United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-second year

7985

th meeting
Wednesday, 28 June 2017, 2 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Llorentty Solíz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bolivia (Plurinational State of))

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Xiao Yuxin
Mr. Mahfouz
Mr. Negash
Mrs. Jarrot
Mr. Romussi
Mr. Kaneko
Mr. Kuatbekov
Mr. Lukshin
Mr. Sene
Ms. Coyet
Mr. Leschenko
Mr. Dixon
Mr. Lee
Ms. García Moyano

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-18731 (E)
*1718731*

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting resumed at 2.10 p.m.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Malaysia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Emmanuel
Roux, Special Representative of INTERPOL to the
United Nations, to participate in this meeting.

28/06/2017

means of delivery. The global threat of terrorism and
transnational organized crime and our nations’ growing
reliance on international free trade represent some of the
conflicting dynamics in that equation. In that regard,
I would like to reiterate Turkey’s strong commitment
to the full implementation of the resolution and its
readiness to continue to cooperate with the Committee.

Mrs. Yalçın (Turkey): Turkey aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004) and on behalf of the European
Union. I will make the following statement in my
national capacity.

Turkey has the relevant toolbox needed to fully
implement its obligations under the provisions of the
resolution, namely, all-encompassing national legislation
and comprehensive international legal instruments on
non-proliferation and counter-terrorism. The present
proliferation concerns, coupled with large-scale global
commerce, financial transactions and cyberrisks, place
unprecedented responsibilities on Member States. In
all parts of the world, transit trade and trans-shipments
are usually the most vulnerable links in the chain of
export control in terms of diversion. Reinforcing
transit inspections will continue to remain high among
Turkey’s priorities with a view to strengthening export
controls. However, it would be unfair to impose the
burden of such controls on transit countries alone.
Here, genuinely fair burden- and responsibility-sharing
by source countries is needed.

Let me begin by thanking you, Sir, for organizing
today’s open debate as President of the Council and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). Last year, the
Committee completed the comprehensive review of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) (see
S/2016/1038). During that process, Turkey worked
closely with the Committee and its Group of Experts.
Turkey’s updated national matrix, which is on the
Committee’s website, clearly shows our meticulous
implementation of the resolution.

As a country that has never pursued a weapons-ofmass-destruction programme, Turkey firmly opposes
the development, production, stockpiling and use of
such weapons by States and non-State actors. In that
regard, the repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria
cannot be considered in isolation, as it is fully consistent
with the regime’s chemical -weapons programmes.
And the gaps, discrepancies and inconsistencies in its
declarations to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) are a testimony to the
regime’s intentions.

The report on the comprehensive review
and the subsequent adoption of resolution 2325
(2016) — co-sponsored by Turkey — in December
2016, has given impetus to the implementation of
that instrument, which plays an important role in the
efforts against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. In that regard, we wish to thank Spain for
its leadership as the previous Chair of the Committee,
as well as the founder of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004).

The OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism established that culpability for the use of
chemical weapons against civilians lies with the Syrian
regime’s armed forces and Da’esh. The use of toxic
chemicals, the most recent example of which was the
Khan Shaykhun attack on 4 April this year, is a brutal
reminder to the international community that, unless
the perpetrators of such attacks are held accountable
for their crimes, the attacks will continue unabated. In
that regard, we call upon the Security Council to take
measures in accordance with its relevant resolutions.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order
to enable the Security Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Turkey.

Resolution 1540 (2004) established a central
non-proliferation mechanism at the nexus of the
risks posed by weapons of mass destruction and their
2/34

The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Belgium.
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
shares the views expressed in the statements made
on behalf of the European Union and on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). Belgium
would also like to make the following remarks in its
national capacity.
First, let me thank the Bolivian presidency of the
Security Council and Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for convening today’s debate.
As mentioned in my country’s statement to the
Council in December 2016 on this very topic (see
S/PV.7758), the risk of the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction by non-State actors is no longer
a working hypothesis but rather a reality in various
countries and regions. The allure and accessibility
of certain weapons of mass destruction and of
related chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear
technologies and resources have increased among
non-State actors in their quest for the means to carry out
large-scale and indiscriminate attacks. It is therefore
essential to continue to work towards the most effective
implementation of existing provisions and instruments
used to combat the proliferation of chemical, biological,
radiological or nuclear resources. The comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) (see S/2016/1038),
carried out in 2016 under the Spanish chairmanship
of the 1540 Committee, is an excellent starting point.
Everyone’s vigilance and the proper collaboration and
transparency between States are necessary.
With regard to chemical weapons, Belgium, which
is preparing to commemorate the 100th anniversary
of the first large-scale use of mustard gas in the Ypres
region in 1917 during World War I, strongly supports
the work carried out by the OPCW. The multilateral
approach to the control of chemical substances must
be preserved, as it has demonstrated throughout the
OPCW’s 20-year lifespan that it is able to considerably
reduce exposure to chemical weapons. Belgium
supports the work of the OPCW and regularly reviews
its own chemical facilities. The use of chemical weapons
cannot go unpunished, whether carried out by States or
by non-State groups. In that regard, it is essential that
the Fact-finding Mission and the United Nations-OPCW
Joint Investigative Mechanism be able to continue their
work without external interference so as to shed light
on all of the chemical incidents that have occurred in
Syria and determine who was responsible. We firmly
believe that the Security Council should be unanimous

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

in its condemnation of each chemical-weapons attack
in Syria, both by the so-called Islamic State and by the
Syrian regime.
As regards the fight against nuclear proliferation,
Belgium has taken measures to secure existing sensitive
materials and to reduce their quantities, often thanks
to the support of new technologies. It is also acting
to raise awareness among industry professionals. Our
experts are also heavily involved in research that is
geared towards the development of nuclear fuel that
has a lower risk of proliferation than traditional fuel.
Belgium remains vigilant in its control of medical and
industrial radioactive sources and works to reduce the
risk of proliferation around the world, particularly
through its support for scientific research.
Despite the difficulties involved in implementing the
Biological Weapons Convention, progress is possible in
combating the proliferation of biological resources. The
peer-review approach, to which Belgium contributed
through the Benelux countries’ peer review in 2015,
has proved useful both in strengthening mutual trust
in implementing the Convention and in building the
capacity of the various States and experts participating
in such reviews. Belgium takes this opportunity to pay
tribute to Morocco, which successfully organized a peer
review in May this year, with financial support from the
European Union. We should also note the development
of industrial standards in the biotechnology sector,
as well as codes of conduct — developments that can
strengthen that sector against the unwanted proliferation
of biological resources.
Belgium believes that the fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction into the
hands of non-State actors can be effective only if it
combines various approaches and includes a higher
number of actors. Where multilateral initiatives exist
and have proved to be effective, they must be strongly
supported, and we must continue to adapt them to future
challenges, in particular technological challenges.
However, such multilateral and State-centred initiatives
are not sufficient. Regional approaches, both formal and
informal, can also play a fundamental role in the fight
against chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
proliferation. Approaches such as those supported
by Council Decision 2017/809 of the Council of the
European Union in support of resolution 1540 (2004)
can indeed help to strengthen cooperation, build trust
and transparency, foster the strengthening of expertise
and disseminate best practices.

17-187313/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In conclusion, Belgium would like to stress that the
role of economics in the implementation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear safety and security
norms is key to non-proliferation. State regulation and
voluntary standards and certification by commercial
entities can be mutually strengthening. However,
given the amount of uncontrolled material at risk of
proliferation and the limited amount of available public
resources, we should favour an approach that involves
all sectors of society in combating proliferation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the initiative of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, as President of the Security Council,
in organizing this open debate and expresses its
appreciation for the leadership of that delegation as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Spain on behalf of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004).
Addressing today’s theme on ways to prevent the
catastrophic humanitarian, political, economic and
environmental consequences of the use of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons by non-State actors,
in particular terrorists, is not an easy task. It involves
both topical and complex issues, in particular the nexus
of weapons of mass destruction and terrorism, which
generates its particular relevance.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
poses a threat to international peace and security. But
the dramatic proliferation of terrorist actors and their
expanding activities represent an even greater threat.
Unfortunately, we are helplessly witnessing an endless
spiral of terrorist attacks striking everywhere and in
various forms. Those attacks increasingly demonstrate
that terrorists are not holding back and are ready to
spread terror by any means, including by using weapons
of mass destruction, so as to generate the maximum
number of victims and create chaos.
Terrorist groups are assisted in the execution
of their macabre plans by the rapid development of
new information technologies and various industrial
advances that enable them to recruit from a distance,
train remotely and even carry out remote attacks. If
terrorists are determined to carry out their macabre
4/34

28/06/2017

plans, we must also be determined to preserve peace, to
save lives, to fight against the terrorists and to prevent
their access to new information and technologies. We
must prevent them from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery and from
developing, trafficking or using them.
The United Nations has addressed the challenges
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
several ways, including through the process initiated
by the Security Council in resolution 1540 (2004),
adopted unanimously on 28 April 2004. Located at the
intersection of the fight against proliferation and the fight
against terrorism, resolution 1540 (2004) complements
the international non-proliferation and counterterrorism measures adopted by States in addressing the
specific threats posed by non-State actors.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is original in that it is the
first international law provision to take into account the
collusion between the two main threats to world peace
and security, namely, weapons of mass destruction and
non-State actors. However, its originality concerns not
only its content, but also its goal, ambition, strength
and scope. Unlike other multilateral disarmament
instruments, resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations and
is, therefore, binding on all States Members of the
United Nations. It must be acknowledged that since
its adoption, Governments around the world have
endeavoured to implement its main provisions by
adopting many laws and implementing a wide range of
appropriate measures.
In addition, several States have provided additional
information on a voluntary basis or at the request of the
1540 Committee. Furthermore, a matrix common to all
States to facilitate the collection of information relevant
to assessing the implementation of the resolution has
also helped to maintain a link with States.
Nevertheless, the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) remains a major challenge for many States,
especially in Africa, owing to the precise nature of
its requirements and the complex measures needed
to address them. However, it is true that the 1540
Committee is making commendable efforts through
the assistance mechanism to effectively assist States,
which are, in most cases, not fully aware of their
shortcomings and have difficulty identifying their
needs in implementing the resolution.
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The 1540 Committee also encourages States to
report on legal systems and authorities, as well as
civil and criminal measures adopted to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
However, there is little information for the
assessment of the true effectiveness of the official
measures. The submission of a report does not guarantee
the correct implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
as some reports are more a statement of intent than a
detailed account of genuine State action. Consequently,
accurate accounting of the number of national reports
submitted is not a reliable criterion for assessing the
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by
States and the outcomes of their engagement. Hence
the need for further efforts to improve the evaluation
of State action in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).
The 1540 Committee would, therefore, benefit
from a greater focus on assisting States in identifying
their shortcomings, without relying on the necessary
but insufficient counting of the number of legal norms
adopted, by analysing in depth the extent to which the
standards were applied and their real impact on the
sensitive areas identified in the resolution, such as
the storage, transport and export of weapons of mass
destruction and related materials, and their means
of delivery.
Convinced that coordination through the exchange
of information, especially at the subregional level, is
dictated by the importance of proximity and shared
borders in the fight against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction and their use by non-State actors,
the Kingdom of Morocco will organize an information
workshop in November aimed at African national
contact points, in the framework of seeking effective
universal application of the provisions of the resolution.
The meeting will facilitate confidence-building
among African States, thereby facilitating possible
partnerships in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). It will also provide an opportunity to take
stock of the regional situation, including the status
of threats and persistent gaps in the mechanisms
available to combat the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction,particularly to non-State groups. The
development of contacts and a deeper knowledge of
the situation as a result of regional conferences are far
from negligible.

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

I cannot conclude without reiterating that the
international community must accelerate efforts to
achieve the total elimination of weapons of mass
destruction as the ultimate guarantee against their use
and acquisition by non-State actors. In that context,
Morocco will continue to fulfil its obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004) and pursue fruitful cooperation
with the 1540 Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of South Africa.
Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the convening of this open debate. Since
the dawn of our democracy in 1994, South Africa has
been steadfast in its commitment to multilateralism in
addressing the peace and security challenges facing the
global community, including the horizontal and vertical
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and their means of delivery. South Africa reaffirms that
no cause could ever justify the use or threat of use of
weapons of mass destruction anywhere, by anyone or
under any circumstances.
Nuclear weapons remain the most indiscriminate
and inhumane weapons ever to have been developed.
Together with the vast majority of the international
community, we believe that all efforts should
consequently be made to ensure that those weapons are
never used again, under any circumstances. The pursuit
of nuclear disarmament is, therefore, not only a legal
obligation, but also a moral and ethical imperative.
It is in that context that my delegation welcomes
the convening of the United Nations conference to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit
nuclear weapons. My delegation would like to stress
that the instrument being negotiated is not a proverbial
silver bullet that can cure all ills. Its main purpose is
to encourage progress towards the total elimination of
all nuclear weapons by stigmatizing and delegitimizing
such weapons on a global scale.
We share the concern of the international community
about the threat posed by non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction and in this regard remain
committed to the strengthening of transfer controls
as called for in resolution 1540 (2004). We recognize
the need for international assistance and cooperation,
especially for States that may not have the requisite
resources to give effect to their obligations. In our view,
accomplishing the full implementation of resolution

17-187315/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

28/06/2017

1540 (2004) requires continuous and sustained efforts
at the national, regional and international levels.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.

At the national level, South Africa has over the
years strengthened its implementation capacity through
comprehensive national legislation focusing on WMDs
and their means of delivery. Our domestic legislation
is subject to continuous review, taking into account
new technological developments and experiences in
national implementation.

Mr. Charwath (Austria): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this very timely
open debate.

While dealing with the aforementioned challenges,
it is imperative that unwarranted restrictions not be
imposed on the inalienable right of Member States,
particularly developing countries, to use any related
materials, equipment and technologies for peaceful
purposes. In this regard, the opportunities provided
by nuclear technologies in the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in areas
such as food security, public-health technologies and
clean energy, cannot be overlooked.
Furthermore, the exchange of scientific information,
equipment and materials for peaceful purposes is
greatly needed in Africa to deal with the spread of
infectious diseases, which could derail socioeconomic
growth and development if not adequately addressed.
South Africa’s experience with the implementation
of control regimes has demonstrated that the challenges
of WMDs and their delivery systems can be addressed
by, first, strengthening national legislation and
implementation capacities; secondly, accelerating the
provision of capacity-building and technical expertise,
especially to developing countries, including in Africa;
thirdly, strengthening international cooperation
with other related international organizations;
fourthly, ensuring adequate and predictable funding
for the relevant international organizations and
implementation support structures so as to enable them
to implement their mandates; fifthly, strengthening
cooperation between regional organizations and the
relevant multilateral organizations; and, sixthly and
finally, enhancing cooperation with civil society and
the private sector.
In conclusion, the threat of WMD proliferation
can be dealt with effectively only through increased
international cooperation and assistance as well as the
strengthening of the relevant multilateral instruments
and institutions. What is required is a faithful and
balanced implementation of the various international
legally binding instruments.
6/34

Austria, of course, fully aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. Let me therefore offer just a few
additional remarks from my national perspective. I
should like to talk about three issues.
First, in recent years, two of the most
significant international security challenges of our
time — terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMD) — have increasingly come
to overlap and thereby compound each other. Recent
instances of the use of chemical weapons not only by
the Syrian regime but also by the Islamic State have
increased public attention to this danger. In the current
situation, resolution 1540 (2004) is becoming ever more
relevant, and, with last year’s resolution 2325 (2016),
we now have a new instrument to further improve the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in the face of
these growing threats.
Secondly, Austria is firmly committed to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. My
country is party to all relevant international treaties,
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention.
Austria considers export controls as an important
tool to prevent proliferation and therefore actively
participates in the Zangger Committee, the Nuclear
Suppliers Group, the Australia Group and the Missile
Technology Control Regime.
Importantly, Austria has in place legislation aimed
at implementing effectively, at the national level, its
international non-proliferation commitments, such as
the relevant articles of the Austrian penal code and of
our Foreign Trade Act. Let me also mention that Austria
serves as the Executive Secretariat of the Hague Code
of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation. We
also participate in the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism.
But, thirdly, the most horrific scenario of all, namely,
the acquisition of nuclear material or, even worse, a
nuclear weapon by terrorists can, unfortunately, not be
dismissed as unrealistic today. It is clear that there are
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

actors with a firm intention to achieve exactly that, and
there is evidence that some are working systematically
to overcome the remaining obstacles. The humanitarian
and other consequences of a nuclear terrorist attack
would be catastrophic.
While we have to redouble our efforts within the
existing nuclear non-proliferation regimes to prevent
such an occurrence, we also have to reinforce these
regimes. One of the major obstacles, of course, is the
continued existence of nuclear weapons as such. The
greater their number and the greater the number of
possessor States, the more difficult it is to secure them
against theft, hacking or other forms of unauthorized
access by non-State actors.
Equally importantly, so long as a number of States
possess such weapons, others will be tempted to
develop or to get hold of them as well. And the greater
the number of States that possess nuclear weapons and
related material, the more opportunities there will be
for non-State actors to get their hands on them.
Inversely, the smaller the overall number of nuclear
weapons in the world and of States possessing them,
the smaller the risk that non-State actors will achieve
their nefarious objectives. That is why real progress on
nuclear disarmament is crucial, not least in the context
of our discussion here.
The convention on the prohibition of nuclear
weapons that is currently under negotiation at the
United Nations — downstairs in this very Building — is
aimed at facilitating such progress. Let me emphasize
that this initiative is fully in line with the existing
non-proliferation regime, with the NPT at its centre,
and that its aim is to strengthen, not weaken, the regime.
Moreover, the initiative has already delivered some
other positive results, as the multilateral disarmament
machinery, both here in New Nork and in Geneva, seems
to have geared up recently compared with recent years.
In our view, we must work in both directions to
ensure greater security for all, strengthening the
existing non-proliferation and control regimes and
seeking the elimination of nuclear weapons worldwide.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Skinner-Klée (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate the delegation
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and on its

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

outstanding leadership at the helm of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), of which you, Sir, are the Chair. We also
welcome the presence of and the timely presentations
by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, and the representative of the
Office of Strategy and Policy of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Mr. Joseph
Ballard. We also appreciate the concept note circulated
by your delegation, Mr. President, which serves as our
guide for today’s debate.
I also associate myself with the statements to be
made by the delegation of Spain as Chair of the Group
of Friends of the 1540 Committee and the delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as Chair of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
There can be no doubt that terrorism is one of the
main challenges facing the world today. Likewise,
the use of weapons of mass destruction, especially by
non-State actors, and the threat that their proliferation
poses to international peace and security are a priority
issue for us all.
In recent years, the face and the methods of
terrorism have changed. Furthermore, advances in
the area of science, technology and international
trade, which in many ways have improved our daily
lives, have brought with them a series of new threats
to security through their potential use as instruments
by radical groups and individuals who seek to wreak
havoc on civilization. Sadly, many recent examples
show that the threat of terrorism knows no borders and
that no country or region is immune to attack. Hence
it is imperative that all Member States comply with
our obligation to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, their delivery systems and related
materials so as to prevent their acquisition by non-State
actors, and ensure that States have the resources and
the capacity necessary to do so.
For my delegation, resolution 1540 (2004) has
pride of place in the international non-proliferation
regime. We would like to emphasize in particular the
preventive and cooperative nature of that important
resolution. The aim since its adoption has been the
establishment of an instrument to strengthen the
approach to non-proliferation commitments without
directly affecting Member States’ compliance with
their obligations with respect to the other pillars

17-187317/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of disarmament, including the peaceful use of
nuclear energy.
We fully agree with the concept note prepared
for today’s debate, which stresses the importance of
resolution 1540 (2004) as a platform for cooperation, but
which also warns that it would be counterproductive for
that spirit of cooperation to be turned into a coercive or
punitive mechanism.
We also recognize the need to strengthen the
international non-proliferation framework in general,
and resolution 1540 (2004) in particular, as well
as the need to adapt them to the reality of the threat
that they seek to prevent. We believe that the recent
comprehensive review process of resolution 1540
(2004). The adoption of resolution 2325 (2016) achieved
that delicate balance, taking into account the evolving
nature of the risk of proliferation, the technological
advances and new obligations to address the threat,
while recognizing the importance of providing States
with the resources and capacity necessary to achieve
the full implementation of the resolution.
We also noted that the review process recognized
the important role of the Expert Group Meeting on the
Development of a Training Module on the International
Legal Framework against Chemical, Biological,
Radiological and Nuclear Terrorism and the importance
of regional organizations in the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Universal, comprehensive and
balanced implementation of the resolution is possible
only if all Member States play a central role, and
have the resources to do so. Regional organizations
are ideal partners for that, having the knowledge of
the specificities and realities of each of their member
States, as well as of the region as a whole. We welcome
the role played in our own region by the Organization
of American States and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean.
Guatemala is aware of the significance of this
important resolution and is committed to complying
with its obligations in this area. We have also made
additional commitments by requesting technical
assistance from the Committee so as to develop a
national action plan for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), and also have several ongoing legislative
processes under way. Following the initial visit to my
country by several members of the Committee’s Group
of Experts to begin formulating the national action plan
8/34

28/06/2017

in Guatemala, efforts are continuing at the national
level with various Government entities to work on the
main elements of the Plan.
Finally, we recall that the only guarantee for
preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and preventing them from falling into the
hands of non-State actors is that they no longer exist.
We therefore welcome the conference currently under
way to negotiate a legally binding instrument banning
nuclear weapons, leading to their total elimination.
We are convinced that a ban on those deadly weapons
will bring us closer to the goal of a world free of
nuclear weapons.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): First of all, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important meeting
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). This
meeting is of particular importance given the threat
represented by the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction, their components and delivery systems by
terrorist groups.
The worst violations of resolution 1540 (2004)
today are the insistence of certain countries and
certain intelligence services on supporting and training
terrorist groups, even going so far as to provide them
with toxic chemical weapons that are then used against
both the military and civilians. The representatives of
those same countries are seeking to deviate today’s
meeting from its goals by raising topics that are not on
the agenda, in order to impede our efforts and prevent
the Security Council from holding a genuine, serious
debate on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
In that regard, we would like to recall that it is those
countries that opposed the draft resolution (S/2016/847)
submitted by Russia and China aimed at impeding the
acquisition of chemical weapons by terrorist groups in
Syria and Iraq. It is those same countries that opposed
the efforts and attempts to make the Middle East a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction; they did that
for the sole purpose of protecting Israel’s chemical,
biological and nuclear arsenal.
The Israeli representative made a statement that
included a tangle of baseless accusations and lies. It
is almost comical, even pitiful, that the members of
the international community must sit in the Council
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Chamber and listen to such allegations and lies
coming from a representative of an occupying Power
that continues to occupy Arab territories and support
terrorists groups, in particular the Al-Nusra Front,
in the area of separation. That country has a nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons arsenal, with the
consent and protection of Western countries that are
permanent members of the Council.
The support that Israel provides to terrorist groups
in Syria has been proved by the extensive evidence that
we have provided to the Council. For those who are still
doubtful, I encourage them to read the report published
by The Wall Street Journal on 19 June 2017, which is
punctuated by terrorist confessions.
My Government has for some time and in a
consistent manner warned of the danger of terrorist
groups acquiring weapons of mass destruction, in
particular Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida. To
date, we have sent more than 108 letters to the Council, to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to the Joint Investigative Mechanism and to all
of the relevant committees and bodies of the Security
Council. Our letters include documented information
implicating countries that have provided such chemical
products as chlorine, mustard gas and sarin gas to
terrorist groups to be used against civilians.
I would also like to say that Turkish intelligence
service transferred sarin gas to terrorist groups in
Syria after the product arrived from Libya in 2013. The
regime of President Erdoğan facilitates the transfer of
such substances to Da’esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist groups in Syria, and that is a flagrant violation
of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).
My country is still waiting for the bodies and
special mechanisms of the United Nations to react to
that information and to treat it with the seriousness it
deserves. We are also waiting for that information to
be reflected in the reports on chemical weapons and
their use by terrorist groups. This is no longer a matter
of merely making a statement in international forums.
Such chemical weapons are in the hands of terrorists and
are being used in many regions of Syria, most recently
in Khan Shaykhun. The attacks were premeditated and
were driven by regional and international forces in
order to tarnish the image of Syria and to justify attacks
against the Syrian forces who are fighting terrorism.

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

The accusations and allegations that we have heard
over the past two days from Western representatives,
as well as from the persons representing those
countries today, all of those declarations are part of
the political blackmail war — the very low war — that
now systematically accompanies every success of
the Syrian army and its allies as they fight terrorism.
Those lies are also being systematically presented in
the negotiations among various Syrian parties, both
in Astana and Geneva, in order to impede the efforts
made by the Syrian Government to arrive at a political
solution without outside interference.
We have a consistent position of principle. We
condemn the use of chemical weapons and any and
all weapons of mass destruction. Their use is a crime
against humanity that is unacceptable, immoral
and unjustifiable, regardless of the surrounding
circumstances. On that basis, my country ratified the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction, and we have implemented
all of our commitments. My country ended its
chemical-weapons programme in record time, which
is unprecedented in the history of the Organization.
That achievement was noted in the report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Mission for the Elimination of
the Chemical Weapons Programme of the Syrian Arab
Republic and was brought to the attention of the Council
in June 2014.
In conclusion, my country has always rejected
all allegations by certain Western Administrations
concerning the use of chemical and toxic weapons by
the Syrian armed forces. In line with our commitments,
we have fully cooperated within the framework of the
investigation carried out by international bodies since
2014. We have provided all the needed information in
order to facilitate the investigation and ensure that it is
credible and impartial. However, some Members of this
Organization will never tell the truth, for reasons that
are well known to Council members.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would like
to begin by commending the Bolivian presidency of
the Security Council and the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) for
organizing this important debate. The fact that this is

17-187319/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the third open debate since August of last year on the
issue of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) by non-State actors clearly demonstrates
the urgency and gravity of the threat and challenges
before us.
Indeed, the seemingly unthinkable scenario of
terrorist organizations or other non-State actors gaining
access to WMDs has become a reality, as illustrated
by the identified uses of chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria and Iraq. The assessment of the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria, or Da’esh, may have the capacity to
produce chemical weapons is more than worrisome. At
the same time, there is simply no guarantee that nuclear
and biological materials are safe from the hands of such
malicious actors.
That is the reason that the Republic of Korea fully
aligns itself with the joint statement to be delivered
by the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group
of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). Given the fact
that such non-State actors are taking advantage of
transboundary networks enabled by rapid advances
in science, technology and international commerce, I
would like to make additional remarks in my national
capacity, with a focus on the following three points
for further consideration in our joint efforts to combat
the proliferation od weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.
First, with regard to building a multilayered
prevention mechanism, our response to non-State actors
must be as transboundary and tech-savvy as theirs is. In
addition to export and border controls at the domestic
level, mechanisms provided by the 1540 system provide
a rallying point for our regional and global efforts to
prevent the illicit acquisition of WMDs. On top of that,
as the representative of the country currently holding
the chairmanship of both the Nuclear Suppliers Group
and the Missile Technology Control Regime, I would
like to stress the importance of active participation in
initiatives taken by multilateral export-control regimes
to add one more layer of sharing proliferation-related
information, such as on updated dual-use items and
recent techniques used by non-State actors.
Secondly, with regard to creating a cascade effect
in awareness-raising, resolution 2325 (2016) calls for
more regional conferences and 1540-points-of-contact
training sessions. As terrorist groups’ networks are
10/34

28/06/2017

becoming wider-spread, we should invest more in
mobilizing public-and private-sector focal points so
that they can reach wider constituents of our society. In
that regard, last year, the Government of the Republic
of Korea successfully hosted the first of the regional
Wiesbaden conferences for industry outreach in the
Pacific region. The Republic of Korea will continue
to support 1540-points-of-contact training sessions in
various regions through its contribution to the Trust
Fund for Global and Regional Disarmament Activities.
Finally, national capacities should be scaled up
through tailor-made matchmaking. Two years of the
chairmanship of the 1540 Committee, from 2013 to
2014, taught Seoul that matching offers and requests
for assistance is most challenging, but we also learned
that through such matching we can close gaps in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) against the
wishes of ill-disposed non-State actors.
In conclusion, it would be remiss of me not to
mention the threat posed to the global non-proliferation
regime by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
continued pursuit of WMD and missile capabilities.
Considering that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea is one of the weakest links in our joint
endeavours to prevent the proliferation of nuclear
and chemical materials and their means of delivery
to non-State actors, I would like to underscore the
importance of the full and effective implementation
of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), in tandem
with the relevant Security Council sanctions resolutions
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, by the
international community as a whole.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Viet Nam.
Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I would like
to express my appreciation to the Bolivian presidency and
chairmanship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) for convening this open debate
on global efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) by non-State actors. I also
thank the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs
and the Senior Officer from the Office of Strategy
and Policy of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons for their informative briefings.
Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The extraordinary and rapid advances in science and
technology create enormous benefits for humankind,
but they also bring about the risk of misuse, enabling
non-State actors to take advantage of such advances to
gain access to WMDs and making it harder for States
to put in place adequate controls over proliferation
activities. The risk of non-State actors acquiring,
developing and using WMDs and their means of delivery
poses a grave threat to global peace and security and is
even more alarming in cases when terrorists and their
supporters have shown their intent and capability to
develop and use WMDs. Toxic chemicals have been
reportedly used as weapons in Syria and Iraq by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, causing serious
casualties and devastating socioeconomic consequences
for civilians and their livelihoods.
The United Nations has been playing an active role
in tackling the threat of the proliferation of WMDs by
non-State actors. It has promoted multilateral diplomacy
in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation,
raised public awareness and assisted Member States
in building and strengthening their capacities to
prevent non-State actors from acquiring and using such
lethal weapons. In that regard, my delegation wishes
to commend the 1540 Committee for its findings
and conclusions in the comprehensive review report
(see S/2016/1038), as well as the Security Council for
adopting resolution 2325 (2016), which has mapped out
a global agenda for the full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We acknowledge the positive contributions
made by Member States to the success of the openended working group during the special sessions
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
We also welcome the increased cooperation and
coordination at the national, regional and international
levels in global non-proliferation activities involving
the United Nations and other stakeholders, including
non-governmental organizations and the private sector,
with, as appropriate, their States’ consent.
Viet Nam is strongly committed to WMD disarmament
and non-proliferation efforts and actively advocates
for the peaceful use of related technologies. Viet Nam
is a party to, and complies fully with, its obligations
under all key WMD disarmament and non-proliferation
treaties, including the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty, the Biological Weapons Convention, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, as well as the Safeguards
Agreement of the International Atomic Energy

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Agency and its Additional Protocol. Viet Nam fully
implements the relevant Security Council resolutions
and actively participates in related initiatives, such as
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and
the Proliferation Security Initiative. At the national
level, we have adopted and enforced appropriate
legislation and have established domestic controls to
impede non-State actors from undertaking, assisting or
financing such proliferation activities.
Viet Nam believes that addressing WMD proliferation
must be coupled with substantive progress on WMD
disarmament. We welcome the ongoing United
Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding
instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading
to their total elimination. We also believe that our
efforts towards the establishment and promotion of
nuclear-weapons-free zones also contribute to the
existing global non-proliferation regime. At the same
time, non-proliferation efforts should not hinder the
legitimate rights of States to acquire, produce and use
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear-related
materials, equipment and technology for peaceful
purposes. It is also important to avoid placing an undue
burden on States with regard to such efforts. Rather,
States, especially developing countries, should develop
their own effective strategies for countering new types
of crime.
In conclusion, I want to say that we believe that it
is high time for us to redouble our efforts, along with
united political will and strong determination, to take
collective action against the grave security challenge
posed by WMD proliferation. In order to fully implement
the global non-proliferation agenda, we need the active
participation and large-scale cooperation both within
and among States.
You can rest assured, Mr. President, of Viet Nam’s
commitment to striving for a world free of all weapons
of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for your presence throughout our
deliberations today. Bangladesh also thanks the
presidency of the Plurinational State of Bolivia for
organizing this high-level open debate. We thank the
briefers for sharing their insights.

17-1873111/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

We recall the implementation of the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004) under the leadership
of the delegation of Spain last year. We reiterate our
conviction that the action-oriented and balanced
approach of resolution 2325 (2016) will help
Member States further consolidate their respective
1540-compliance regimes.
The growing use of illicit financing, new
technologies and the dark web by non-State actors,
including terrorists, continues to pose new challenges to
Member States. Those trends require us to devise more
innovative, well-coordinated and fool-proof national
mechanisms, especially for securing the production, use,
storage and transport of materials related to chemical
and biological weapons. It also remains of paramount
importance to ensure cross-border controls against the
illicit transfer of arms, ammunition, weapons of mass
destruction and their means of production and delivery.
In order to build on the progress in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and address the emerging
gaps, we would reiterate the following four points.
First, the concept note for this debate aptly
recognizes that the task of implementing resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term undertaking. It would therefore be
crucial to support its implementation in a coordinated
and consistent, yet context-specific manner. The regular
sharing of best practices, including through the national
points of contact network, would be particularly useful.
In that regard, we recall Bangladesh’s participation in
the training course for points of contact held in Qingdao,
China, in September 2015, and we look forward to
participating in the upcoming one in August this year.
Secondly, the wide divergences in implementation
among Member States will continue to persist unless
meaningful financial and technical assistance is
provided to overcome the structural constraints faced
by many States. We would expect Member States and
the relevant entities in a position to do so to redouble
their efforts to provide concrete, needs-based assistance
to interested States upon their request. The 1540
Committee’s Group of Experts can continue to help
Member States to better identify and articulate their
needs and match them with a relevant offer of support
and expertise by States and other stakeholders.
Thirdly, resolution 2325 (2016) makes a strong case
for further enhancing the 1540 Committee’s cooperation
and interface with the relevant international, regional
and subregional entities. We reaffirm the need to avoid
12/34

28/06/2017

duplication and to facilitate assistance and the sharing
of expertise on a regional basis.
Fourthly, we take note of the rapid advances in
science and technology that are susceptible to abuse
or risks of proliferation by non-State actors, including
terrorists. We call upon the 1540 Committee to help
enhance our information and knowledge base about
the evolving risks, especially those requiring our
pre-emptive action.
The threat of WMDs falling into the hands of
unauthorized non-State actors has rightly been identified
as a looming catastrophe. As a responsible member
of the international community, Bangladesh remains
committed to further strengthening its efforts to help
prevent any such situation and its grave consequences.
We continue to work to make our voluntary reports to the
1540 Committee more informative and comprehensive.
In conclusion, we affirm that we associate ourselves
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): At the outset, allow me,
Mr. President, to join other delegations in commending
your delegation most sincerely on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
June. I also wish to commend you for convening this
important open debate focused on the global effort to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State actors.
Botswana aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Botswana also welcomes this open debate, which
seeks to consider practical measures to implement
resolution 1540 (2004), and applauds your country,
Sir, for drawing global attention to the threat of
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors. The rise of terrorism and insurgent
groups increases the risk of non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.
The advent of international terrorism has had
adverse effects on our efforts to establish and sustain a
tranquil and peaceful international order. Moreover, in
the recent past, terrorist groups have employed weapons
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

of mass destruction against innocent and unarmed
civilian populations. Ensuring that such actors do not
have access to those devastating weapons should be a
lesson and a challenge for us all.

is general consensus on the escalation of international
terrorism, the difficulty in agreeing on a common
definition of terrorism will continue to undermine our
efforts to fight that global scourge.

Botswana fully supports resolution 1540 (2004),
which urges all States to refrain from providing any
form of support to non-State actors seeking to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or
use nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery, in particular for terrorist purposes.

Also problematic is the phenomenon of dual-use
and the use for peaceful means. The inherent right of
sovereign States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
for instance, must be respected. Anything to the
contrary undermines existing multilateral instruments,
the Charter of the United Nations and all others efforts
to prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction.

Weapons of mass destruction are a serious threat to
global peace and security, and their use has devastating
consequences for humankind and all forms of life on our
planet. In that regard, it is imperative that the Security
Council, Member States and international organizations
spare no effort in preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors. In
that regard, Botswana reaffirms its commitment to
international instruments that ban weapons of mass
destruction, such as the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention.
Botswana also fully supports the ongoing United
Nations conference to negotiate a legally binding
instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading to their
total elimination Should that effort come to fruition,
it would be an enormous step towards a nuclear-free
world, for which we all yearn.
Before I conclude, let me highlight some of the
measures that Botswana has adopted to support the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). To strengthen
national capacities to deal with emerging global security
challenges, Botswana, among other things, adopted a
counter-terrorism act, a chemical-weapon prohibition
act and a proceeds-and-instruments of crime act.
Botswana also continues to train agencies, such as
the financial intelligence agency, and other safety and
security entities to effectively deal with the crimes of
terrorism, terrorist financing, money laundering and the
monitoring and tracking of the movement of chemicals
in the country that have the potential to contribute to
the proliferation of chemical weapons.
There are a number of challenges and opportunities
available to us in order to effectively deal with this
matter. Botswana firmly believes that deepening
international cooperation and strengthening existing
mechanisms should form the basis of our efforts to
prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction. We are gravely concerned that, while there

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
unwavering commitment to support the international
community by playing its part in ensuring that terror
organizations do not have access to any weapons of mass
destruction. We need sustainable peace and security in
order for the human spirit to thrive and develop.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Venezuela) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I am pleased to see
you, Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Solíz, a son of
Bolivia — our liberator’s favourite country — presiding
over the Security Council this month. You have done an
outstanding job and we wish to congratulate you.
It is an honour for the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
First of all, allow me to convey, on behalf of the
member States of the Movement, our best wishes to
the delegation of the Plurinational State of Bolivia
for a successful month in conducting the work of the
Council, as well as our appreciation for its efforts in
the drafting of the concept note for this meeting, which
serves as a basis for guiding our discussions today.
We also take this opportunity to acknowledge the
dedication with which the delegation of Uruguay led
the work of this organ during the month of May.
During the seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in September 2016 on Margarita
Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and Government
reiterated their ongoing concern about the difficult
and complex situation in the area of disarmament and
international security, and called for the redoubling of

17-1873113/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

efforts in order to break the current stalemate in the
pursuit of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
in all its aspects. On that occasion, the Heads of State
and Government also reaffirmed the Movement’s
principled positions on nuclear disarmament, which
remains its top priority, and on the non-proliferation of
nuclear weapons in all its aspects, while emphasizing
the importance of ensuring that efforts towards nuclear
non-proliferation are concurrent to efforts towards
nuclear disarmament. They also expressed concern
about the threat posed to humankind by the existence of
nuclear weapons and their possible use or threat of use.
Similarly, in relation to chemical weapons, the
countries of the Movement that are States parties to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction (CWC) note with satisfaction
its effective operation as the only comprehensive
multilateral treaty banning an entire category of
weapons of mass destruction, establishing a system
of verification and promoting the use of chemicals for
peaceful purposes. With regard to future priorities, the
countries of the Movement that are States parties to the
CWC consider that the primary objective should remain
the complete elimination of all categories of chemical
weapons, with the firm conviction that all pillars of the
Convention will be treated in a balanced way.
Similarly, with respect to biological weapons, the
countries of the Movement that are States parties to the
Biological Weapons Convention are of the view that
the Convention represents an important component of
the international legal architecture related to weapons
of mass destruction, but recognize that the lack of
a verification system continues to undermine the
effectiveness of the Convention, and urge parties that
reject the resumption of multilateral negotiations on a
legally binding protocol to reconsider their policy.
In reaffirming the absolute validity of
multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament
and non-proliferation, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its determination to promote multilateralism
as a fundamental principle of disarmament and
non-proliferation negotiations.
On the other hand, the member States of the
Movement stress that the most effective way to prevent
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists is the total elimination of such weapons, while
emphasizing the need to urgently make progress in the
14/34

28/06/2017

area of disarmament and non-proliferation in order to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security and to boost global counter-terrorism
efforts. That issue is of particular concern to us,
given the fact that terrorist groups have used chemical
weapons in the past, including in countries that are part
of the Movement.
In that regard, we call on all Member States to
support international efforts to prevent the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery by terrorists, and urge Member States to adopt
and strengthen national measures, as appropriate, so as
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass
destruction, their delivery systems and materials and
technologies related to their production.
The member States of the Movement encourage
cooperation between the international community and
the relevant international and regional organizations
to strengthen national capacities, in line with General
Assembly resolution 70/36, with a view to strengthening
the national capacities of States and curbing the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including
to non-State actors and terrorist groups — in keeping
with the relevant obligations in the framework of the
international legal architecture related to weapons of
mass destruction.
Also, in noting the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006), 1810 (2008) and
1977 (2011), we stress the need to ensure that no action
by the Security Council undermines the Charter of the
United Nations and the existing multilateral treaties
on weapons of mass destruction and the international
organizations established in that regard, as well as the
role of the General Assembly. We also caution against
the recurring practice of the Security Council to use its
authority to define legislative requirements for Member
States to implement the decisions of this organ. In
that regard, we want to emphasize the importance of
ensuring that the issue of non-State actors’ acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction is addressed in an
inclusive manner by the General Assembly so that the
views of all Member States are taken into account.
The Movement also welcomes the successful
conclusion of the third session of the Open-ended
Working Group on the Fourth Special Session of the
General Assembly Devoted to Disarmament. We would
like to stress the importance of convening such a special
session, which would provide us with an opportunity to
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

consider the most critical aspects of the disarmament
process from a perspective that is more in line with
the current international situation, and to mobilize the
international community and public opinion in support
of eliminating nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction and controlling and reducing the
availability of conventional weapons.
In conclusion, in maintaining its commitment to
banning the development of new types of weapons
of mass destruction, the Non-Aligned Movement
reiterates its adherence to the objectives and principles
outlined in General Assembly resolution 69/27, entitled
“Prohibition of the development and manufacture of
new types of weapons of mass destruction and new
systems of such weapons: report of the Conference
on Disarmament”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for presiding over this afternoon’s
resumption of the meeting in person, which we greatly
appreciate. We would also like to express our sincere
thanks to Bolivia for convening today’s important open
debate on a crucial and urgent issue.
The Netherlands aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union
and by the representative of Spain, on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540, as well as with the
points made by the representative of Italy in the context
of our split term on the Security Council. In addition,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands would like to make the
following remarks.
Unfortunately, the use of chemical weapons by
terrorists has become a dreadful reality. The Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) has used chemical weapons
in Syria and is trying to expand those capabilities. We
firmly condemn the use of chemical weapons both by
ISIS and by the Syrian Arab Republic. Those horrendous
acts have reminded us of the importance of resolution
1540 (2004), and this open debate continues the work it
requires. The comprehensive review carried out under
Spain’s presidency of the Council and adopted under
resolution 2325 (2016) in December was an important
step in that process. As I have said before, we are
grateful for Spain’s transparent and inclusive conduct
of the review.

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

I would like to focus on three issues
today — implementation, nuclear security and the
threat of biological weapons. The first of these is
the importance of ensuring the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). We have come a long way
since the resolution was adopted, but reaching full
worldwide implementation by 2021 will still require a
tremendous effort from all of us — first and foremost
from Member States, but also from international and
regional organizations and industry. With so many
actors, considerable coordination will be needed to
ensure efficient and effective implementation and to
prevent overlapping or competing efforts by different
organizations. In that regard, the work that has been done
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and its Panel of Experts is indispensable.
And where implementation is concerned, we also have
a great instrument at our disposal — our national
action plans. They help Member States approach
implementation comprehensively and can also improve
the effectiveness and efficiency of international
technical assistance. This is a truly forward-looking
instrument that can help us put the emphasis on action
rather than reporting. We therefore strongly encourage
other Member States to use national action plans.
That brings me to my second point, nuclear security.
Of course, we are all aware of the horrific effects that
a terrorist attack using nuclear or radiological weapons
would have. Nuclear security is key to addressing that
threat. It is a prime example of how the implementation
of resolution 1540 can count on solid international
organizations, above all the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Its work is indispensable and deserves
the international community’s full support. We would
like to stress the importance of close cooperation among
the IAEA, Member States and the 1540 Committee in
strengthening nuclear security worldwide.
My third point is about biological weapons. The
possibility of a biological attack by non-State actors is
real, and the need to address this threat is more pressing
than ever. That is why we should make the most of the
existing international framework for addressing the
threat of biological weapons. Its implementation must
be improved and its existing framework strengthened,
especially given the rapid pace of technological
development in the biological sciences. All States
parties to the Biological Weapons Convention should
pursue those ends in good faith, as well as working to
universalize the Convention.

17-1873115/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In conclusion, we need full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and better cooperation with the
IAEA on nuclear security. We also need to strengthen
the existing framework on biological weapons. The
Netherlands will continue to be a partner to the Security
Council in further work on this important topic.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Special Representative of INTERPOL to
the United Nations.
Mr. Roux: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
in your capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for inviting
INTERPOL to present its strategy for combating the
global threats represented by chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear (CBRN) terrorism by non-State
actors, as well as to discuss the policing capabilities we
provide to our member States and the global community.
The use of CBRN materials by terrorist groups such
as Da’esh and by criminals and other non-State actors has
become one of the most significant challenges to global
security today. In 2010, INTERPOL made a strategic
decision to launch a comprehensive CBRN terrorismprevention-and-response capability in support of its
190 member States. The INTERPOL methodology for
countering CBRN threats specifically from non-State
actors has four main pillars that respond to the needs
of member States — intelligence and operational
data services; capacity-building; investigative and
operational support; and working in partnership. CBRN
threats are also a key element in INTERPOL’s counterterrorism strategy, which was endorsed by its entire
membership very recently, in November 2016.
First, through our intelligence and operational
data services, we facilitate the secure exchange of
information among member countries and identify
criminals and criminal organizations through
intelligence analysis, which represents the foundation
of INTERPOL’s work and mandate. INTERPOL
collects and analyses information on CBRN incidents
and conducts threat assessments, and shares
intelligence and analysis regarding CBRN threats and
incidents with INTERPOL’s member countries and
partner agencies through monthly and ad hoc reports.
Specialized databases such as Geiger and Watchmaker
provide operational and specialized support to member
countries through the sharing of INTERPOL notices
and warning messages on individuals involved in
illegal CBRN activities by non-State actors.
16/34

28/06/2017

The second pillar is capacity-building. Given
the gravity of a potential CBRN terrorist attack and
its consequences, prevention and countermeasures
constitute an essential element in both national and
international strategies. INTERPOL engages in
efforts to increase the level of CBRN awareness in
law-enforcement agencies, delivers training sessions
designed to increase law-enforcement capabilities and
provides prevention methodologies for use by member
countries. Major INTERPOL CBRN capacity-building
programmes include workshop training courses and
tabletop exercises.
The third pillar is investigative and operational
support. Strictly at the request of member States,
INTERPOL can provide operational support to them in
the form of incident response teams. In the event of a
terrorist attack, staff with expertise in CBRN matters
can be deployed to these teams. In addition, INTERPOL
runs a number of initiatives, projects and operations that
support the international law-enforcement community
in tackling the illicit trafficking of CBRN materials.
Fourthly, and lastly, is working in partnership. Due
to the complex nature of CBRN prevention and response,
a multidisciplinary approach is essential. Action needs
to be coordinated at the national Government level,
while also ensuring close cooperation and information
exchange among the various ministries, agencies and
institutions involved. This inter-agency approach needs
to be extended on an international level.
INTERPOL works in this global arena, connecting
our worldwide network of member countries and
maintaining close partnerships with other international
agencies and initiatives that are specialized in the
CBRN field, such as the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and others. I
stand ready to provide additional information to any
interested actor or Mission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Morales López (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I join the previous delegations that have congratulated
you, Mr. President, on your work in the Security
Council this month and on your leadership as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Nakamitsu and Mr. Joseph Ballard of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for
their briefings.
Following the concept note for today’s debate, I
will focus on sharing practical, concrete measures from
my country’s experience, with a view to facilitating
and improving States’ implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). For Colombia, national legislation is
a key element in addressing the threat posed by
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors. However, efforts aimed at adopting
national legal norms must be accompanied by efforts
aimed at strengthening cooperation between States
and institutions and addressing the issue from the
perspective of prevention.
Beyond strengthening legal norms and the capacity
to respond, Colombia has repeatedly suggested in
different forums improving particular aspects, such
as safety and chemical, nuclear and radiological
protective measures in order to prevent the diversion of
hazardous materials into the hands of non-State actors,
while also ensuring their security and protection at all
stages of their life cycle, from research, development
and manufacturing to transport through the supply
chain, storage and waste disposal. The strengthening
of security measures and chemical, nuclear and
radiological protection will prevent non-State actors
from acquiring these types of materials.
The OPCW and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, through their verification activities and
safeguards systems, respectively, have played a leading
role in monitoring the peaceful uses of chemistry and
nuclear energy. These systems of control have guaranteed
that all legally constituted actors within States comply
with the established controls. Accordingly, these
industries ensure adequate monitoring of hazardous
materials when they are on their radar. However, the
importance of strengthening the identification and
tracking of end users, both within States and abroad,
has been emphasized. Similarly, importance has been
given to strengthening border controls to prevent
illegal trafficking in hazardous materials, controls
in ports and airports to prevent the diversion of such
materials, and oversight on the import, export, transit,
transhipment and re-export of chemical, radiological
and nuclear products.
On the international scene today, the emergence of
new threats and irregular wars have served to highlight

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

the imperative need to ensure that weapons and their
components, as well as the technology and processes
for manufacturing them, are not likely to fall into the
hands of non-State actors and terrorist groups. For
this reason, strategic trade control has become an
irreversible trend at the international level.
Customs is a crucial link for strategic trade control.
Colombia therefore considers it essential to make strides
in the implementation of modern standards stipulated
by the World Customs Organization in order to meet
the challenges required by both resolution 1540 (2004)
and an increasingly interconnected and globalized
world, thereby improving the foreign trade processes
related to imports, transit, transhipment and exports.
That is why my country is seeking to make progress in
learning and awareness-raising in its institutions with
respect to working on strategic trade issues, given their
direct implications for the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).
Proof of the foregoing is the country’s recent
participation in the first regional conference in Latin
America of the Wiesbaden Industry Process, entitled
“Private sector engagement in strategic trade controls
for the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)”,
which took place in Mexico City at the beginning of this
month and where the need to strengthen ties between
the public and private sector and to work jointly to
fulfil our country’s commitment to resolution 1540
(2004) and strategic trade control of strategic trade was
made evident.
Finally, in order to make further progress in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), at the end
of July, Chile and Colombia will carry out the first
on-site peer-review visit to assess the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and share experiences,
procedures and best practices at the national level. This
exercise was made possible thanks to the support of
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the 1540 Committee Group of Experts and the
Inter-American Committee against Terrorism.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia) Following my Dutch
colleague, let me also honour you, Mr. President, by
saying in Spanish,

17-1873117/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

(spoke in Spanish)
“many thanks for your presidency and for convening
today’s important debate.”
(spoke in English)
We also thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs and the other briefers for their statements.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the Biological Weapons Convention and the South-East
Asia nuclear-weapon-free zone, and having ratified the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism, Indonesia welcomes today’s focus
on the threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) to non-State actors.
Although Indonesia fully supports resolutions
1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), I will not list all the
steps that my country has taken to safeguard against
the WMD proliferation threat. Suffice it to say, we
have instituted comprehensive measures to counter the
development, acquisition, manufacture, possession,
transportation, transfer or use of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their delivery systems.
Regionally, too, Indonesia participates actively in the
various Association of Southeast Asian Nations forums
on export controls and non-proliferation.
All States must fulfil their responsibilities to ensure
that the WMD threat from non-State actors is dealt
with effectively. It is therefore encouraging that the
latest five-year comprehensive report (see S/2016/1038)
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), presented last December observed that
most States had undertaken enhanced measures on
the prohibition of non-State-actor activities relating
to nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery. It also acknowledged greater
reporting by States. While the report also pointed
out gaps, it rightly noted that the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term task that requires
continuous efforts at national, regional and international
levels with intensified support.
18/34

28/06/2017

International cooperation and assistance are critical
when it comes to resolution 1540 (2004), especially
when taking into account countries’ varied economic
and industrial abilities. Indonesia underlines the 1540
Committee’s role in facilitating matchmaking and
extending extra support, in particular to those countries
that lack capacities in furnishing technical-assistance
proposals. There needs to be a proper response to
the decrease in the number of requests for assistance
submitted to the 1540 Committee during the five-year
period ending in 2016 as compared to the five-year
period ending in 2011. Greater support from the
Committee and its Group of Experts, including close
cooperation with national 1540 points of contact,
along with adequate support from other relevant parts
of the United Nations system and the international
community, will be extremely important.
It also goes without saying that the presence of
peace and stability will foster increased focus by
conflict-affected countries on thwarting any WMD
activity by non-State actors in their countries and
regions, thereby not only making the success of the
sustaining peace agenda even more imperative, but
also that of the deeply interconnected 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Thirteen out of the 17
Sustainable Development Goals have direct relevance
to nuclear science and technology, and it is crucial that
the discourse on WMD proliferation by non-State actors
does not impinge on the inalienable right of States to
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. My delegation also
stresses that the issue of WMD acquisition by non-State
groups should be considered by all United Nations
States Members in an inclusive manner, and our actions
should flow from multilaterally negotiated instruments.
As the Security Council tackles threats to global
peace, it must be principled and clear. The risk that
non-State actors might acquire nuclear and other
WMDs is only one among a list of serious global
security problems. A key challenge that remains is the
insistence by some States to possess nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons. There is no such thing as
right and moral hands for holding such wrong and
immoral weapons. Furthermore, my delegation remains
concerned about the fact that the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has yet to enter into force.
The international community can be proud of
having adopted legally binding instruments and banned
biological and chemical weapons through its clear
moral imperative and dedicated multilateral efforts.
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Yet, confronted with the horrors that Hiroshima and
Nagasaki endured and the abundant research confirming
the absolute destruction that nuclear weapons, by design
or accident, can wreak, it is deeply disturbing that some
States have hindered the same approach on nuclear
weapons, as is also mandated by article VI of the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
However, with the ongoing multilateral endeavour
in the United Nations conference to negotiate a legally
binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading
towards their total elimination, the recent meetings
of the Open-ended Working Group for the Fourth
Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to
Disarmament, and the disarmament activism by global
civil society, Indonesia sees some signs of hope. We
therefore have joined the overwhelmingly large number
of countries in urging reluctant States to heed the
calls for banning nuclear weapons and achieving their
total elimination.
Let us be on the right side of history when it comes
to the survival of humankind from the menacing threat
of nuclear explosions, either by design or accident. It is
our earnest hope that the Council, just as it is rightly
seized by the WMD proliferation concern, will display
the same vigour with regard to nuclear disarmament
from which the legitimacy for non-proliferation is born.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Arriola Ramírez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay expresses
its gratitude for the briefings by the Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs and the representative of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in connection
with the international effort to prevent the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors,
and commends the Bolivian presidency of the Security
Council for holding this open debate.
The Republic of Paraguay works closely with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the delegation of which
headed by its Executive Director visited our country
in March and held meetings with the highest-ranking
officials from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs and
those dealing with homeland security, the prevention
of money laundering and customs. During its visit,
the Committee was able to see at first-hand the efforts
undertaken by the Republic of Paraguay to adhere to
international norms in combating terrorism in all its

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

forms, as well as the implementation of public policies
aimed at preventing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors, especially in the
border areas of the country.
During its visit, the Committee was able to note the
need for technical assistance and specialized teams in
Paraguay so as to effectively and efficiently implement
mechanisms and policies aimed at preventing all forms
of terrorism and cross-border criminal activity linked
to it. Consequently, at the request of the Paraguayan
Government, the Committee is considering a follow-up
mission this year during which it will hold meetings
with officials from the legislative and judicial
branches. Furthermore, the Republic of Paraguay
participates actively in training activities, as it did in
the regional training course for the points of contact of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), held recently in Chile.
The delegation of Paraguay reaffirms its conviction
that the fight against terrorism in all its forms must
contribute to the maintenance of international stability
and security; encourage cooperation and friendly
relations between States, while respecting their national
sovereignty; and be based on the rule of law, respect for
human rights in the broadest terms and the fundamental
freedoms of individuals under international law.
In conclusion, the delegation of Paraguay calls on
the States Members of the United Nations to reallocate
the resources budgeted for the modernization of their
stockpiles to efforts aimed at achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular target 4 of Sustainable
Development Goal 16 — to significantly reduce illicit
arms flows and combat all forms of organized crime.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate on a very
pressing issue.
I align myself with the statement made on behalf
of the European Union and the statement to be made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group of
Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). I would like to make
the following four points.
First, the use of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists is a growing threat. Since 2013, the repeated
use of chemical weapons in Syria, particularly by the
Syrian regime but also by Islamic State in Iraq and

17-1873119/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the Levant (ISIL), as well as ISIL’s use of chemical
weapons in Iraq, has dramatically exacerbated concerns
about the use of those universally condemned weapons.
However, holding the perpetrators accountable for those
heinous acts remains a major challenge. We believe that
preventing non-State actors from accessing chemical
weapons and their precursors is the most effective way
to prevent non-State actors from ultimately using them.
For that reason, Germany supported the
international community’s efforts to remove and destroy
the remaining stocks of chemical-weapon precursors
in Libya. The German Government is contributing to
those efforts by allowing the precursors to be destroyed
at a specialized facility in Germany. To address these
growing risks, it is crucial that the international
community continue to strengthen the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention and support capacitybuilding in countries in which proliferation risks
exist. The Group of Seven’s global partnership plays
an active role in that area, and Germany contributes to
those activities through its partnership programme on
biological and health security.
Secondly, together with its partners, Germany is
pushing for a treaty to end fissile material production.
By limiting the pool of available fissile material, such
a treaty could significantly reduce the risk of non-State
actors acquiring those highly dangerous materials. We
congratulate Canada for the progress that it has made
towards that goal while chairing the High-level Fissile
Material Cut-off Treaty Expert Preparatory Group.
The international community has also made great
progress in the field of nuclear security. The Nuclear
Security Summit process has not only drawn worldwide
attention to the risks of nuclear terrorism, but has also
triggered concrete actions and initiatives to close
existing gaps. We encourage all Member States to adopt
existing legal norms such as the amended Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism. Furthermore, those Member
States that require assistance to fully implement
those norms must be able to turn to the international
community for sustainable support. Germany is one of
the major donors to relevant organizations and bodies.
For example, Germany contributes substantially to the
Nuclear Security Fund of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, which supports nuclear security
capacity-building projects. We count on others to
follow our example.
20/34

28/06/2017

Thirdly, in our globalized world, the private sector
has an important role to play in non-proliferation. After
all, it is the private sector that must implement export
controls and adhere to non-proliferation legislation.
In recognition of this fact, Germany initiated the
Wiesbaden process with the support of many other
Member States and in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. The process
seeks to increase private sector engagement in the
context of resolution 1540 (2004). The next Wiesbaden
conference, in late November, will focus on due
diligence by private sector companies and questions
related to cross-border development and production.
We have initiated a similar dialogue with industry
through the Nuclear Security Contact Group.
Fourthly, last year’s comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) proved to be a useful exercise.
Germany especially supports the aim to reinforce the
role of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in facilitating
technical assistance, particularly by improving the
matching mechanism. We welcome all other initiatives
that seek to strengthen resolution 1540 (2004) in the
long term, such as the work of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540, in which Germany actively participates.
Together with partner nations and international
organizations, Germany will continue to play its part in
reducing the global risk of terrorism perpetrated with
weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am delighted to see you, Sir, presiding over today’s
meeting of the Security Council.
(spoke in English)
On behalf of 51 — may I repeat, 51 — members of
the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to stress the relevance of today’s debate. I will now
highlight the main elements of our statement, as the full
version has been circulated.
Resolution 2325 (2016) reaffirms that the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery constitutes a
serious threat to international peace and security. We
see proliferation taking place in the Middle East and in
Asia. We condemn proliferation in all possible forms
by anyone and we will make every effort to prevent it.
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

In that connection, we condemn in the strongest terms
the nuclear-weapon and ballistic-missile-development
activities conducted by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in flagrant violation of Security
Council resolutions.

lists to monitor and control materials that can be used
for proliferation purposes. We encourage those States
that have not yet done so to develop such controls. It is
also important to strengthen cybersecurity, in particular
in sensitive sectors.

That threat is more pressing than ever because of
the risk that terrorists and other non-State actors might
acquire and use such weapons, in addition to the rapid
advances in science, technology and international
commerce. Unfortunately, we have seen that that threat
has materialized in Syria, Iraq and Malaysia. The use
of chemical weapons undermines the hard-won taboo
of those atrocious weapons, contrary to the norms
established by the international community and upheld
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons (OPCW).

Fourthly, it is imperative that resolution 1540
(2004) be fully implemented. We encourage States that
have not done so to submit their first report. We also
encourage States to provide additional information on
implementation and good practices, consider developing
voluntary national action plans, identify effective focal
points and maintain ongoing dialogue with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), including through visits by the Committee.
In that regard, we welcome Morocco’s initiative to
host a training session for African contact points. We
underscore the importance of assistance and welcome
capacity-building through bilateral contributions to the
trust fund managed by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. We stand ready to assist States at
their request in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004)

We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria,
as confirmed by the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. In order to stem the risk of
further chemical-weapon use by any party in Syria,
we urge the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully
with OPCW to fulfil its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
(spoke in Spanish)
In that regard, we support the global approach that
advocates the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), established pursuant to resolution 2325 (2016).
First, a specific approach must be adopted so as to
allocate resources to areas where they are most needed,
all the while taking into consideration the circumstances
unique to each State. In more concrete terms, we believe
that the chemical and biological sectors require greater
attention, in particular in terms of inventory control
procedures, the protection of related materials and
the relative accessibility of such materials, including
formulating a more urgent response to the issue.
Secondly, it is important for States, at the very least,
to criminalize the reckless funding of activities that
lead to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
regardless of whether or not they are linked to terrorist
activities, and to establish national control mechanisms
to prevent them.
Thirdly, the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) demands not only the adoption of legislation,
but its enforcement and the establishment of national
controls. A good example is the compilation of national

(spoke in English)
We welcome increased cooperation between the
United Nations and relevant international and regional
organizations, as well as among the relevant Security
Council committees, in combating proliferation. In that
effort, parliamentarians and civil society, in particular
industry and academia, also have a role to play.
Finally, we acknowledge the key role played by
Bolivia as it leads the 1540 Committee and highlight
the importance of transparency. A good example of
such transparency is today’s open debate. In view of
the current threats and challenges, we believe that the
Committee needs to have in place an adequate support
structure so that it can assist States and more efficiently
monitor implementation.
Rest assured, Sir, of our continued support to the
work of the Committee and to your chairmanship.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank Bolivia for having convened today’s
open debate and through you, Ambassador Llorentty
Solíz, I congratulate your entire team on its excellent
work in presiding over the Security Council.

17-1873121/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Cuba supports the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Our country shares the legitimate concerns of
the international community about the threat posed
by weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear
weapons. Limiting international efforts to the horizontal
non-proliferation of such weapons is insufficient. The
only effective way to stop the acquisition and use of
nuclear weapons, including by terrorists, is through the
prohibition and total elimination of such weapons in
a transparent, verifiable and irreversible manner. Our
country does not possess, nor does it intend to possess,
weapons of mass destruction, and it has adopted a
series of measures to guarantee strict compliance
with the commitments and obligations it undertook as
a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the Biological Weapons Convention, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, and as a member State of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
Cuba participates actively in ongoing negotiations
at the General Assembly on a treaty to prohibit nuclear
weapons, leading towards their total elimination.
We support the adoption, entry into force and
implementation of such an international instrument.
Similarly, we will continue to advocate the adoption,
as soon as possible, of a broad-based convention that
encompasses the elimination of nuclear weapons within
a specific time frame and under strict international
verification. We reiterate the need to start negotiations,
without delay, on a legally binding protocol that would
effectively, comprehensively and equitably strengthen
the Biological Weapons Convention. The meeting of the
States parties to that Convention to be held in December
should include among its priorities the adoption of a
clear mandate for resuming the negotiating process in
that regard.
In a year in which we commemorate the twentieth
anniversary of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
as one of the first signatories and a State party to
the Convention, Cuba reiterates its firm rejection of
the use of chemical weapons by anyone under any
circumstances. We reject, and call for the immediate
elimination of, those unilateral measures designed
to prohibit or limit the legitimate right of States to
access and use nuclear energy, biological agents and
chemicals for peaceful purposes, as well as the relevant
technologies and know-how.
22/34

28/06/2017

In the light of the danger posed by the existence
of weapons of mass destruction and their possible use,
cooperation on the part of the international community
must be strengthened.
The fight against terrorism must be based on the
effective implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in strict compliance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
The efforts of the Security Council cannot undermine
the existing multilateral treaties on weapons of mass
destruction, the international organizations established
in that regard, or the role of the General Assembly.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Ms. Mac Loughlin (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, for having proposed
this open debate on a particularly topical subject, namely,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Spain on behalf of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004).
I would like to say how pleased we are to see a
brotherly country chairining the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), given our region’s unwavering commitment to
non-proliferation. Latin America and the Caribbean
were pioneers in establishing a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction. Likewise, we welcome the
adoption of the declaration of the States members of
the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean (OPANAL) on the
fiftieth anniversary of the conclusion of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean.
There are many highly distressing cases in which
international terrorism has shown ample proof of
its destructive capacity. The use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors in recent years has
ceased to be an abstract or theoretical problem and
has served to highlight the need for Member States to
redouble their efforts to prevent terrorist groups from
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction, their
related materials and means of delivery.
For Argentina, by its scope and nature, resolution
1540 (2004) represents the clearest response by the
United Nations to the problem of weapons of mass
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

destruction and their access by non-State actors. Since
its adoption, 13 years ago, Argentina has addressed the
resolution by striving to preserve the balance between
its traditional commitment to non-proliferation and
a reaffirmation of the sovereign right to the peaceful
use and development of advanced technologies such
as nuclear, chemical, biological, pharmaceutical and
nanotechnology. Both principles are enshrined in the
text of resolution 1540 (2004) as well as in resolution
2325 (2016), co-sponsored by our country and adopted
only six months ago. In that context, on 26 October
2004, the Republic of Argentina submitted its first
national report, together with successive updates,
thereby demonstrating its unwavering commitment to
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and becoming an active member of the five
non-proliferation regimes, as well as the Proliferation
Security Initiative.
Member States should redouble efforts to strengthen
and update our national export control systems, which
we believe should be based on four fundamental pillars:
a transparent and standardized national licensing
system; effective compliance with current legislation
applicable to export controls, including brokering and
trans-shipment aspects; increased corporate awareness
of the importance of such systems for industrial
development and for the security of international trade;
and close regional cooperation.
With regard to regional cooperation, I wish to
emphasize that Argentina provides assistance under
resolution 1540 (2004) and has developed training
activities on identifying sensitive items at subregional
and regional levels, as well as through South-South
cooperation with African countries.
Argentina considers it essential to ensure that
dual-use chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
materials are properly protected, and out of the hands
of those who would not hesitate to use them to terrorize
others and sow panic and destruction. It is illusory to
believe that we live in security while there are such
materials lacking the proper protection, and without
the implementation of international regulations at the
global level.
In particular, for Argentina, the Amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material has been in force for more than a year. Last
April in Buenos Aires, together with the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

National Institute of Industrial Technology, we
organized the second Regional Course on Chemical
Safety and Security Management in Laboratories.
Argentina is convinced that, beyond the protection
of materials that we can guarantee at the national
level, we must work constructively to foster dialogue
between nuclear- and non-nuclear-weapon countries,
with the understanding that the only guarantee that
such weapons or related materials will not be acquired
by non-State actors would be their total elimination.
Lastly, Argentina reiterates its call for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and calls
upon the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
abandon its nuclear military programmes in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Security Council. Those
programmes represent a threat to international peace
and security.
The Argentine delegation would also like to
say that the call for the complete elimination of
chemical weapons is a key element of its position on
non-proliferation and disarmament. In that context,
Argentina firmly reiterates its absolute condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons and the use of chemicals
as weapons by any actor and under any circumstance.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate. In the interests of time, I will read out only
parts of our statement.
Terror networks and non-State actors by themselves
do not have any capacity or access to advanced and
sensitive technologies and materials. However instances
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) are not unknown to us all. The possibility of
such collusion remains a real cause for concern. That
grave threat can only be contained through effective and
sustained international cooperation and monitoring.
As a country with advanced nuclear technologies,
India is fully conscious of the responsibilities that come
with their possession. India is a party to all of the 13
universal instruments accepted as benchmarks for a
State’s commitment to combat international terrorism.
India participated at the ministerial level in the
2013 and 2016 International Conferences on Nuclear
Security organized by the International Atomic Energy

17-1873123/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Agency, which plays a central role in promoting nuclear
security efforts. Our Prime Minister has participated in
all of the four Nuclear Security Summits held since 2010.
India also participates actively in the Nuclear Security
Contact Group. India has contributed to the goals and
objectives of the Chemical Weapons Convention and
participates actively in the inter-sessional process on
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention.
Since 2002, India has introduced at the General
Assembly draft resolution entitled “Measures to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction”,
which has been adopted by consensus every year, most
recently in 2016 as resolution 71/38, co-sponsored by
more than 70 Member States. The resolution offers a
consensus platform to strengthen international dialogue
and cooperation.
India has harmonized its legislative and regulatory
framework with the control lists, guidelines and best
practices of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), the Wassenaar
Arrangement and the Australia Group. India’s
admission to the MTCR, a year ago, is a recognition
of India’s non-proliferation record and its ability to
contribute to global non-proliferation efforts. Last year,
India also joined The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation.
We appreciate the efforts of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA) and collaborate with
the 1540 Committee to organize capacity-building and
awareness-raising events. India is currently planning
to host an international workshop in cooperation with
UNODA and the 1540 Committee in New Delhi.
We have taken note of the requests for assistance
put forward by countries to the 1540 Committee and
remain ready to provide technical assistance and
training to any interested Member State. Details on the
technical expertise offered by India can be accessed
through our latest report submitted to the 1540
Committee this month.
India’s Global Centre for Nuclear Energy
Partnership has conducted more than 30 international
and regional programmes, involving more than 300
participants from around 30 countries. In February,
India hosted the meeting of the Implementation and
Assessment Group of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism. It was attended by more than 150
24/34

28/06/2017

representatives from over 40 partner countries, as
well as by the International Atomic Energy Agency,
INTERPOL, the European Union and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
An early conclusion to the negotiations on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
would be helpful. We support universal adherence
to, and the full implementation o,f the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism and the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material, as well as its 2005 amendment.
Unmasked clandestine proliferation networks have
shown that non-State actors can exploit weak links in
global supply chains. All States must therefore assume
their responsibilities to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
The measures undertaken by India in that regard are
consistent with the highest international standards and
are highlighted in India’s latest national report to the
1540 Committee. We must remain vigilant, strengthen
cooperation, build capacity and encourage the full
assumption of national responsibility by States, in
accordance with their international obligations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): We thank the
Bolivian presidency for the inclusion of this important
agenda item in the programme of work of the Security
Council and for the comprehensive concept note.
Armenia attaches great importance to the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and has
been submitting regular reports on the measures
taken by national authorities to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). An important development in strengthening the
implementation of, and compliance with, the provisions
of that resolution was the adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), in December 2016, which we co-sponsored
together with other 76 States. We also commend the
initiative of Spain to establish a Group of Friends of
resolution 1540 (2004).
There is widespread recognition of the threat
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists and non-State groups, heightened by the
rapid advances in science, technology and international
commerce that could give rise to a risk of the misuse of
scientific developments.
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Capacity-building and the strengthening of
institutional arrangements at the national level are
the necessary prerequisites to address the existing
and emerging threats associated with the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to counter the
growing risk of weapons of mass destruction falling
into the hands of terrorists and non-State groups.
The Government of Armenia has been consistent
in reinforcing the implementation of the provisions of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) at the national
level. We have been enacting a broad range of legislative
and administrative measures aimed at safeguarding
radioactive and nuclear material, strengthening border
security against the smuggling of hazardous materials
and enhancing capacities to investigate and prosecute any
such incidents. Rigid legislative safeguards have been
put in place for the licensing and physical protection of
nuclear and radioactive material. The criminal code has
been amended with a view to significantly increasing
the term of sentences for the illicit trafficking, import,
export or re-export of chemical, biological, radiological
or nuclear materials.
Significant steps have also been taken in the field
of biological security. In particular, in 2016 Armenia
adopted a national programme on the implementation
of the Biological Weapons Convention. The programme
aims at increasing awareness among the population,
ensuring the accreditation of existing laboratories in
accordance with international standards, establishing
a network of such laboratories, as well as securing
adequate professional competence of employees
working with biological agents. Furthermore, the
Government has set up an inter-agency working group
to ensure the implementation of the provisions of
the Convention.
In November 2016, Armenia also adopted a
national strategy related to chemical, biological,
radiological materials, which outlines the threats and
risks in the field and respective measures to address the
emerging challenges.
With a view to strengthening the international legal
framework in combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, Armenia has supported the initiative
to establish an international legal instrument for the
suppression of acts of chemical and biological terrorism.
We encourage the 1540 Committee to continue its
cooperation with relevant international and regional
organizations based on comparative advantages

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

and best practices developed on the ground. In that
respect, an effective response to the specific needs
of States, upon their request, could bring together the
efforts of all actors on the ground, including donor
States. We recognize and support the role of regional
organizations and multilateral initiatives in promoting
the comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe in particular has been instrumental in
facilitating the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by its participating States.
The Global Initiative to Combat Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, as a partnership of 88 States to promote
global nuclear security, has been an important and
useful platform to facilitate cooperation aimed at
nuclear detection, nuclear forensics, response and
mitigation of threats.
We condemn the use of chemical weapons by anyone
and in any part of the world and highlight the importance
of verifiable, transparent and internationally mandated
investigation of any alleged use of chemical substances
banned under international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Bolivia for convening this debate on the
grave threat posed to international peace and security
by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors.
Canada is pleased to align itself with the statement
of the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004), and
would like to make the following additional three points.
First, Canada fully supports resolution 1540
(2004) and its successor resolutions as essential to the
international non-proliferation architecture. Indeed, we
all need to step-up our efforts to achieve its full and
universal implementation as quickly as possible.
(spoke in English)
As a co-sponsor of resolution 2325 (2016), Canada
particularly welcomed measures aimed at strengthening
assistance requests and mechanisms. To support those
measures, we are pleased to announce funding to the
Stimson Center to implement a 1540 assistance support
initiative. This initiative will create a new website
with a comprehensive list of assistance providers and
help to develop more detailed and strategic requests

17-1873125/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

for assistance. It aims to provide the Office for
Disarmament Affairs and committed States Members
of the United Nations with an action plan for more
effectively transmitting assistance requests through the
1540 Committee. We are also providing new funding
for several other projects related to resolution1540
(2004), including continued support for a Caribbean
Community regional 1540 coordinator, and further
assistance to partner countries in Latin America and
the Caribbean for legislative implementation.
Secondly, we recognize that fast-evolving
proliferation risks and advances in science, technology
and commerce demand dynamic and flexible responses.
Domestically, Canada is strengthening its counterproliferation capabilities by increasing funding and
amending legislation to better control brokering activitie,
and weapon-of-mass destruction-related exports. We
continue to monitor advances in science and technology
and promote responsible innovation. Through targeted
outreach, we are educating stakeholders about the
proliferation risks associated with chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear sensitive technologies and
dual-use goods. Internationally, under Canada’s
chairmanship, the Nuclear Security Contact Group
is working to identify and address new and emerging
challenges to nuclear security.
Thirdly, Canada is pleased to chair the highlevel fissile material cut-off treaty expert preparatory
group to prepare the way for negotiating a treaty to
end fissile material production for nuclear weapons.
A fissile material cut-off treaty would reduce the risk
of non-State actors acquiring these materials, thereby
enhancing global nuclear security and reducing the risk
of nuclear terrorism.
In conclusion, Canada stands ready to partner in
relevant and constructive ways with all interested
national and regional parties to address the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.

28/06/2017

in particular you, Ambassador Llorentty Solíz,
which allows us to take stock of what we have so far
achieved and to discuss how we will navigate in future
in keeping with resolution 2325 (2016), which was
the result of the 2016 comprehensive review of the
resolution 1540 (2004), a pillar of the international
non-proliferation architecture.
I would also like to thank Ms. Nakamitsu and
Mr. Ballard for their excellent briefings.
In brief, Greece maintains the view that, at the dawn
of the twenty-first century, the world finds itself in a
situation of constant change and has been confronted
with multiple challenges. All of that is happening within
a volatile global security environment and in a fragile
and unstable political and socioeconomic landscape in
strategically important regions.
The proliferation of the threat of weapons of mass
destruction that we are discussing today is a very
complex challenge. Volatility, instability and regional
crises and conflicts, as well as a galloping rate of
technological advances in science and global commerce,
render more alarming the risk that non-State actors,
namely, terrorist groups, may seek to acquire weapons
of mass destruction.
Specific resolutions to address that threat do
not exist, and might not be the answer. With that in
mind, we stand, first and foremost, for reducing the
root causes of instability, strengthening multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation treaties, supporting
relevant multilateral institutions, mainstreaming
non-proliferation into broad policies and fully
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). We also stand for
vigilance and inclusivity at the national, regional and
international levels in coping with that challenge so as
to enable us to embark upon more coherent and holistic
ways to combat it further on.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.

Mr. Kalamverzos (Greece): Allow me, at the
outset, to stress that Greece aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union, which highlighted the unwavering support for
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

Mr. Gertze (Namibia): First of all, I would like to
express my appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
open debate on the question of non-proliferation. This
debate promotes transparency and inclusivity. Let me
also congratulate the delegation of the State of Bolivia
for its successful work of presiding over the business of
the Security Council during the month of June.

I would like to express my appreciation for the
timely discussion initiated by the Bolivian presidency,

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Bolivarian

26/34

17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
On many occasions, the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, has expressed that
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a
threat to international peace and security. That was
demonstrated when the Security Council sent out a
strong message in 2004 by adopting resolution 1540
(2004), which offers a response to the growing risk that
weapons of mass destruction could fall into the hands
of, and be used by, non-State actors and terrorist groups.
Resolution 1540 (2004) provides an opportunity to
deepen cooperation among the countries of the world
so as to access technology and the required capacity to
respond to the threat posed by terrorist groups and other
illegal armed groups. The physical protection of nuclear
materials and installations and adequate guarantees for
the peaceful use of nuclear material and technology are
fundamental to establishing a favourable environment
for developing nuclear energy that benefits humankind.
Namibia understands the relevance of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) as, first, to
ensure the right of all Member States to the peaceful
use of nuclear energy for the development and
advancement of technology, and, secondly, to ensure
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
whether nuclear, chemical or biological, as well as their
means of delivery and related technologies. In that
regard, we reiterate the sovereign right of Member States
to the development of advanced technologies, such as
nuclear, chemical, biological and pharmaceutical ones,
so as to achieve industrial development.
Namibia continues to participate in the activities of
the international community in the area of disarmament
with a view to achieve a world free of weapons of
mass destruction and the complete prohibition of their
acquisition, development, stockpiling, transferring
and modernization. It is our belief that cooperation
between Member States and the relevant regional and
international organizations will strengthen national
capacities to help prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, including their acquisition by
non-State actors and terrorist groups.
As a State party to the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
(CWC), Namibia welcomes the implementation of
that Convention, which is the only comprehensive

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

multilateral treaty banning the whole group of
weapons of mass destruction, while also providing
for a verification system and promoting the use of
chemicals for peaceful purposes. Namibia believes that
the main focus of the CWC should remain the complete
elimination of all categories of chemical weapons.
Similarly, Namibia considers the Biological
Weapons Convention as representing an important
component of the international legal architecture
related to weapons of mass destruction, while noting
with concern that the lack of a verification system
continues to pose a challenge to the effectiveness of
that Convention.
All pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) should be treated in a
balanced approach. The failure of the 2015 NPT
Review Conference has raised serious questions about
the future of the international non-proliferation and
disarmament regime. The reaffirmation of deterrence
doctrines, modernization plans and long-term
investments in nuclear-weapon programmes only serve
to undermine the legitimacy of the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime. Those trends pose serious
challenges to disarmament initiatives.
In conclusion, my delegation welcomes the
successful conclusion of the Open-Ended Working
Group for the fourth special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament (SSOD IV). We
underscore the importance of convening SSOD IV, as it
would offer an opportunity to review the most critical
aspects of the disarmament machinery and mobilize the
international community and public opinion in favour
of the elimination of weapons of mass destruction. It
would also enhance the total control and reduction of
conventional weapons, which can be easily acquired by
non-State actors.
We also welcome the ongoing conference to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit
nuclear weapons, leading to their total elimination.
We note with appreciation the successful outcome of
the first session of the conference and look forward to
another successful outcome of its second session.
Let me assure you, Sir, that Namibia continues to
stand fully behind this important global effort to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.

17-1873127/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Bande (Nigeria): I thank the Bolivian
delegation for convening this important debate on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I
also commend the briefers for their remarks
I align my delegation with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I wish to reaffirm Nigeria’s commitment to the
ideal of a nuclear-free world. We regard the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery as a grave threat to our collective security. The
risk of non-State actors, including terrorists, acquiring,
developing, manufacturing and using nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons remains a serious threat to
global peace and security. Terrorists and their sponsors
have shown the intent and, at least in the case of
chemical weapons, some capability to develop and
acquire weapons of mass destruction and use them.
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), 11 years
ago, signalled the determination of the Security
Council to respond robustly to the threat posed to
international peace and security by the proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their
means of delivery. While the three main treaties on
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons address
non-proliferation, it is evident that they do not take into
account the possibility of such weapons falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Therein lies the significance
of resolution 1540 (2204) in its complementarity to the
three global treaties on weapons of mass destruction.
The emergence of extremist groups has introduced
a sense of urgency to the need for the international
community to take stock of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and close the gaps that could be
exploited by such groups to obtain and use weapons of
mass destruction.
An appraisal of the mandate of this significant
resolution shows a measure of commitment on the part of
Member States. Numerous countries have adopted laws
and regulations that comply with a substantial number
of the obligations set out in resolution 1540 (2004).
They are reference points and useful mechanisms for
confidence-building measures, including those that
could assist in addressing actions that could promote
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, such
as the menace of smuggling and money-laundering
28/34

28/06/2017

activities in all regions. That is as a result of the need to
relentlessly address the yawning compliance gap often
encountered by Member States with limited resources
and technical capabilities.
Nigeria believes that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones across the world is a potent tool
to prevent the vertical and horizontal proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Success in that direction
would promote transparency in non-proliferation, which
is the second pillar of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Nigeria will continue to
support efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones
in parts of the world where they currently do not exist.
We recognize the right of any party to pursue a peaceful
nuclear programme. However, it must be pursued within
the ambit of the NPT and other relevant international
instruments. We stress that efforts aimed at nuclear
non-proliferation should tally with simultaneous efforts
aimed at nuclear disarmament.
Nigeria is concerned about the slow pace of progress
towards nuclear disarmament and the lack of progress
by the nuclear-weapon States to accomplish the task of
the total elimination of their nuclear stockpiles. We call
on the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their multilateral
legal obligations on nuclear disarmament.
We appreciate the role of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in assisting States
and international institutions in the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
by considering requests from States regarding the
provision of technical assistance in the energy and
extractive industries. That allows States and institutions
to implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Nigeria wishes to stress that resolution 1540
(2004) and its effective implementation remain a key
component of the global architecture for countering
the danger posed by the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We are convinced that
the establishment of effective precautionary measures
and systems to address potential nuclear, chemical or
biological proliferation is a collective responsibility
incumbent upon all Member States, and we must all
take the lead.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Nigeria’s
conviction of the validity of multilateral diplomacy in
the field of disarmament and non-proliferation. We must
remain especially vigilant to issues that may threaten
international peace and security. We shall therefore
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

continue to advocate for multilateralism as the core
platform for negotiations in the area of disarmament
and non-proliferation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): First, I would like to
thank the delegation of Bolivia for convening today’s
important debate and for preparing the concept note on
reinforcing the preventive system to avoid the different
kinds of catastrophes that could result from the use of
nuclear, chemical or biological weapons by non-State
actors, particularly terrorists.
Slovenia fully subscribes to the statement made by
the observer of the European Union and to the statement
made on behalf of the Group of Friends of resolution
1540 (2004). I would like to make some additional
remarks in my national capacity.
Slovenia has been supporting the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to strengthen global capacity to prevent, detect
and respond to the use of weapons of mass destruction
for terrorist purposes by, first, joining the Group of
Friends of resolution 1540 (2004) to help contribute to
better transparency and the resolution’s implementation;
secondly, submitting four national reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004); and, thirdly,
expanding the Slovenia-led Western Balkan counterterrorism initiative, which links up individual initiatives
in that area into a joint comprehensive effort — the
integrative internal security governance concept — that
includes the prevention of violent extremism, fights
terrorism and takes measures to combat organized
crime and enhance border security.
Fourthly, Slovenia also contributes by attaching
great importance to nuclear security through the
involvement of several ministries in nuclear security
matters in order to fight the illicit trafficking of
radioactive and nuclear materials and, lastly, by playing
an active role in the work of the Board of Governors of
the International Atomic Energy Agency for the third
time since our independence.
Slovenia had informed the Council about the
practical measures it adopted to prevent non-State
actors from accessing weapons of mass destruction
technology in the open debate on resolution 1540 (2004)
in December 2016 (see S/PV.7837). Let me just briefly
mention the most recent ones.

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

In March, we joined the Nuclear Security Contact
Group, through which we will contribute to global
efforts in that area to achieve and enhance nuclear
security. We also took over the co-rapporteur role
to Montenegro as it aspires to become a member
of the Wassenaar Arrangement, which deals with
promoting transparency and greater responsibility in
the transfers of conventional arms and dual-use goods
and technologies, as well as with the prevention of
the acquisition of those items by terrorists. This year
Slovenia also chairs the General Working Group of the
Wassenaar Arrangement to help contribute to that goal.
In conclusion, there is a growing link between
terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and
cyberthreats. Cyberterrorism is perhaps the most
prominent emerging threat in the nuclear realm, based
on rapid advances in science and technology. That is
why Slovenia is reviewing our national legislation and
measures in that area of endeavour and we will report
on the review when it has been concluded.
Let me reassure you, Sir, that Slovenia will continue
to implement resolution 1540 (2004), as well as the
recommendations of the comprehensive review, and we
call upon all States to do the same.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim In Ryong (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): Let me express my appreciation to you, Sir,
for convening today’s important debate.
We join with previous speakers to support the
statement of the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, I condemn in the strongest terms
and categorically reject the reckless remarks made
by hostile forces, including the United States, Japan,
the United Kingdom, France, Spain and the Republic
of Korea. Taking the opportunity offered by today’s
open debate, they once again called into question the
measures taken by the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to bolster its self-defence capabilities, and
referenced the use of chemical weapons that have never
existed, while branding the Republic as a threat to
world peace and regional security and a country that
violates Security Council resolutions.
This is nothing but an outrageous breach of the
sovereignty of the Democratic People’s Republic of

17-1873129/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Korea. Everyone recalls that, in February this year, the
hostile forces tried to use the death of a citizen of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to step up their
human rights racket against the Republic and spread
rumours about its use of chemical weapons or weapons
of mass destruction, in a bid to create an atmosphere of
international criticism against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Once again, I hereby strongly denounce the reckless
remarks against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea by hostile forces, for the dangerous political
purpose of tarnishing the dignified image of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and weakening
its social system by spreading such ruinous rumours on
the international stage.
On the occasion of today’s open debate on the
theme of global efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors, once
again, I would like to clarify and emphasize the policy
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The respected Supreme Leader Comrade Kim Jong
Un, in his remarkable statement made at the historic
seventh Congress of the Worker’s Party of Korea, clearly
affirmed before the world that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, as a responsible nuclear-weapon
State, would not use nuclear weapons first, unless the
forces of aggression that are hostile to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea violate its sovereignty with
their nuclear weapons; and would faithfully observe
its commitments to nuclear non-proliferation, which
it agreed to before the international community, and
strive for global denuclearization.
We are seriously concerned by the fact that the
United States and its vassal forces again picked a fight
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea over
its self-defence strengthening measures under the
pretext of non-proliferation. I would like to clarify the
principled position of my Government.
It is clear that the main root cause of the grave
situation on the Korean peninsula, which is inching to
the brink of war and is shrouded in nuclear war clouds,
is the hostile outdated policy and manoeuvres of the
United States aimed at provoking a war against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Needless to
say, as everybody witnessed, the joint military exercises
Key Resolve and Foal Eagle 2017, which were carried
out by the United States on the Korean peninsula over 60
30/34

28/06/2017

days in March and April this year and which introduced
the largest-ever mass aggressive forces and sufficient
strategic assets to wage another full-scale war, are
very dangerous and reckless aggressive war drills that
constitute grave threats to the peace and security on
the Korean peninsula and beyond in the region and are
acts of State-sponsored terrorism against a sovereign
State. Those kinds of extreme, provocative military
manoeuvres by the United States continue even after
the end of the joint military exercises.
The United States staged the madcap pre-emptive
nuclear strike drills against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea after deploying two nuclear carrier
strike groups in the East Sea of Korea and introducing
B-1B strategic bombers from the Guam Island. They
even brought a nuclear submarine into the Port of Busan
in South Korea and held a missile interception test
simulating the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
intercontinental ballistic missile attack on 30 May. On
20 June, the United States introduced two B-1B nuclear
strategic bombers into the airspace of South Korea to
conduct simulation bombing exercises, and it is openly
arguing that it would send strategic bombers to the
Korean peninsula more than once a month. Now it has
introduced the monster-like Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense missile defence system in South Korea
in order to aggravate the tensions and turn the Korean
peninsula into a radioactive zone. On 1 June, the United
States publicly imposed unilateral sanctions on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and, on 3 June,
it spearheaded the fabrication of another sanctions
resolution through a vote of the Security Council.
The United States is stepping up its military buildup,
including modernizing its nuclear weapons, just in
order to obtain exclusive and permanent possession of
the most sophisticated weapon system in the world, but
other countries are not allowed to test or launch any
nuclear- or ballistic-related object. It is really the height
of shameless arrogance, self-righteousness and double
standards. That the United States forced others to agree
to the sanctions resolution, which had been fabricated
in a back room at its own pleasure, and described the
resolution as the will of the international community
is a flagrant example of high-handedness and of its
trampling upon international justice and an arbitrary
act in pursuit of its own interests.
It is a fatal miscalculation if the countries that
had a hand in the frame-up of the sanctions resolution
think that they can delay or keep in check the open
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

development of the nuclear forces of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea even for a moment. They
will clearly see that their means and indiscreet acts run
counter to their objectives.
The buildup of nuclear forces by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is a natural exercise of its
sovereignty to thwart the nuclear threat imposed by the
United States against our country in an unprecedented
way. It is also an effort to ensure genuine international
justice and peace and security on the Korean peninsula
and in the region.
To this day, the United States continues to talk
about dialogue, but it does not make any sense to talk
about dialogue when unjust preconditions are attached
and extreme pressure is applied. Having undergone
rigorous trials, the Korean people have arrived at
the conclusion that the only way to defend their vital
rights and sovereignty is to react to the nukes in kind.
No matter what others say and whatever sanctions,
pressure and military attacks may follow, we will not
flinch from the path of building up our nuclear forces,
which are used to defend the sovereignty of our country
and our right to national existence.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s selfreliant nuclear force serves to guarantee and strengthen
the peace of the Korean peninsula and the world.
I reaffirm my Government commitment to
strengthening its national nuclear deterrent in every
possible way to eliminate the source of nuclear threat
and blackmail of the United States, which grows more
desperate day by day, and to safeguard the peace and
security of the Korean peninsula and the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me thank the Bolivian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
this debate and for its successful chairmanship of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

materials and technologies have become a serious
threat and one of the major challenges to our common
security. The chances of these weapons falling into the
hands of unauthorized actors is particularly worrisome
and alarming in view of the rapid advancements in
science and technology.
Increasing threats emanating from terrorist groups
make the exploitation of security vulnerabilities with
criminal intent highly possible. Some actors have already
demonstrated readiness to acquire and use weapons of
mass destruction, as demonstrated in the reports by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical WeaponsUnited Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism.
The threats posed by the proliferation of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) weapons
and materials, as well as weapons of mass destruction
and related technologies, remains a subject of serious
concern for my country, not least due to the fact that
we neighbour the regions with a risk of proliferation.
In recent years, several attempts to smuggle nuclear
and radioactive materials through Georgia’s occupied
regions were recorded. They were duly prevented by
law enforcement agencies. However, in the absence
of international presence inside those regions, it has
become virtually impossible to conduct any type of
verification activities on the ground, which increases
the risk of proliferation of WMD-related materials.
Political commitment is crucial in developing the
policies, strategies and systems to strengthen security
at all levels. In that regard, full compliance with the
obligations under the international arrangements,
such as the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Biological Weapons Convention, and resolutions 1540
(2004) and 2325 (2016) and others, must stand as a
priority for the international community.

My country aligns itself with the statements
made by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group
of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). In my national
capacity, I would like to add the following remarks.

Georgia believes that resolution 1540 (2004)
remains the main pillar and overarching legal
instrument in the multilateral non-proliferation
architecture. We co-sponsored the new resolution 2325
(2016), unanimously adopted on 15 December, which
clearly reaffirms that the proliferation of these weapons
constitutes a serious threat to international peace and
security and sets the basis for the pathway to achieve
the full implementation of the obligations of resolution
1540 (2004).

The risks of nuclear terrorism, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and the related

Georgia has been taking various measures to that
end. The Government established the National CBRN

17-1873131/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

28/06/2017

Council, which, in consultation with the European
Union, the United States and the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
(UNICRI), elaborated a national CBRN threat-reduction
strategy and a CBRN national action plan for 20152019. Georgia is actively cooperating with the European
Union and UNICRI within the framework of the CBRN
Centres of Excellence to promote an integrated CBRN
approach across South-Eastern Europe, the Caucasus,
Moldova and Ukraine. A CBRN regional secretariat has
been opened and is now functioning in Georgia with
the aim of contributing to the success of this project.

views on global efforts to prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction through non-State actors,
as well as for the concept note on the topic.

With support from our partners and in close
cooperation with international experts, Georgia has
developed a new legislative base, in force since 2014,
for regulating its strategic export controls in full
compliance with European standards. The relevant
department in the Ministry of the Environment and
Natural Resources Protection has been transformed
into a public legal entity so as to increase its effective
independence of the regulatory body, and a new
department of radioactive-waste management has
been created, putting radioactive-waste storage and
disposal facilities under full State control nationwide,
and supported through the development of a relevant
legal framework.

For many parts of the world, including the South
Caucasus, the direct relevance of resolution 1540 (2004)
is obvious. The work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) is still vitally
important. Azerbaijan greatly appreciates its activities,
particularly its close interaction with Member States
and increased cooperation with relevant international,
regional and subregional organizations. As the 2016
comprehensive review of the status of the resolution’s
implementation noted, the rate of progress shows that
achieving its full implementation is a long-term task that
will require continued effort at the national, regional
and international levels. In its resolution 2325 (2016),
the Security Council re-emphasized the importance
of ensuring that all States implement resolution 1540
(2004) fully and effectively.

To promote CBRN-related topics at the United
Nations, the Governments of Georgia, the Kingdom
of Morocco and the Republic of the Philippines have
established the United Nations Group of Friends of
CBRN Risk Mitigation and Security Governance.
The Group of Friends is a consultation and dialogue
forum with the goal of integrating a CBRN component
into the international security architecture, raising
States’ awareness of the importance of mitigating
CBRN risks and fostering regional cooperation on
CBRN challenges. It also promotes activities aimed at
building capacity and developing capabilities between
and among partner States, as well as implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). It is our belief that by
promoting such joint efforts we can advance a robust
preventive system against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Bolivian delegation, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important meeting to exchange
32/34

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) and their means of delivery continues to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security.
Azerbaijan shares the international community’s
concern about the growing dangers and risks of that
threat, and our strategic documents on national security
and defence cite the proliferation of WMDs as a key
security challenge.

Azerbaijan has consistently contributed to global
efforts to promote peace and security, including in
non-proliferation. Countering that menace is a priority
area for our bilateral relations and international
cooperation. Azerbaijan has always been a staunch
supporter of the quest for a world free from weapons of
mass destruction, including through the universalization
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the establishment of WMD-free zones.
Trans-border threats such as international terrorism
and the proliferation of WMDs demand that States pay
special attention to the security of their borders. Both
at the national level and through close cooperation
with neighbouring countries and international partners
within its bilateral security programmes, as well as
with international organizations, Azerbaijan is doing
its utmost to maintain comprehensive national border
controls and management, along with export control
systems. Its relevant State agencies are constantly
working to enhance their counter-proliferation
17-18731

28/06/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

capacities and physical protection measures and to
improve inter-agency coordination and cooperation.
Areas where there is armed conflict, and especially
those under foreign military occupation, often create
conditions conducive to exploitation by terrorists,
separatists and other criminal groups and increase the
risk of illicit cross-border activities. It is critical to ensure
that all States comply strictly with their international
obligations, particularly those relating to respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and the
inviolability of their international borders. However,
that can hardly be achieved if those obligations are
misinterpreted, made conditional or implemented
with reservations, if not ignored altogether. When
discussing efforts to prevent non-State actors from
acquiring, developing, manufacturing, trafficking or
using WMDs, therefore, attention should also be given
to countering the policies and practices of States that
instigate, support and direct such actors.
At a time when challenges to international peace
and security continue unabated, more concerted action
and synergy are required at all levels. By striving to
implement resolution 1540 (2004) fully and effectively,
Member States can contribute significantly to global
non-proliferation efforts. Beyond that, there is still
an acute need for international assistance to help
individual Member States implement their obligations
under the resolution, as well as for sustained support to
cooperation and capacity-building.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that in order
to ensure the effectiveness of strategies that have been
collectively agreed on, we should first and foremost
uphold fundamental principles and adhere to the
uniform application of international law. Azerbaijan
will continue to contribute to international efforts to
counter the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and to support the work of the 1540 Committee.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): I thank the Security
Council and its Bolivian presidency for convening
today’s open debate. I would also like to commend the
briefings by Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative
of Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Joseph Ballard, of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
for their keen interest in and insights into the various
areas where our engagement with resolution 1540
(2004) and its implementation can be further enhanced.

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

We also align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
I believe it is important today to recognize the
progress that the Security Council has made in
enhancing the global framework designed to prevent
non-State actors from acquiring nuclear, biological or
chemical weapons of mass destruction. In that regard,
we commend Spain for its leadership in steering the
2016 comprehensive review exercise of resolution 1540
(2004). As a result, we then witnessed the Council’s
unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), and I
would therefore like to stress that we will continue to
spare no effort to work with the relevant stakeholders
to strengthen and promote the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
For its part, Malaysia continues to meet its
international obligations by further enhancing the
enforcement and effectiveness of measures aimed
at improving domestic controls preventing the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery, including by
establishing appropriate controls over related materials.
Malaysia also made amendments to strengthen its
strategic trade act of 2010, which provides control over
the export, trans-shipment, transit and brokering of
strategic items, including arms and related materials,
and other activities that could facilitate the design,
development and production of WMDs and their
delivery systems. The amended act was passed by the
Malaysian Parliament on the 21 June 2017.
Among the amendments to the act were
enhancements related to definitions and scope of
implementation and on penalties designed to dictate
serious repercussions for violations. Commensurate
penalties are now provided for each offence under
the strategic trade act; indeed, committing an offence
under the act carries very severe penalties in the form
of harsh fines and prison terms.
We reaffirm our commitment to engaging
and working together with all Member States and
the international community to collectively strive
to maintain international peace and security by
strengthening all global non-proliferation efforts, in
cooperation with our partners here at the United Nations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.

17-1873133/34

S/PV.7985 (Resumption 1)

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): First of all,
I would like to praise the Bolivian presidency of the
Security Council and thank it for organizing today’s
open debate.
I would also like to align myself with the statement
made by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity.
Iran is indeed one of the most serious victims of the
use of chemical weapons in recent decades. Our people
will never forget that they were exposed to hundreds of
chemical attacks by the Saddam Hussein regime, while
the Security Council remained silent. We strongly
condemn the use of weapons of mass destruction by
anyone anywhere.
Let me also react to the statement made this
morning by the representative of the Israeli regime (see
S/PV.7985). That statement contained unsubstantiated
allegations against my country, fabricated to advance
an Iranophobic agenda and, through that, to cover
for and justify its aggressive and unlawful policies
and practices committed against the whole region. I
categorically reject all those allegations and wish to
bring the following to the Council’s attention.
It is very interesting to see the Israeli regime, an
icon of total disregard for dozens of Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016), and the principles of international law, a
regime famous for its atrocities and apartheid policies
with a well-known record of developing, producing
and stockpiling different kinds of inhumane weapons,
including weapons of mass destruction, gesticulating
to complain about Iran’s legitimate and conventional
defence capabilities. The Israeli regime blatantly and
flagrantly continues to flout all international regimes
governing weapons of mass destruction by refusing to
adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention
and the Biological Weapons Convention. It is therefore
is the only obstacle to the establishment of a zone free
from weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Nuclear weapons in the hands of the regime pose
the most serious of threats to the security of all States
in the Middle East and to the NPT regime. The Security
Council has the responsibility to effectively address
this threat. Moreover, it is now an established fact that
Israeli agents are providing care to Da’esh operatives
active in Syrian territory, proof of which is abundant.

34/34

28/06/2017

As a country living in an unstable and volatile region,
Iran is fully entitled to build a credible conventional
capability to defend against any aggression. Iran’s
missile systems are part of its legitimate defence
capabilities against the threats and intimidations that
we are facing on an almost daily basis, especially by the
Israeli regime. In that regard, I refer you, Mr. President,
to our letter dated 19 May 2015 (S/2015/353). These
systems are an exercise of our right to self-defence in
the event of any armed attack against us. Iran will not
start any war. We do not intend to attack any country,
but if we come under attack, it is our legitimate right,
under the Charter of the United Nations, to be able to
use our national conventional defence capabilities to
counter any aggression against our national sovereignty
and territorial integrity.
Iran will not tolerate actions that endanger its
national security. We have always warned against
terrorism and its expansion in the region. Our policies
are based on cooperation with regional countries and
the international community with a view to uprooting
terrorism and extremism in the region and world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Turkey has asked for the floor to make
a further statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): I will not dignify with
a reply the ridiculous allegations made by the
representative of the Syrian regime. I refute them in
their entirety. Turkey has a well-established record on
compliance with the weapons-of-mass- destruction
non-proliferation regime. The use of chemical weapons
is a violation of international law, Security Council
resolutions and the Chemical Weapons Convention. It
constitutes a crime against humanity. Its perpetrators
must be held accountable. And the Syrian regime
cannot and will not be held exempt from that.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to
thank all participants in today’s open debate for their
input, which will be very important for continuing the
work, not only of the Council but also of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on the
topic that has brought us together for today’s debate.
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

17-18731
