S/2007/253

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 May 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 3 May 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
convey the attached letter, dated 23 April 2007, from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, transmitting the thirty-first report on the implementation
of the Peace Agreement, covering the period from 1 July 2006 to 31 March 2007
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-33080 (E) 160507

*0733080*

S/2007/253

Annex
Letter dated 23 April 2007 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to it reports from the
High Representative in accordance with annex 10 to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the conclusions of the London
Peace Implementation Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I herewith present to
you the thirty-first report (see enclosure). I would ask for this report to be
distributed to the members of the Security Council for their consideration.
The present report covers the period from 1 July 2006 to 31 March 2007.
Should you or any member of the Security Council require any information beyond
what is offered in the report or have any questions regarding its contents, I should
be pleased to reply in writing.
(Signed) Christian Schwarz-Schilling

2

07-33080

S/2007/253

Enclosure
Report of the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the Security Council
1 July 2006-31 March 2007
Summary
1.
The general election campaign and the subsequent negotiations to form new
governments at the state, entity and cantonal levels dominated the second half of
2006 and the first quarter of 2007 in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although I continued
to encourage and support the domestic authorities in their efforts to adopt and
implement the reforms required if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to make further
progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration, both the intense pre-election
environment and the complicated post-election situation were far from conducive to
success. By year’s end, only the Republika Srpska had a reconstructed government.
The State-level Council of Ministers was formed in February, and a Federation
government was finally established on 30 March. At the end of March, six months
after the elections, 3 of the 10 cantons remained without new governments.
2.
The highly divisive and occasionally inflammatory rhetoric that characterized
the election campaign put my resolve to promote domestic ownership to the test; but
it also made it possible to make a realistic assessment of the extent to which the
domestic political establishments could take on ever-increasing responsibility for
their own country’s affairs. Only by establishing the reality of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina did it prove possible to identify the mechanisms that will
be required in future to assist this country in completing its transition from postcommunist and post-war fragility to Euro-Atlantic integration and security.
3.
Despite repeated calls during and after the election campaign for a referendum
on the independence of the Republika Srpska — and countervailing demands from
the Federation to abolish that entity — the first general elections since the war to be
wholly organized and run by the domestic authorities passed off peacefully and
successfully on 1 October. On the other hand, the parties that employed the most
vociferous rhetoric during the campaign were also the biggest winners: the Alliance
of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) led by the Prime Minister of the
Republika Srpska Milorad Dodik, and the Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina (SBiH),
led by the newly elected Presidency member, Haris Silajdžić. The electoral
arithmetic meant, however, that these two parties, regardless of their opposite stands
on numerous issues, were compelled to share power at the State level, in the
Federation and in some cantons.
4.
The other notable result of the elections was the weakening of the traditional
nationalist parties that had dominated the political scene in Bosnia and Herzegovina
since the first free elections in 1990: the (Bosniak) Party for Democratic Action
(SDA), the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) and the Croatian Democratic Union of
Bosnia and Herzegovina (HDZ BiH). Their loss of predominance among their
respective electorates does not signal, however, any diminution in the salience of
national (and nationalistic) issues.
5.
Little progress was made during the period in meeting the preconditions for
signing the Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union. The
technical negotiations with the European Commission were completed successfully,
07-33080

3

S/2007/253

with very good performances on the Bosnia and Herzegovina side by both the chief
negotiator and the Directorate for European Integration. However, the failure to
forge a political agreement on police restructuring precluded the initialling of an
agreement during the period.
6.
Constitutional reform remained a high-profile issue, although there has been
no concrete progress on constitutional reform in the last six months, primarily due
to the focus of the local authorities on government formation and police reform. The
package of amendments narrowly defeated in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliament in April 2006 remains on the table. However, it appears increasingly
unlikely that the package will get the necessary support to be reintroduced and
adopted, despite clear and repeated calls for this by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council. Recent political developments have confirmed
constitutional reform as imperative for Bosnia and Herzegovina for both political
and functional reasons. The debate on constitutional problems and the need for
reform continues to occupy much political and public space. Political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have recently started to promote some ideas on possible
constitutional set-ups. The ruling by the International Court of Justice on
26 February on the suit launched by the former Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
against the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1993 has brought the issue to
the fore once again. Bosniak politicians, led by Haris Silajdžić, have seized upon the
Court’s verdict and have pointed out that it was the army and police of the wartime
Republika Srpska that committed genocide in and around Srebrenica in July 1995.
They demand that the Srebrenica municipality be removed from Republika Srpska
jurisdiction and that the Republika Srpska itself be abolished through more
far-reaching constitutional changes. Their Serb counterparts have responded by both
defending the legitimacy of the Republika Srpska and offering economic and fiscal
assistance to Srebrenica residents, the Bosniak returnees among whom have
threatened to leave the town once more if their demands are not met. In close
coordination with the United States Government, in my capacity as European Union
Special Representative, I am preparing for a broad constitutional reform process to
be set up and operating in the second half of 2007.
7.
In November, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) invited Bosnia
and Herzegovina to join its Partnership for Peace, together with Serbia and
Montenegro. NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer stressed in the
aftermath of the decision that NATO still expected the three countries to improve
their cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
8.
In December, Bosnia and Herzegovina scored another success when, after hard
negotiations over agricultural imports with its neighbours, it joined the Central
European Free Trade Agreement. Just as the Partnership for Peace is an anteroom to
full NATO membership, the Agreement provides the Western Balkan States with a
single set of trade rules harmonized with those of the European Union. Meanwhile,
economic growth remained healthy, with an increase in real GDP — despite the onetime boost in inflation to 6.8 per cent following the introduction of a value-added
tax (VAT) — and rising exports.
9.
The security situation was stable during the reporting period. Only a few
security incidents or cases of nationally motivated violence or vandalism were
noted. The most serious took place around Mostar and in areas of Bosniak return to
the Republika Srpska during the summer.

4

07-33080

S/2007/253

10. Political processes in Mostar hardened in the second half of the year. No
progress had been made by summer in finalizing the systemization of the
administration, forming an urban planning institution, resolving the status of
Hercegovačka Radio-Television and various cultural institutions, or forming a single
public utility company. I therefore appointed a special envoy, Norbert Winterstein,
to mediate, arbitrate or recommend other solutions to outstanding disputes. He
successfully resolved several long-standing issues, but I was required in December
to impose solutions pertaining to urban and spatial planning that he had
recommended but had been unable to convince the polarized parties to adopt.
11. Brčko District was also characterized by mounting party disputes within the
majority coalition and declining effectiveness on the part of the government, all
exacerbated by the State-wide election campaign, uncertainty over the District’s
post-supervisory future and continuous disputes over revenue allocation from the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Single Account. Raffi Gregorian succeeded Susan Johnson
as Supervisor in September, just in time to take part in the negotiation of a State law
on Brčko District that would seek to regulate the District’s long-term status and
prerogatives. Mr. Gregorian also instituted changes to the District’s statute that
would make for more functional and accountable government.
12. As noted above and predicted in my previous report, the uncertain regional
situation and, in particular, mounting tension caused by both the approach to and
deferment of a Kosovo status decision had a negative impact on politics and
political discourse in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the period. The independence
referendum in Montenegro in May set the scene for much loose and inflammatory
talk of both “self-determination” in the Republika Srpska and the abolition of the
entities in the Federation during the election campaign. This continued as Belgrade
officials attempted to link the fates of Kosovo and the Republika Srpska. Prime
Minister Dodik also used the renegotiation of the parallel relations agreement with
Serbia, Belgrade’s offer to build a new bridge across the River Sava at Bosanska
Raca, and the lucrative sale of the entity’s telecommunications operator to its Stateowned Serbian counterpart to reinforce his close economic and political connections
with Serbia.
13. Staff of the Office of the High Representative continued to work towards
fulfilling the Office’s workplan and revised Mission Implementation Plan, which
were approved by the Peace Implementation Council in March 2006. Our efforts
were hampered, however, by both pre-election politicking and the post-election
interregnum, as parties slowly negotiated the formation of new coalition
governments. The completion rates of the plans suffered accordingly.
14. It was this uncertain regional environment, combined with the virtual halt in
reform and the prolonged void in government following the elections, that
convinced me that it would be rash to proceed with the planned closure of the Office
of the High Representative and the transition to an operation conducted solely by
the European Union Special Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina after June
2007. The Peace Implementation Council Steering Board endorsed that view at its
meeting in Brussels on 26 and 27 February. In line with the general consensus of the
Steering Board members, there was agreement to aim for closure of the Office by
30 June 2008 and to review the situation in October 2007 and February 2008. The
Steering Board emphasized that the policy of ownership remained the guiding
principle and that the international community would help Bosnia and Herzegovina

07-33080

5

S/2007/253

to make the final steps from peace implementation to Euro-Atlantic integration as
soon as possible. The Russian Federation stated that it was unable to join the
consensus and that it would make conclusions consistent with Security Council
resolution 1722 (2006). I had announced in January that I would not seek an
extension of my mandate beyond June 2007.

I.

Introduction
15. This is my second report to the Secretary-General since assuming the Office of
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina on 31 January 2006. As has been
the norm, it assesses progress made towards attaining the goals outlined in previous
reports, reviews developments during the reporting period and provides my
assessment of mandate implementation.

II.

Political update
16. The results of the general elections held on 1 October were certified on
27 October — a few days before the legal deadline — but the broad contours of the
resulting political landscape in Bosnia and Herzegovina had been far more quickly
discernible. The big winners were Milorad Dodik (and SNSD) and Haris Silajdžić
(and, to a slightly lesser extent, SBiH). Their victories were also victories for the
radical and polarizing political rhetoric that they had employed during the
campaign, which had centred on their antithetical conceptions of the future
constitutional order in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The irony of the result is that their
two parties are now condemned to cohabitation in government and future progress
will largely depend on the ability of Messrs. Dodik and Silajdžić to find mutually
acceptable compromises.
17. The other notable result of the October poll was the blow dealt to the “big
three” nationalist parties, SDA, SDS and HDZ BiH, which had dominated their
respective people’s political horizons since 1990. Although diminished in strength,
all three will, however, continue to be important players. Indeed, only SDS will be
excluded from a share in power at the State and entity levels. The relative or
absolute defeats of the traditional nationalist parties did not mean, of course, a
defeat for nationalist politics. The victors simply proved more adept at mobilizing
national sentiments and issues, accusing the formerly dominant nationalists of
having failed to stand firm on salient national issues, such as constitutional reform
and the balance between State and entity prerogatives.
18. By winning 41 of the 83 seats in the National Assembly of the Republika
Srpska, Mr. Dodik came close to obtaining an absolute majority and more than
doubled the previous 19 seats of SNSD. SDS, by contrast, saw its tally fall from
26 to 17 seats. It promptly repudiated its latterly moderate leader and defeated
candidate for re-election as president of the Republika Srpska, Dragan Čavić, and
turned to the right. Mr. Dodik, for his part, needed only to offer a ministerial office
to a few smaller parties to construct a strong majority and then to reshuffle his
existing cabinet. Having done so, he won confirmation by the National Assembly of
the Republika Srpska on 29 November.
19. In the Federation, SDA retained its position as the biggest Bosniak party, with
28 seats in the lower House, but the loss of just four mandates understated the

6

07-33080

S/2007/253

party’s relative defeat in the face of SBiH’s jump from 15 to 24 seats and
Mr. Silajdžić’s clear victory over SDA leader Sulejman Tihić in the race for the
Bosniak place on the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency. The long-dominant Croat
party, HDZ BiH, lost half of its previous 16 seats in the Federation lower House, but
still edged out the breakaway HDZ 1990, which won seven. On the other hand, HDZ
1990, in combination with smaller Croat parties, claimed the leadership of the
majority Croat coalition once all the cantonal assemblies had elected their delegates
to the upper House, the House of Peoples.
20. A feature common to both entity Parliaments elected in 2006 is that the
number of parties winning seats was reduced, so making political management
easier. No Croat parties, for example, won seats in the National Assembly of the
Republika Srpska, though the number of Croat deputies (elected as SNSD
candidates) remained the same at four. The number of predominantly Bosniak
parties winning seats in the National Assembly of the Republika Srpska remained
the same (3), but their total number of seats fell from 10 to 8. On the other hand,
SNSD won two seats in the Federation Parliament.
Government formation
21. The SDA and SBiH leaders quickly agreed in October on an undefined postelection coalition, but serious talks about forming a State-level Government did not
begin until mid-November. They continued in desultory fashion until year’s end, but
picked up speed and purpose in January. The major sticking point throughout was
which of the two HDZ parties would share power; the SDA preferred HDZ BiH,
while SBiH wanted a partnership with HDZ 1990, which had also opposed the
March set of constitutional reforms. For its part, HDZ BiH had long rejected any
notion that both Croat parties should enter Government. In the end, the Council of
Ministers confirmed by Parliament on 9 February and the Federation Government
finally established on 30 March contained ministers from both Croat parties.
22. Despite the fact that the business of forming the State and Federation
Governments was long and tortuous, it was a positive sign that SNSD was
determined both to occupy the prime executive post at State level, so according the
chairmanship of the Council of Ministers greater importance, and to take ministerial
office in the Federation for the first time. In addition to the chairmanship of the
Council of Ministers, SNSD took two of the more important State-level ministries.
It was an equally healthy sign that there were no demands that the international
community should intervene to broker a deal. Although Mr. Dodik stated before the
Council of Ministers was established that the governing majority would be a purely
mathematical combination, and not a real coalition, and that SNSD would focus on
running “its” ministries, his interest in the chairmanship and the calibre of his
ministerial nominees suggested otherwise.
23. Although the six parties that signed up to the March 2006 package of
constitutional reforms won the two-thirds majority of seats that would be required to
pass the amendments on a second attempt, two (SDP and SDS) have gone into
opposition and announced that they can no longer be counted upon to back the
amendments, while a third (SDA) is internally split on the issue. The combination in
Government of parties wholly opposed to the package (SBiH and HDZ 1990) with
those who still favour it (SNSD and HDZ BiH) and one that is now equivocal (SDA)
means that no clear way ahead is yet visible. The Peace Implementation Council

07-33080

7

S/2007/253

Steering Board nonetheless reaffirmed its view that early adoption of the package
would constitute a positive first step and provide a basis on which to establish a
broader process by mid-2007 that would help Bosnia and Herzegovina meet the
requirements of a modern European State.
24. As noted above, the new but little-changed Republika Srpska government was
confirmed in office on 29 November, celebrating in mid-March the achievements of
its first 100 days while Federation politicians were still wrangling over portfolios,
particularly those to be allotted to the Croat parties. Once that was done, there
followed a rushed attempt on 22 March to subvert the process whereby my office
vets nominees for five sensitive ministries. The reason for the sudden haste was
ostensibly the need to adopt and enact the Federation’s 2007 budget before the
expiry of the temporary financing authority on which the caretaker government had
operated.
25. Having warned parliamentarians that vetting was not yet complete and asked
them to postpone their session for the day or two that would be required, the House
of Representatives nonetheless proceeded to elect the new government. I was thus
compelled to nullify the House’s vote on 23 March. Since one ministerial candidate
did not, in the event, pass the vetting procedure, I asked the relevant party (SBiH) to
nominate another. This it promptly did, so permitting an accelerated vetting
procedure and a new session of Parliament on 30 March. The Cabinet was duly
confirmed and the 2007 budget adopted.
26. The new Federation House of Representatives had convened within the
prescribed deadline on 21 November, but did so only to swear in Members of
Parliament and to recess. Most cantonal assemblies did not even do that. Moreover,
the failure of the cantons to respect deadlines made it impossible to form the
Federation House of Peoples (which is elected from the cantons) and the House of
Peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina (two thirds of whose members are elected from
its Federation counterpart) before February. In addition, there will continue to be a
small shortage of Serbs in the Federation House of Peoples, since not enough were
elected to the cantonal assemblies. Moreover, three cantons remained without new
governments at the end of March.
Party-political realignments and reactions
27. The immediate post-election period saw the weakened leaders of SDA and
SDS facing revolts over their parties’ disappointing results. While Sulejman Tihić
(SDA) survived, Dragan Čavić (SDS) was forced out in mid-November. SDS has
now reverted to the intransigence of its earlier days, but is unlikely to be able to
outflank Milorad Dodik in this regard. The newly elected SDS leadership has
nevertheless been openly flirting with former SDS officials removed for support of
persons indicted for war crimes.
28. The new HDZ 1990 bucked the trend established by earlier breakaway parties
from HDZ BiH by winning a substantial number of seats at the State, Federation and
cantonal levels. HDZ 1990 benefited from perceptions that it was backed by both
the HDZ Government in Zagreb and the Catholic Church, as well as from the
conviction in the autumn of HDZ BiH leader Dragan Čović for financial crimes
when he was Federation Finance Minister.

8

07-33080

S/2007/253

29. The major non-nationalist (or non-national) party, the Social Democrats
(SDP), failed to make significant headway, but is set to remain the strongest
opposition party in the State and Federation Parliaments. The party’s one success,
the election of its candidate, Željko Komšić, to the Croat seat on the Presidency,
stemmed from the split between the two HDZ parties and the votes of SDP loyalists
among all three constituent peoples. The explicitly Croat parties cried foul and
denounced the legitimacy of a Croat supposedly elected by non-Croats, but their
protests petered out rapidly. SDP leader Zlatko Lagumdžija subsequently called for
a vote of confidence in his leadership, which he won easily.
30. Claims by Mr. Dodik that the secessionist rhetoric that characterized the
campaign in the Republika Srpska would evaporate after the election have, by and
large, been borne out by events. On 28 March, Republika Srpska President Milan
Jelić stated that SNSD had abandoned its pre-election rhetoric on a referendum in
the Republika Srpska as the international community and the Office of the High
Representative have clearly said that the Republika Srpska could not be abolished
and so there was no need for a referendum. The Prime Minister did, however, keep
the notion of a referendum alive by proposing instead to call one on policing should
the existence of the Republika Srpska police be threatened (this was an idea he had
borrowed from SDS). Non-governmental organizations based in the Republika
Srpska, however, have continued to agitate on behalf of referendums on both
policing and secession.
Constitutional reform
31. As noted above, the future of the first-ever package of constitutional
amendments in post-Dayton Bosnia and Herzegovina remains uncertain.
Nonetheless, constitutional reform was an inescapable subject during the coalition
negotiations and will remain on the agenda no matter how divided the new
governments may be on the issue. Although nearly everyone agrees that
constitutional change is necessary if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to have functional,
affordable and European Union-compatible governance, few agree on the nature and
scope of the reforms. Most Serbs want an explicitly federal State composed of three
“national-majority” units, though any effort to define the prospective boundaries of
such units undermines potential Serb-Croat concord on this point. Bosniaks, on the
other hand, continue to favour an integral or “civil” State, the territorial sub-units of
which would be merely administrative — and certainly not national or constituent.
This is unacceptable to Serbs and Croats, because they see it as guaranteeing
majority (that is, Bosniak) rule.
32. The determination of the Bosniaks to pursue the goal of an entity-free Bosnia
and Herzegovina has been reinforced by the verdict of the International Court of
Justice on 26 February. The Court’s finding that the wartime institutions of the
Republika Srpska had been responsible for genocide in Srebrenica has provided an
opening: first for demanding Srebrenica’s removal from the jurisdiction of the
Republika Srpska, then for the elimination of the Republika Srpska police and,
eventually, for the abolition of the entity itself.
33. Although both the United States Government and I had hoped to work for the
speedy adoption of the modest package of amendments that failed in April, making
it clear that this was but the first step in what would have to be a more
thoroughgoing process of constitutional reform, the omens are far from good at

07-33080

9

S/2007/253

present. In the medium term, however, both the pressure of events and the
development of a popularly inclusive procedure involving the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament, outside experts and civil society could forge the necessary
consensus for change. This would require an effective structure, combining both
international and Bosnian experts, and a strong secretariat to support the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament and maintain the momentum. There will thus be a key role
for the international community to play, particularly the European Union, led by the
Special Representative and the United States, in supporting the initiation of this
process and facilitating progress over the next few years.
34. Also on the constitutional front, I was obliged on 23 March to issue an order to
assure the integrity of decisions taken by my predecessors and myself and to make
sure that the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina abide by their obligations under
the Dayton Peace Accords and Security Council resolutions. The need for this order
arose from a ruling on July 2006 by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional
Court on an appeal for redress from two persons removed from office by my
predecessor in 2004 in relation to non-cooperation with the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. The Court, although not directly challenging that
decision, had ordered the State authorities to take steps to remedy such removal
decisions. My order established a process whereby the authorities will be able to
comply with the Constitutional Court’s ruling without, at the same time, violating
their obligations to respect and implement decisions of the High Representative
taken under annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace. The order
prohibits the establishment of any review mechanism by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities while obliging them to refer such matters to the High
Representative, as Chair of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.
35. This order was made following close consultations with Steering Board
members and others. On 27 February, the Steering Board reminded all institutions
that the international obligations of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the General
Framework Agreement and the Charter of the United Nations must be respected and
called upon me to take appropriate actions to ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina
fulfils those obligations.

III.

European partnership requirements
36. The technical rounds of the negotiations on the Stabilization and Association
Agreement completed in 2006 proved constructive. They focused on trade
concessions, the movement of goods, the approximation of laws, law enforcement
and competition rules, mutual assistance in customs matters, dispute-settlement
mechanisms and transitional periods. No breakthroughs were made, however, on the
preconditions for signing the Agreement, namely police restructuring, public
broadcasting reform and cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.
Police restructuring
37. In December 2006, the Directorate for Police Restructuring Implementation
completed its 36-page final report entitled “Proposed plan for the implementation of
the reform of police structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina”, as mandated by the
Agreement on the Restructuring of Police Structures signed in October 2005. The

10

07-33080

S/2007/253

Directorate submitted its report to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Security
on 27 December 2006, and on 3 January 2007, the Ministry of Security forwarded it
to the Secretary-General of the caretaker Council of Ministers.
38. The report was the result of 12 months of work, during which the Steering
Board of the Directorate held 28 meetings (15 during the reporting period). There
were numerous delays, however, stemming largely from the Republika Srpska
government’s obstruction of and objections to the legitimacy of the process,
notwithstanding the fact that the Republika Srpska National Assembly had adopted
the Agreement and Serb ministers in the Council of Ministers had supported the
formation of the Directorate. Opposition by the Republika Srpska to the process
culminated in a decision in May 2006 to downgrade its representation on the
Steering Board to that of observer. Directorate members from Republika Srpska
institutions maintained their status as observers for the remainder of the
Directorate’s mandate, although Serb representatives of the State continued to
participate.
39. As a result of these delays and obstructions, the report was submitted three
months after the deadline envisaged in the Agreement, without some of the elements
specified by the Agreement. In particular, it does not include draft legal acts or
rulebooks, a timetable for the overall implementation period, or a map of police
regions.
40. The proposed policing system provides for an organizationally integrated
structure with decentralized police operations and decision-making. The
consolidation of administrative services (human resources, finance, procurement,
information technology/communications), which are currently duplicated in each of
the 15 existing police forces, is perhaps the most far-reaching aspect of the report.
The new system also envisages a single forensics centre and police academy. The
local policing level would operate with fairly extensive autonomy, although the
future Director of Police and the Directorate for Police Coordination would provide
an operational hierarchy.
41. The report also offers concrete solutions designed to implement the three
guiding principles set by the European Union:
(a) All legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters must be
vested at the State level;
(b)

No political interference with operational policing;

(c) Functional local police areas must be determined by technical policing
criteria where operational command is exercised at the local level.
42. With regard to the first principle, the report clearly establishes that the State
should be vested with exclusive legislative competency for all police matters and
that other levels of government cannot legislate on police matters. The report also
envisages a single police budget to be adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly. Regarding the second principle, the report provides for
numerous oversight mechanisms designed to keep politics out of policing, mainly
through parliamentary watchdogs and institutions, such as the Independent Board
and Public Complaints Office. On the third principle, the report enumerates specific
technical guidelines and criteria for forming local policing areas, but does not
contain a map suggesting what they should be.

07-33080

11

S/2007/253

43. In line with the Agreement, the State and entity governments and Parliaments
will need to adopt the Directorate’s proposal, along with any agreed amendments.
Because of the earlier withdrawal of Republika Srpska support from the Directorate,
continuing Serb determination to maintain the name Republika Srpska for police
forces deployed on its territory, and a reinforced Bosniak view that no such thing
must happen, the forging of a political consensus on the Directorate’s report, let
alone the number and shape of local policing regions, has thus far proved
impossible. My Office has organized or participated in numerous meetings among
party leaders this year and has conducted bilateral negotiations.
44. At several points it has looked as if progress was being made, most notably at
a meeting of Serb and Bosniak leaders on 14 March, the day before the European
Union Commissioner for Enlargement, Olli Rehn, arrived in Sarajevo. Although
Mr. Dodik on that day shifted his position significantly towards meeting the three
European Community principles, Messrs Silajdžić and Tihić deemed this to be
insufficient, offering compromise only after the Commission had left and Mr. Dodik
had back-tracked. The failure to reach a political agreement and to promptly
translate it into parliamentary acts and legislation on implementation may make it
increasingly difficult for Bosnia and Herzegovina to sign the Stabilization and
Association Agreement before the end of 2007.

IV.

Entrenching the rule of law
45. In addition to police reform, my office has continued to focus on facilitating
and consolidating the implementation of other rule of law reforms, especially those
that aim to build the capacity of existing law enforcement agencies and the Bosnia
and Herzegovina State Court.
46. The Office of the High Representative/European Union Special Representative
has worked over the period with the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of Security,
the State Investigation and Protection Agency, the State Border Service and the
entity and cantonal interior ministries and police to build their capacity, particularly
in the fight against organized crime. We have also worked to enhance the capability
of the recently formed Bosnia and Herzegovina Service for Foreigners’ Affairs.
47. In the second half of 2006, my colleagues sought to identify systemic
problems in the work of prosecutors and to facilitate improved cooperation between
them and the police. They also produced an analysis of strategies and best practices
in the prosecution of organized crime in other European countries and distributed it
to local prosecutors.
48. The Office of the High Representative also contributed to ensuring the
successful transition of the Registry of the State Court to full domestic ownership by
concluding a new registry agreement. Replacing the original of December 2004, the
new agreement provides for the gradual transfer of responsibility for the Registry to
domestic institutions. Of particular importance are the provisions, that give
authority to the High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council to appoint all judges to the
State Court and all prosecutors to the State Prosecutor’s Office, and the provisions
reorganizing the Registry and its financing. The agreement also provides for the
integration of national Registry staff into domestic judicial institutions from 2006 to
2009. The goal is to ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina assumes full responsibility
for the State Court and Prosecutor’s Office with regard to finance, administration

12

07-33080

S/2007/253

and personnel matters, as well as to guarantee the long-term sustainability and
capacity of domestic judicial institutions to process war crimes and organized crime
cases.

V.

Cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia
49. A number of complex trials for war crimes are still under way in the State
Court. The court also initiated trials of cases transferred from the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in the reporting period (Savo Todović, Mitar
Rašević and Paško Ljubičić). The first instance verdict in another case transferred
from The Hague (Radovan Stanković) was handed down in November: the accused
was found guilty of crimes against humanity and sentenced to 16 years’
imprisonment.
50. There was little or no progress in capturing remaining Tribunal fugitives. In
December, however, the Republika Srpska government adopted a new action plan
directed at the location, apprehension or voluntary surrender of such fugitives. We
look forward to seeing it implemented. In the meantime, my colleagues and I will
continue to monitor and exhort the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular the Republika Srpska authorities, in this matter.
51. In addition to its decision of 27 February to not close the Office of the High
Representative in June 2007, the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
directed the Office to reinforce its efforts to secure full cooperation with the
Tribunal by the domestic authorities during its remaining tenure. My Office is
making every effort to do so, all the more so because of the simultaneous judgment
of the International Court of Justice and the political impact it has had in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

VI.

Reforming the economy
52. Now that the new governments are in place, it is imperative that they both rise
to the challenges ahead and deal with a substantial backlog of essential fiscal and
economic legislation. The country not only needs to maintain sound macroeconomic
policies but must also make substantial progress on the structural reforms required
to lay the foundations for sustained, private-sector-led growth.
53. That said, economic growth has remained relatively robust, and it is likely that
real GDP growth of 5 per cent in 2005 will increase to 5.7 per cent in 2006. The
introduction of the value-added tax inevitably had an impact on retail prices,
producing a one-time rise in the average rate of inflation to 6.8 per cent. Exports
have picked up and, with improved statistics, the current account deficit should
show a narrowing from 21 per cent of GDP in 2005 to about 13.5 per cent in 2006.
The external deficit, however, remains very large.
Introduction of the value-added tax
54. The successful introduction of a value-added tax was undoubtedly the high
point of economic reform in 2006. Projected revenue collection from VAT for 2006
was 3.5 billion convertible marka (KM). Actual revenues far exceeded the initial

07-33080

13

S/2007/253

projection, reaching a final total of slightly more than KM 4 billion. There continues
to be intense disagreement, however, over the formula for allocating these revenues
among the entities and Brčko District, making it clear that the current methodology
represents a constant source of contention. As a consequence, revenues from the
Single Account have only been allocated on a monthly or bimonthly basis, and
sometimes in arrears. The contention has also caused delays in reaching an
agreement on the National Fiscal Council, which still has no basis in law and has,
therefore, neither an effective mechanism for breaking deadlocks among its
members nor any means of enforcing its decisions.
Budgets
55. The effects of the unsatisfactory level of intergovernmental coordination and
the lack of a law on the National Fiscal Council were again obvious. Preparation of
the 2007 budgets continued to be marred by such weaknesses. Governments are
boosting their spending in an inefficient and shortsighted manner, albeit not
dangerously so. This trend, however, poses a fiscal risk if revenues stagnate, let
alone drop, as the governments quickly came to rely on steadily increasing revenues
during 2006.
Business environment
56. Progress in improving the business environment, restructuring corporations
and making structural reforms slowed in 2006. According to the World Bank
Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey for 2006, improvements
have mainly been made in taxation, customs and trade regulation. However, all
efforts to centralize banking supervision at the State level or to adopt laws crucial
for creating a single economic space in Bosnia and Herzegovina (for instance, laws
on obligations and pharmaceuticals) have failed or been postponed. My Office has
also been engaged in improving the business environment through institutional
support for business associations and trade chambers, as well as in encouraging
socio-economic dialogue.
57. Corporate restructuring has proceeded slowly and progress in strengthening
corporate governance has been modest in comparison to neighbouring countries.
The absence of political interest or will has stymied privatization efforts in the
Federation, although there has been significant progress in the Republika Srpska in
privatizing a number of large companies.
Infrastructure reform
58. While the demand for most modes of transport is growing markedly, the
absence of an overall national infrastructure policy is a major problem. This is
partly due to the lack of institutional capacity, but also to politics, particularly in the
railway sector. The situation is slightly better in the electricity industry, which has
been restructured with significant assistance from the World Bank, the European
Commission and several other donors. The main challenge will be to increase the
power-generation capacity in a transparent and competitive process, with the
objective of achieving a balance between risks and benefits, for both Bosnia and
Herzegovina and investors.

14

07-33080

S/2007/253

VII.

Public administration reform
59. The State, entity and Brčko District governments adopted the National Public
Administration Reform Strategy prepared by the reform coordinator during the
reporting period. Six intergovernmental working groups were established to work on
its implementation. The strategy encompasses the six horizontal reform areas:
human resources; legislative drafting; administrative procedures; information
technology; institutional communications; and public finance. The Office of the
High Representative provided both political support and technical assistance
throughout the adoption process.
60. Although the working groups have been set up, implementation of the action
plan has yet to begin in earnest. This will need to be the focus in coming months,
and the Office of the High Representative will, within its means and capabilities,
seek to assist the authorities. Initiating the implementation of the comprehensive
public administration reform action plan is a key short-term priority of the European
Partnership and a condition for signing the Stabilization and Association Agreement.

VIII.

Defence reform
61. NATO Member States invited Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the alliance’s
Partnership for Peace on 29 November 2006, signifying fulfilment of one of the
main benchmarks of success in defence reform. Meanwhile, work continued
throughout the period on transferring all property identified by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Ministry of Defence as necessary for defence purposes from the
entities to the State. This effort was hampered, however, by the repeated refusals of
the Republika Srpska government to comply with the relevant provisions of the Law
on Defence. Work on transferring the residual Dayton tasks and functions of the
European Union military mission to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities also
intensified. But Bosnia and Herzegovina remains in need of legislation providing for
the oversight of movements of weapons and military equipment within the country,
including the structures required to ensure implementation. The domestic authorities
also worked on programmes aimed at safely disposing of surplus weapons and
military equipment. However, without transfers of ownership by the entities, these
programmes cannot be implemented.
62. After much political wrangling and discussion of relative national
representation in the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, on 5 July 2006 the
State Presidency finally adopted a decision on their size and structure that allowed
for the development of an increasingly integrated force. It thus offers a solid basis
for future progress while providing immediately for the Armed Forces to have niche
capabilities in the spheres of demining and explosive-ordnance disposal. There is a
realistic ratio of officers to non-commissioned officers and soldiers (2:3:5). The
Forces will be fully professional, with no conscripts and no passive reserve.
Membership in the Partnership for Peace will help ensure that improvements
continue to be made, particularly since Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun to
participate in the NATO force-development process. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
Chief of Joint Staff has produced an implementation plan with timelines for the
stand-up of all elements of the Armed Forces. The plan aims to ensure that the
legally defined dates for the formation of headquarters and the battalions assigned to

07-33080

15

S/2007/253

them can be met. It is likely, however, that those timelines will slip, owing to the
fact that the selection process for military personnel is not yet complete.
63. Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted its presentation document to NATO before
the end of 2006. It has been accepted and Bosnia and Herzegovina is now preparing
its individual partnership plan. On 16 March 2007, it also signed a NATO security
agreement that defines parameters for the exchange of information between NATO
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, including document handling, security clearances and
the like. The initial phases of the planning and review process have also begun.
64. Although not a defence-reform issue per se, Bosnia and Herzegovina recently
dispatched its fifth contingent (an explosive ordnance disposal platoon) to serve
with the United States-led coalition in Iraq. Each contingent has served for six
months. Platoon members are volunteers drawn from the Armed Forces as a whole
and, as with other smaller deployments in the past (for instance, with the United
Nations in Ethiopia/Eritrea), they represent all three constituent peoples.

IX.

Intelligence reform
65. The Intelligence and Security Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina fine-tuned
its organizational structure during the reporting period in order to take on the
responsibility for security vetting prescribed by the Law on the Protection of Secret
Data. A first batch of Agency employees commenced training on both operational
and analytical aspects of the Agency’s work. Such training, as well as consultations
with international experts, remained a priority. Both executive control and
parliamentary oversight of the Agency continued to mature.
66. The Intelligence and Security Agency underlined its ability to act as the key
point of contact in Bosnia and Herzegovina for counter-terrorism efforts through its
membership of several international forums for intelligence cooperation. Bilateral
donors provided both training and material assistance. The Agency will continue to
work with the Mission to Bosnia and Herzegovina of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and other partners to consolidate it with all aspects of
the laws that regulate it and to ensure both proper executive control and effective
parliamentary oversight.

X.

European Union military mission
67. The European Union military mission (EUFOR) continued to conduct
operations to ensure compliance with the General Framework Agreement for Peace
and to maintain a safe and secure environment. EUFOR troops conducted a number
of operations, including presence patrolling, observation activities, weapons
collections and specific operations targeted at the support networks of war crimes
indictees and associated criminal elements. Thanks to improvements in the security
situation, EUFOR started to reduce and, in some areas, to end routine patrolling
towards the end of 2006.
68. EUFOR maintained some 6,000 troops from 22 States members of the
European Union and 12 other countries. The force remained deployed in three
regional multinational task forces based in Banja Luka, Mostar and Tuzla, in
addition to 44 liaison and observation teams throughout the country.

16

07-33080

S/2007/253

69. As a result of new common operational guidelines established with the
European Union Police Mission, EUFOR ceased to conduct independent operations
targeting organized crime. Instead, it backs up domestic law enforcement agencies
when their requests for support are endorsed by the Police Mission. Having fulfilled
its mandate, the Crime Strategy Group chaired by the European Union Special
Representative, formerly assigned the task of overseeing the coordination and
coherence of the European Union Security and Defence Policy in support of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities’ fight against organized crime, closed down in
November.
70. The European Union decided in principle on 11 December to downsize
EUFOR in 2007. The European Union Political and Security Committee confirmed
that decision on 27 February. Implementation has begun and is due to be completed
mid-2007, when EUFOR will consist of some 2,500 troops in the country. The new
force posture that is planned provides for the retention of one battalion and two
independent police unit companies, based at Camp Butmir near Sarajevo, while
additional battalions will be available “over the horizon” to reinforce EUFOR at
short notice. EUFOR will, however, maintain a countrywide presence in the form of
liaison and observation teams, the purpose of which will be to provide EUFOR with
real-time situational awareness.

XI.

Return of refugees and displaced persons
71. At the end of 2003, when property repossession was nearly complete, the
Office of the High Representative handed over responsibility for refugee and
displaced-person returns under annex 7 to the General Framework Agreement to the
domestic authorities. Property repossession has since been completed throughout the
country, all municipalities having dealt with outstanding first-instance applications
for repossession of dwellings.
72. Permanent returns — and the sustainability of those returns — are, however,
another matter. Unlike the number of repossessions, it is virtually impossible to
offer a reliable estimate of the number of people who have returned physically to
their pre-war homes. While the number of potential returnees grows ever smaller
with time, a re-registration exercise undertaken by the Ministry for Human Rights
and Refugees revealed that there were still 130,000 displaced persons in Bosnia and
Herzegovina who wished to return to their pre-war homes. They need and deserve
support, as do those who have returned but who often lead precarious lives. Field
visits undertaken by the staff of the Office of the High Representative and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees found that an alarming
number of “minority” returnees to rural areas lacked the rudiments of modern life,
such as electricity and running water.

XII.

Mostar
73. Persistent intervention by my Office in the affairs of the city of Mostar was
necessary in the second half of 2006. The political parties continued to stall or
prevent the reorganization of the city administration, the formation of a single
public utility company to cope with ongoing waste-disposal problems and any
resolution of the status of the city-owned but Croat-controlled Hercegovačka Radio-

07-33080

17

S/2007/253

Television. Moreover, the Croat-Bosniak dispute over urban planning threatened to
create new parallel structures. All of these contentious issues continued to threaten
the city’s normal functioning and unity.
74. After the city authorities repeatedly failed to meet several deadlines I had set
for resolving these issues, as well as to take up the opportunity I offered them to
settle the television dispute through arbitration, it became necessary by September
to appoint a special envoy of my Office to Mostar. I assigned the experienced
Norbert Winterstein the task of trying to build the political consensus necessary to
make decisions, as well as to arbitrate in cases where no consensus could be forged.
If even arbitration were not acceptable, I asked him to propose solutions to me.
75. My Special Envoy soon succeeded in obtaining the consent of the City Council
to arbitrate the final status of Hercegovačka Radio-Television. He decided that it
must be either transferred to new ownership or liquidated by 31 March 2007. On
30 March, the City Council passed a decision to transfer ownership of
Hercegovačka Radio-Television to three Croat-majority cantons, although they have
not yet formally accepted such a transfer. He also succeeded in brokering
agreements on the formation of a single public utility company and in pushing ahead
with the reorganization of the city administration.
76. Since urban planning issues could not be resolved by compromise, as a last
resort I issued two decisions on 22 December to establish urban and spatial planning
bodies in the city. The Bosniak-dominated parties took those decisions as attacks on
them and criticized them as biased.
77. Although my Special Envoy made significant progress in securing agreements
and proposing decisions, the difficult work of implementation lies ahead in 2007.
Continued obstruction may leave me no choice but to use the Bonn Powers again.
Mostar remains politically unstable, and will continue to require the attention of the
Office of the High Representative.

XIII.

Brčko District
78. Since 1999, when the Final Arbitral Award established Brčko District as a
single, multi-ethnic administrative unit under an international supervisor, the
District developed a political culture that was distinct from the rest of the country.
Problems were solved locally, without recourse to national political parties, even
after the first district-wide elections in October 2004. Lately, however, this has
begun to change. The political radicalization accompanying the general election
campaign and the approach of the end of the supervisory regime have combined to
create a new and negative dynamic. Fearful of a future without a supervisor to check
nationalist excesses, parties have been playing up ethnic issues that had hitherto
stayed in the background.
79. Serb politicians were concerned during the period about the need to appoint a
new police chief. They believed the chief should be a Serb not only because his
predecessor had been a Serb, but also because Bosniak politicians were reportedly
expressing the desire to get hold of major enforcement positions in the government,
including the police chief (the acting chief was a Bosniak), the new auditor and the
public attorney, in addition to the mayoral and prosecutor positions they already
held.

18

07-33080

S/2007/253

80. Accusations of corruption and national discrimination have been bandied
about without regard for facts or evidence. Bureaucratic inertia, laziness and
incompetence are often mistaken for deliberate actions. The government has
procrastinated in making preparations to create an independent health insurance
fund and public utility company and initially failed to provide for them in its draft
2007 budget. The District Assembly duly rejected it, displaying the dysfunctional
relationship between the government and the assembly majority that has come to
prevail.
81. Leaders already seem to be positioning themselves for the 2008 elections, both
by raising nationalist issues and, increasingly, taking their cues (if not direction)
from Banja Luka, Sarajevo or Mostar. This has had the effect of making some of the
parties forming the governing coalition distance themselves from the work of their
own government and not support government proposals in the assembly, the better
to pursue party and personal interests. The situation culminated on 28 December,
when Bosniak councillors staged a walkout during the Assembly’s last session of the
year in reaction to proposed reforms and the reallocation of positions resulting from
government restructuring.
82. Outside influences on local political leaders are likely to intensify as the
Supervisor’s departure nears. The mayor could be weakened further, and may
continue to rely upon the Supervisor to compensate for the inadequacies of his
government and bureaucracy. To counter these deficiencies, the Supervisor has
focused on increasing government accountability, performance and reform in order
to diminish the impact of party politics on government services. Seven supervisory
orders in February and March sought to promote that agenda. The Supervisor
appointed a new police chief, restored two buildings to religious communities,
amended the District statute, appointed members of the Audit Office, and dismissed
five officials dealing with urban planning issues. These actions have had a positive
effect on restoring Brčko as a place of realized reform and great potential.
83. In November, the Supervisor presented to the Brčko District Assembly a draft
law of Bosnia and Herzegovina on Brčko District and explained the process by
which a joint working group had prepared it. The post-election interregnum
precluded the caretaker Council of Ministers from adopting and proposing the draft
law to Parliament. The new Council now needs to do so, but it has also become
evident that State and entity governments remain to be convinced that the law is
adequate to the purpose.
84. Following a series of decisions that short-changed Brčko in terms of revenue,
the Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority finally adjusted the revenueallocation coefficients for December and January to reflect the final consumption
criteria when it met on 22 December. The rebalancing exercise for JanuarySeptember 2006 returned nearly KM 7 million to Brčko. It remains to be seen,
however, whether the final rebalancing, delayed as a consequence of there being no
Federation finance minister, will restore all the funds that Brčko claims are owed.
The District had meanwhile filed its submission asking for relief from the Arbitral
Tribunal by 30 November. The submission complains that the taxation regime
violates two principles of the Final Award. If the parties do not resolve their dispute
in a timely fashion, it will be necessary to consider alternative solutions.

07-33080

19

S/2007/253

XIV.

Bosnia and Herzegovina and the region
85. As a multinational State whose three constituent peoples also inhabit
neighbouring countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot escape regional disputes or
instability. Even the ordinary politics of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro have an
impact on it. The Republika Srpska government, in particular, has felt compelled to
do Belgrade’s bidding on numerous occasions.
86. As I have emphasized above, however, the uncertainty over the future status of
Kosovo and the delays in the announcement of the United Nations mediator’s
proposals had an especially baleful influence during the 2006 election campaign and
thereafter. Indeed, the risk of regional instability is one reason why I concluded that
it would be rash to close the Office of the High Representative and renounce the
Bonn Powers as early as 30 June 2007, the target date set by the Peace
Implementation Council in June 2006. Until such time as the status of Kosovo is
both settled and accepted — and arguments and passions attempting to draw Bosnia
and Herzegovina into the equation are moot and spent — fundamental changes in
the nature of the international engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be
considered carefully. The country may be peaceable and secure, but it is just as
vulnerable to external developments and their domestic reverberations as to homegrown political instability. The reverberations set off by the verdict of the
International Court of Justice on 26 February are a case in point.
87. Any perceived lowering of international interest in Bosnia and Herzegovina or
any apparent weakening of resolve to uphold its sovereignty and territorial integrity
could invite trouble. The invitation by NATO to Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the
Partnership for Peace had a decidedly reassuring effect. The signing of a
Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European Union would provide an
even greater boost.
88. Bosnia and Herzegovina still has minor border disputes with Serbia and
Croatia, though the potential quarrel over Zagreb’s plan to build a bridge between
the mainland and the Pelješac peninsula that would have restricted access of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to the Adriatic seems to have abated. Another long-standing
irritant to regional relations — the constitutional bars on extradition of their
nationals by Croatia and Serbia — remains unresolved, although cooperation among
prosecutors continues to improve. Bosniak politicians’ efforts to call the dualcitizenship agreement with Serbia into question following the departure of
Montenegro from the State Union and subsequent lack of interest in concluding a
similar agreement with Croatia have lately been overcome.

XV.

European Union Police Mission
89. During the reporting period, the European Union Police Mission continued its
successful work in co-locations with the local police. It implemented its refocused
mandate and further strengthened its cooperation with EUFOR. With the Common
Operation Guidelines in place, the Mission took the lead in supporting Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the fight against organized crime and corruption, as tasked by the
European Union Political and Security Committee. The establishment of the
Criminal Justice Interface Unit charged with addressing deficiencies in cooperation
between police and prosecutors was a positive step. The Unit focused on enhancing

20

07-33080

S/2007/253

both general and case-specific cooperation in order to facilitate effective
investigations and prosecutions, as well as to contribute to strengthening the
integrity of the country’s criminal justice system.
90. Pursuant to an operational review conducted at the end of the year, the Police
Mission concluded that greater effort was required to support the ongoing battle
against organized crime and corruption, including the provision of more hands-on
advice regarding specific cases, in addition to general guidance.

XVI.

Non-certification of police officers
91. During the reporting period, I continued my efforts to help resolve the vexed
issue raised when former Bosnia and Herzegovina police officers were denied
certification by the International Police Task Force in 2002. The expert team of the
Office of the High Representative/European Union Special Representative returned
to New York in July and met once more with European Union missions, the Security
Council Coordination and Drafting Group and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to explore possible solutions. In August, I wrote to the President of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General, expressing my view that the Office of
the High Representative/European Union Special Representative, in cooperation
with authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, had made every effort to provide the
information required by the Council and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and that it was up to the United Nations to take the next steps.
92. In November, I reiterated that point in my statement to the Council and later in
meetings with the Secretary-General and the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations. In response to a letter in November from the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, and reflecting the mounting frustration and discontent
in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the continuing stalemate, I wrote again in
December to the Under-Secretary-General to suggest that it was incumbent upon our
respective organizations to search for new solutions to this old problem. When
former police officers embarked the same month on a hunger strike, the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina reacted by adopting a unilateral decision to
establish a domestic review process for officers who had been denied certification. I
called upon the Council of Ministers to respect fully its obligations under
international law and pointed out that, were its decision to be implemented, I would
have no choice but to consider further measures. I also called upon the Council of
Ministers to contact the Security Council and the Secretariat as a matter of urgency.
Since then, members of my staff have continued to consult with the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board members, Bosnia and Herzegovina
institutions and others, including the Council of Europe.

XVII.

Media development
93. Efforts to complete public broadcasting reform suffered a setback on 19 July at
the hands of the Federation Constitutional Court, which ruled that the entity public
broadcasting service law imperilled the “vital national interests” of Croats. In
November, the Bosniak club in the Federation House of Peoples appealed to the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, seeking to reverse the entity

07-33080

21

S/2007/253

court’s decision. The Constitutional Court is not likely to rule on this issue before
May.
94. If, however, that judgement is either unfavourable or further delayed, it will be
necessary to introduce a redrafted law that meets the Federation Constitutional
Court’s original and technical objections. In the meantime, the Office of the High
Representative/European Union Special Representative will continue to meet
regularly with the public broadcasting service governors and other stakeholders to
discuss the course of reform and to encourage measures to modernize and streamline
the system.

XVIII.

Mission Implementation Plan and the workplan of the
Office of the High Representative
95. A total of 30 workplan items remain outstanding. The Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board asked me in February to revise the workplan to focus on
remaining Dayton implementation requirements and on consolidating the reforms of
State-level institutions necessary for the stability and sustainability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
96. Work continued, however, on ensuring that workplan items could be completed
once the new governments were in place and normal legislative business resumed.
In almost all cases, the impediments have not been technical, but have reflected an
absence of engagement and determination on the part of the governing authorities. It
remains to be seen how much political will the State and entity governments will be
able to mobilize. The fact that the blockage in the Council of Ministers following
the verdict of the International Court of Justice was overcome in mid-March — and
some important decisions taken — may augur well.

XIX.

European Union Special Representative
97. In line with my dual mandate as European Union Special Representative in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, I continued to promote the priorities listed in the European
Partnership document of 2006, as well as the implementation of the General
Framework Agreement. I also worked on behalf of constitutional reform, which
remains essential to both rationalize and strengthen the country’s governance and,
by extension, to equip Bosnia and Herzegovina for European Union integration. In
my role as Special Representative, I also continued to provide political oversight of
the European Union Police Mission. The Commander of EUFOR, the Commissioner
of the European Union Police Mission and I revised the terms of reference for the
European Union Crime Strategy Group during the reporting period.

XX.

Reinforced engagement of the European Union in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and closure of the Office of the
High Representative
98. The staff of the Office of the High Representative and the European Union
Special Representative worked towards meeting the conditions required for the
transition from the Office to the Special Representative following the decision of the

22

07-33080

S/2007/253

Political Directors of the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board in June
2006 that the Office should prepare to close in June 2007. As I have emphasized
throughout the present report, however, developments on both the regional and
domestic scenes have been far from propitious, ultimately causing the Peace
Implementation Council to decide on 27 February to maintain the Office. The Office
and the Special Representative will therefore continue to work in tandem, but with
the latter assuming increased prominence as a more gradual transition process
proceeds.
99. In the meantime on 16 and 17 October, the General Affairs and External
Relations Council welcomed the second joint report by the High Representative for
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union, Javier Solana, and the
Commissioner for Enlargement, Olli Rehn, on a reinforced European Union
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the context of the closure of the Office of
the High Representative. In accordance with my mandate, on 23 November, I
submitted a detailed proposal for the consideration of the Council on the mandate,
structure and resources required for a reinforced European Union engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Working groups in Brussels examined the issues involved
and the Council adopted a new joint action (legal basis) in January 2007. This will
now need to be reviewed.

XXI.

Reporting schedule
100. In keeping with my proposal to submit regular reports for onward transmission
to the Security Council, as required by the Council in its resolution 1031 (1995), I
herewith present my second regular report. Should the Secretary-General or any
Security Council member require information at any other time, I would be pleased
to provide an additional written update.

07-33080

23
