TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 19 MARCH 1973
PANAMA

CITY

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1699) . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . .
Tribute to the memory of Mr, Mangalam Chacko

Page

.. ,...,..... .........

Adoption of the agenda . , . . . , . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . ,

1

Consideration of measures for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter . . . , . . . . . , , . . . , , . , . . , . , . . . , . . . . . . , . .

1

SIPV.1699 and Corr.1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the OffciaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SIXTEEN
Held in the Legislative

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-NINTH

Palace, Panama City, on Monday,

President: Mr. Aquilino E. BOYD (Panama).

MEETING
19 March 1973, at IO a.m.

death of your outstanding husband. We share your grief
becausehis passing means for the Council the loss of one
of its most worthy associates.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

“May I assure you that all of us on the Security Council
will always remember your husband as a man for whom
we had the greatest respect and esteem, confidence and
friendship.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l699)

“While I am aware that your personal loss cannot be
alleviated, I wish you to know that all of us share that
senseof loss. On behalf of the Security Council I extend
our deepest condolences to all the family.”

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2, Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in
Latin America in conformity with the provisions and
principles of the Charter.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a. m.
Consideration of measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles
of the Charter

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Mangalam Chacko

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Before
the Council takes up the item on its agenda I wish to pay a
tribute to the memory of Mr. Mangalam Chacko, who
recently died in the city of New York. Mr. Chacko gave
eminent service to the United Nations in many posts in the
Secretariat. He died while carrying out the very delicate
duties of Deputy Under-Secretary-General of ihe Department of Political and Security Council Affairs. In that
capacity Mr. Chacko had served during recent years as
Secretary of the First Committee of the General Assembly
and of a number of other Committees, particularly the very
important Special Committee on Peace-Keeping Operations.

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with decisions previously taken by the Council
[1696th-1698th meetings] and with its consent, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mauritania, Mexico,
Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zaire and
Zambia to take the piaces reserved for them in the Council
chamber.
6. I should like to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Canada and the Dominican Republic in which they request to be allowed to
participate, without the right to vote, in our deliberations,
in accordance with Article 31 of the Charter. In keeping
with past practice, and with the consent of the Council, I
propose to invite those representatives to participate,
without the right to vote, in our debates and to take the
places reserved for them in the Council chamber, on the
understanding that they will be invited to take a place at
the Council table when they wish to make a statement.

2. Mr. Chacko’s death spells a real loss to the Organization, since he was a true model of an international civil
servant. His dedication to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, his devotion to his work,
and his senseof responsibility in the fulfilment of his duties
earned him the respect, admiration and affection of all
those who came into contact with him.
3. We all know that, in addition to the qualities I have just
mentioned, Mr. Chacko also had the common touch and
human warmth that turned his official contacts into
relations of personal friendship.

At the invitation of the President, the representatives of
Canada and the Dominican Republic took the places
reserved for them.

4. As President of the Security Council I have addressedto
his bereaved family the following telegram of condolence:

7. The PRESIDENT {interpretation from Spanish): I wish
to draw the attention of members of the Council to
document S/10930, which contains a letter dated 16 March

“On behalf of the Security Council I should like to
express to you our deep feelings of grief at the untimely
1

wish to register .?ry deep appreciation of the excellent
arrangements that have been made for our reception and
comfort and for the facilities which we have enjoyed for
the discharge of our responsibilities. I run very happy to
have had this opportunity to visit a sister Latin American
country, particularly one which, like my own, has sficres
washedby the Caribbean Sea.

1973, to the President of the Security Council from the
representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan. In that
letter the three representatives request that the Council,
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, invite
Mr, Mamadou Diarra, Executive Secretary of the Organization of African Unity at the United Nations, to addressthe
Council on behalf of the OAU. As I hear no objection I
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation to
Mr. Mamadou Diarra and I shall invite him at the appropriate moment to make a statement.

14. It is worth mentioning that the Caribbean area wasthe
theatre in which during the so-called age of discovery the
foundations of more than one European empire were laid.
It is also worthy of note that it is in this area, where
colonialism began some three centuries ago, that some of
the last examples of the colonial relationship persist. The
historical residue of this period of human relations is still
with us in the form of situations, some more dangerous
than others, all of which had their origins in a time when
relations between strong and weak peoples were dominated
at worst by cruel rapacity, at best by demorsliaing
paternalism.

It was so decided.

8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
addition, I wish to inform members of the Council that I
have received a letter, dated 16 March 1973, from the
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. In that letter the Chairman of the Special
Committee requests, in accordance with a decision adopted
by that body, that he be permitted, in his capacity as
Chairman of the Special Committee to address the Council
during its current series of meetings away from Headquarters. In view of that request, I would suggest that the
Council extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to the Chairman of the Special Committee.

15. Many representatives who have preceded me in this
debate have discussed the valuable general considerations
and principles which are more and more being accepted by
States, and being given the quasi-regulatory function which
they must have if States are to succeedin harmonizing their
actions for the attainment of the purposes of the United
Nations. Others have given rather more emphasis to a
number of specific situations requiring settlement. Of the
specific situations which have been discussed, the one
which has dominated the thinking and concern of all who
have spoken is that difficult and dangerous matter-the
Panama Canal question. For some delegations this is a
particularly difficult problem because of the close and
friendly relations which exist between their countries and
the Republic of Panama and the United States of America.
My delegation finds itself so placed; however, the question
has to be faced. It cannot be denied that the Panama Canal
links two mighty oceans and divides a small developing
country. That is a visible fact, It cannot be denied that the
Governments of Panama and the United States are agreed
that the existing situation is intolerable and must be
changed-witness the Joint Declaration’ signed by both
Governments before the Council of the Organization of
American States in April 1964 and the negotiations
between the two countries which took place subsequently,

9. Finally, I wish to inform the Council that I have also
received a letter, dated 13 March 1973, from the Chairman
of the Special Committee on Apartheid. In that letter the
Chairman of the Special Committee requests, in accordance
with a decision taken by that body, that he be given the
opportunity to addressthe Council on behalf of the Special
Committee on the occasion of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. In view of that
request, I wish to propose that the Council also extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to the Chairman of the Special Committee on Apartheid.
10, Accordingly, at the appropriate moment and with the
consent of the Council, I shall invite the Chairmen of these
two Committees to make a statement.
It was so decided,

11. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
first name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Trinidad and Tobago, Ambassador Eustace
Seignoret. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

16. My delegation believes that these two Governments,
these two countries which have so much to gain from
bringing into being a mutually satisfactory arrangement for
the Canal, must be encouraged to resume negotiations witi
the least possible delay on the basis of the principles of
international relations which have come to be accepted in
the contemporary world. Trinidad and Tobago SuppO~s
Panama in its determination to reach a fair and just
agreement.

12. Mr. SEIGNORET (Trinidad and Tobago): Mr, President, allow me to begin by expressing the thanks of my
delegation to you and the members of the Security Council
for your invitation to me to participate in its work on the
question now on the agenda.

17. Many representatives who have preceded me have
drawn attention to the fundamental principles which must
be observed faithfully if mutually acceptable results are to
be achieved at a mutually acceptable rate of progress. we

13. My delegation together with all the other members of
the Latin American group, gave early endorsement and
support to the intention of the Government of Panama to
invite this Council to hold a series of meetings in its capital.
Having spent the greater part of a week in this country, I

1 See The Department of State Bulletin, vol. I, No. 1296 Washington, DC., U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964), p. 656.
2

21. We are confronted here with a serious and difficult
problem. The positions of the parties to the dispute,
Guatemala and Great Britain, appear to be irreconcilable,
But neither the people of Guatemala nor the people of
Great Britain have anything at stake in this dispute so
important and fundamental as have the people of Belize.
Through no fault of their own, through none of their
contriving, through the passageof time they have developed
a consciousnessof themselves as a community separate and
distinct from all others in the world, living on territory with
known and defined boundaries. What is at stake for this
community is whether or not it will be able to live in a
State of its choice in peaceful and friendly co-operation
with all its neighbours.

hope that the discussion in this august Council will
strengthen the determination of both sides to reach an early
settlement and help to create a political climate which will
enable the arrangements of a bygone era to be brought
up-to-date and made to conform with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
18. Another of the historical residues which has been dealt
with is the avoidance by regional organizations of adherence to the principles of universality and non-discrimination in relations between States. The Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Guyana, in his intervention at the 1696th
meeting of the Council, read into the records of the Council
the Declaration made by the Prime Ministers of Barbados,
Guyana, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago at the conclusion of the Seventh Conference of Heads of Government of
Commonwealth Caribbean Countries held at Chaguaramas,
Trinidad and Tobago, in October 1972. That Declaration,
adopted after due reflection and careful examination of all
its parts, calls for an end to the outmoded exclusionary
arrangements and expresses the resolve of the Governments
of the four countries to adopt all necessary measures to
bring such exclusionary arrangements to an end within the
inter-American system.

22. The question is about the rights of people to have the
rights which we have and which justify us all in sitting
around this table. In mentioning this matter I should like to
repeat that my concern is not to argue the case involving
Guatemala and the United Kingdom. My concern is to
focus attention on the people in that Territory and on their
right to self-determination and independence. We earnestly
hope that a way will be found to enable the people of
British Honduras to enjoy their basic human rights and to
enter into an era of peaceful co-operative activity of their
choosing with their neighbours, thereby strengthening
international peace and security in the area and creating the
best conditions for the serene development of all our
peoples.

19. Similarly, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago,
together with other Governments in our regional organization, sought to end the isolation of the valiant people of
Cuba from the inter-American system. More than two years
ago the head of the Government of Trinidad and Tobago
called for the first step in this process to be made. Before a
meeting of the Inter-American Economic and Social
Council held in Caracas he proposed and argued for the
abandonment of the policy of isolation of Cuba from the
regional economic and social institutions. Last December,
my Government, together with the Governments of Barbados, Guyana and Jamaica, established diplomatic relations with Cuba-the clearest possible indication which
could be given of our conviction that Cuba’s isolation from
the inter-American system should be terminated.

23. I cannot leave the question of colonialism without
paying a tribute to the Governments and peoples of the
other emerging Territories and the administering Power for
so widely charting the course toward independent statehood. My delegation endorses what has been said about
those developments by the representatives who have preceded me. May I add our hope that these valuable lessons of
co-operation between an administering Power and a colonial Territory will encourage others, particularly those
outside this hemisphere, to abandon the use of repressive
force and open warfare in order to preserve the anachronism of their foreign rule and domination of other peoples.

20. Yet another vexatious remnant of the past is the
situation concerning the internally self-governing Territory
of Belize, The representatives of Guyana [1696th meeting]
and Jamaica [169&h meeting] have dealt with the aspirations of the people of British Honduras for self-determination and independence and the factors governing their
progress towards the fulfilment of those aspirations. The
representative of Guatemala, exercising his right of reply
[ibid], stated categorically that the Territory of British
Honduras was Guatemalan and that his country’s rights to
that Territory were inalienable and imprescriptible. The
representative of the United Kingdom, also in exercise of
his right of reply [ibidJ, declared that there wasno doubt
in British minds as to their sovereignty over that Territory.
Both those representatives have indicated that they do not
consider the question of Belize as being on the agenda and
that they see no reason why it should be. Trinidad and
Tobago does not wish to reopen the matter. The language
we shall use is inspired by the desire to let the matter rest at
this time, without failing in our duty to say that the
Government of Trinidad and Tobago supports the legitimate aspirations of the people of British Honduras to
exercise their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence,

24. This is the second successive year that the Security
Council has left New York to hold a series of meetings in a
developing country. On each occasion the Council examined various aspects of the matter and, if I may be
forgiven for stating the obvious, on both occasions decided
to hold such meetings. I had the opportunity of attending
last year’s meetings of the Council in Addis Ababa and
therefore know by direct experience what the members of
the Council have put into the record-namely, that those
meetings were most useful because they enabled the
Council to concentrate on the problems of a given area,
meeting in the area and therefore in fuller view of the
people involved in those problems.
25. The representative of Yugoslavia stated at the 1685th
meeting of the Council:
“The meetings of the Security Council in Africa
actually opened a new chapter in its work and constituted
an effective utilization of the possibility that the Charter,
in its wisdom has provided for the Council,” [Para, 53.1
3

He went on to say that the Council should not wait for a
problem to be escalated into a crisis and a crisis into an
armed conflict before dealing with it. The representative of
Kenya stated at the same meeting that the Security
Council, as the United Nations organ having primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, not only should develop a global presence and
capability in the interests of peace and security but should
also systematically increase and assert its presence.

31. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President, I wish to
associate myself with you in paying a tribute to the late
or. Chacko. The United Nations Council for Namibia, with
which Mr. Chacko was closely associated and which he
served with devotion and dedication, has already sent a
telegram of deep condolences to Mr. Chacko’s bereaved
family.
32. Mr. President, on 8 March 1973 [1692nd meeting], I

had the opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption of the high office of President of the Security Council.
The Council, as will be readily recalled, wasthen discussing
the reports of its Special Mission established under resolution 325 (1973) following acts of aggression committed
against my country by the illegal white minority r&ime of
Southern Rhodesia in collusion with the racist Government
of South Africa.

26. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana, noting
that the Security Council spends most of its time occupied
with specific threats and actual breaches of world peace,
said that too little time was set aside for the essential tasks
of review and appraisal of general situations which might
contain elements of potential international friction or could
give rise to a dispute (2696th meeting]. Finally, in a
document dated 12 December 1972,2 the Government of
Austria, in response to General Assembly resolution
2864 (XXVI), suggested that the Security Council, in the
future, consider, from time to time and whenever conditions seemed appropriate, having recourse to Article 28,
parakraph 3, of the Charter and holding the meetings of the
Security Council in a different environment, if such
environment appeared in one way or the other to be
conducive to the expected solution of a given political
issue.

33. I have pleasant memories of your sympathetic understanding and readiness to help in spite of your heavy
schedule and demands connected with the current meetings
of the Security Council. The fact that the Council wasable
to conclude the consideration of the item in the very
limited time at its disposal, is a tribute to the high calibre of
leadership that you brought to bear on it. I would,
therefore, not let this opportunity go by without expressing
the deep gratitude of the Government and people of
Zambia to you.

27. I have expressed my delegation’s support for use by
the Security Council of the opportunities provided by the
Charter in Article 28, paragraph 3, through some of the
contributions to the exchange of ideas on this question
made by a small number of those States Members of the
United Nations which have expressed their views.

34. It is the desire of my country to strengthen further the
relations between our countries and peoples. Your own
delegation at the United Nations and that of Peru were,
among others, sponsors of the two draft resolutions which
were adopted by the Council on 10 March [328 (1973) u.&
329 (1973)]. You yourself had this to say during the
consideration of the report of the Special Mission:

28. Allow me to end with an extract from the statement
made by the representative of Indonesia at the 1686th
meeting of the Council, while he was President of the
Council. He said:

“My delegation wishesto express its sincere gratitude to
the Special Mission and to announce that it will lend full
support to the recommendations contained in the report
for the benefit of Zambia.” [1694th meeting.J

“Apart from considerations based upon its substantive
work, the Security Council, through meetings awayfrom
Headquarters, will be in a position to project itself more
directly to the peoples of the region where such meetings
are held. Through such meetings also the members of the
Council will have the opportunity not only to obtain
first-hand knowledge of the problems of the region but
also to acquire a senseof involvement in those problems.”

35. My country is familiar with the difficulties Panama is
facing asregards its full exercise of independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty. We are familiar also with Panama’s noble aspirations which are designed to reach reason.
able arrangements regarding the Canal Zone-arrangementi
which will bring peace, security, socio-economic develop
ment and dignity to Panama.

fPara+ 124.1

36. As evidenced at Georgetown, Guyana, last August,4
many States in Latin America and the Caribbean either are
full members of the family of non-aligned countries or
enjoy observer status in the movement. These countries
have, from time to time, advocated the need to strengthen
international peace and security in the world. There exists
today tremendous economic co-operation particularly
between Zambia on the one hand and Chile and Peru on the
other, since all the three are producers of copper. Unfortunately, like many others in this hemisphere, they have been
and continue to be targets of outside economic and other

29. It is the hope of my delegation that the Security
Council Committee on Council Meetings away from Headquarters will be able to *meet as foreshadowed in paragraph
18 of its second report [S/10868] and succeed in developing further and positively the Council’s ideas on this
question.
30, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the representative of Zambia, Paul Lusaka, President of the United,
Nations Council for Namibia, I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

3 Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-eigid
Year,
Special Supplement No. 2.
4 Conferenceof ForeignMinisters of Non-Aligned Countries.

2 A/8847/Add.l.
4

forms of coercion or pressures, thereby threatening their
peaceful and progressive development.

not only from the evils of South Africa’s apartheid policies
but also from the Balkanization of their Territory by
Pretoria.

37. It is against that background that my country attaches
great importance to the current meetings of the Security
Council in this beautiful city of Panama. The Council, as
the custodian of international peace and security, should
take effective action to bring to fruition the expectations of
the people of Panama and indeed those of all of Latin
America. Zambia will support fully any measures that may
ensure for the States of Latin America the safety of their
territorial integrity and sovereignty. Only in a climate of
peace will these States be able to effect to the maximum
their own political, economic and social changes for the
benefit of their people.

43. Finally, Mr. President, may I express my deep thanks
and gratitude to the Government and people of the
Republic of Panama for the very warm hospitality they
have extended to us,
44. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (translation from Chinese):
Over a year ago, the Security Council successfully held its
special meetings in Africa. Today, at the request of the
Panamanian Government and with the- support of other
Latin American countries, ‘the Council is meeting in Latin
America. This is the first time that the Council has met in
either of these two regions since the founding of the United
Nations. This shows that in the 28 years since the end of
the Second World War important changes have taken place
in the international situation and international relations,
great progress has been made in the national independence
movement of the peoples of Africa and Latin America, and
the third world countries are enjoying an increasingly
higher and stronger position and role in international
affairs.

38. Permit me to seize this opportunity to speak in my
capacity as President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and to convey on its behalf felicitations and
appreciation to the States of Latin America for the stalwart
manner in which they have supported the Council. The
annals of the United Nations are replete with recordings of
the strong support given by these States to the Council for
Namibia.

45. The Chinese delegation is pleased to attend the
Security Council meetings in Latin America, and we should
like to take this opportunity to extend our cordial greetings
and high respects to the peoples of Panama and other Latin
American countries and express our sincere thanks to the
Panamanian Government, which has provided facilities for
these meetings. The Chinese delegation hopes that, through
our joint efforts, these meetings can make due contributions towards supporting the Latin American peoples in
their struggle to defend their national independence,
sovereignty and national resources and oppose super-Power
aggression,interference, subversion, plunder and control.

39. These States were among the majority of Members of
the United Nations which voted in the General Assembly
for the termination of South Africa’s Mandate over
Namibia. Their affirmative vote was a response to the call
for freedom and dignity for the people of Namibia. It was
also a response to the blatant defiance by South Africa of
the United Nations resolutions. They expressed support for
the independence of Namibia when they sponsored and
voted in favour of resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967,
to establish, inter alia, a United Nations Council for South
West Africa, which was subsequently redesignated as United
Nations Council for Namibia in accordance with resolution
2372 (XXII) of 12 June 1968.

46. Having listened carefully to the important statements
made by a number of delegations, the Chinese delegation
would now like to make the following observations.

40. Some States of Latin America were among the first 11
members of the Council for Namibia. When the membership of the Council was recently enlarged from 11 to 18,
States of Latin America were included also in the enlarged
membership.

47. First, Latin America is a beautiful and rich continent.
The industrious and intelligent peoples of Latin America
have created a brilliant civilization and made great contributions to human progress. With the barbarous invasion by
the European colonialists after the end of the fifteenth
century, Latin American regions were reduced to colonies
of Spa@, Portugal and other countries one after another,
and the peoples of Latin America were. subjected to brutal
plunder, enslavement and exploitation. However, the fiercer
the oppression the stronger the resistance. The heroic and
indomitable peoples of Latin America have waged arduous
struggles for national independence and liberation. From
the end of the eighteenth century to the beginning of the
nineteenth century, starting with the revolution of Haiti,
the flames of national liberation wars swept the whole of
the Latin American continent, and the much-oppressed
Indians, black people and creoles, united as one and
advancing wave upon wave, fought hard for more than
three decades and finally smashed the Spanish and Portuguese colonial systems in Latin America, adding a glorious
chapter to the annals of the struggle of the world’s colonial
peoples.

41. It is extremely encouraging to note that the goodwill
and support of Latin America is assured in the struggle to
win
independence for Namibia. This is all the more
important now because South Africa is continuing its illegal
occupation of the Territory of Namibia and also is
continuing to apply its destructive and repressive measures
to the people of Namibia in defiance of the United Nations.
Most of us are aware what the present evil and oppressive
system in South Africa implies in terms of human misery
and turmoil.
42. The record of the United Nations will show very
clearly that the States of Latin America are included in the
forward echelon of the march towards political freedom,
social Progress and economic improvement for all mankind,
There is no doubt that the States of Latin America will not
retreat until liberty and its blessings are extended to all
those who still remain under the yoke of colonialism-for
example, the people of Namibia, who continue to suffer
5

48. The road of revolution is tortuous. After the independence of a number of Latin American countries, colonialism and imperialism, refusing to give up their sinister
designs, have continued their oppression, interference and
infiltration against the Latin American countries by every
possible means and in different forms, Particularly since the
beginning of this century, United States imperialism, under
the signboard of “pan-Americanism”, has subjected the
Latin American countries to aggression and enslavement,
plunging the Latin American peoples into continued dire
misery. To date, imperialist and colonialist oppression and
control are still menacing the independence and security of
the Latin American countries and peoples. The struggle of
the Caribbean colonial peoples for independence continues
to be suppressed and sabotaged. Foreign military basesand
foreign troops still remain on the territories of some Latin
American countries. The territories and sovereignty,
national resources and economic lifelines of many Latin
American countries are still being subjected to infringement, plunder and control. However, the Latin American
peoples are no docile slaves of imperialism They have
waged unflinching struggles to achieve and safeguard
national independence, winning one victory after another.
We are pleased to note that in recent years new changes
have taken place in the situation of Latin America. A
number of newly independent countries have continued
their advance on the road of national independence. There
has been greater progress in the Latin American peoples’
struggle to safeguard national independence, sovereignty
and maritime rights and to defend their national resources
and develop their national economies. The Latin American
countries and peoples are getting united on an ever-broader
scale in their common struggle against imperialism colonialism and neo-colonialism At the various meetings in the
United Nations, a great number of Latin American countries, together with other countries of the third world, have
resolutely defended the principles of national self-determination and non-interference, firmly opposed the hegemony
of big countries bullying the small and strong ones bullying
the weak, and strongly condemned super-Power economic
monopoly, plunder and expansion. The Latin American
countries and peoples have become an active force in the
third world, playing an increasingly greater role in intemational affairs together with the Asian and African countries
and peoples.

America and the rest of the world. Like the Panamar$
people, the Chinese people used to be the victim of
imperialist aggression, expansion and unequal treaties overa
long period. The Chinese Government and people fu$,
understand, deeply sympathize with and actively support
the Panamanian Government and people in their patriotic
struggle. Recently the Panamanian Government has re.
affirmed the inviolability of the territory and sovereignty of
the Canal Zone and demanded the abrogation of fihe
unequal treaty, an end to the colonial rule in the Cwal
Zone and the gradual recovery of the entire jurisdiction
over the Zone within a set time-limit. The PaIUlII~i~
Government’s position is just and its demand reasonable.
We firmly support them. We believe that, so long as tie
heroic Panamanian people strengthen their unity ~d
persevere in their struggle, they will certainly win find
victory in recovering their territory and sovereign right over
the Canal Zone.
50. Third, the struggle in defence of the 200 nautical-mile
maritime rights initiated by the Latin American count&
and peoples is a struggle of the small- and medium&ed
countries to protect their marine resources and oppose
super-Power maritime hegemony. In recent years t&
struggle has grown in depth and momentum. The one Q
two super-Powers have been frustrated repeatedly in their
attempt to undermine the unity and s’truggle of the Lath
American countries by threat and cajolery. The Latin
American countries have openly exposed the super-Powers*
despicable act of imposing so called economic sanctions,
detained the latter’s piratic fishing boats which llave
intruded into their territorial seas, and waged tit-for-tat
struggles against the super-Powers which have fallaciously
described the claim for the 200 nautical-mile territorial sea
as a “violation of international law”, “infringement upon
the rights and interests of other countries” and as creating
international “confusion” and “conflict”. By their strong
will and heroism the Latin American countries and peoples
have greatly encouraged the small- and medium-sized countries in their struggle against power politics and hegemony.
At present the struggle in defence of maritime rights is
mounting rapidly and has formed a gigantic torrent,
vigorously pounding at the super-Power hegemonic positicm
of seeking monopoly over the seas and oceans.
51. We have consistently held that countries, big or XII&
should be equal. All coastal countries are entitled to
determine reasonably the limits of their territorial seasand
jurisdiction according to their geographical conditior%
taking into account the needs of their security and national
economic interests, and have the right to dispose of tfleir
natural resources in their coastal seas, sea-bed and the
subsoil thereof. This is the sovereign right of every countrY
which other countries should respect. The super-Powers
have no right to impose their will on others. We are
resolutely opposed to the arbitrary and peremptory acts Of
one or two super-Powers and their schemes to narrow dam
the limit of the territorial seasof other countries.

49. Second, the holding of Security Council meetings now
in Latin America is of particular significance. It givesUs an
opportunity to know the concrete situation in Latin
America on the spot. Let us start by reviewing the question
of the Panama Canal Zone. As is known to all, the Panama
Canal Zone is an inalienable part of the sacred territory of
the Republic of Panama. At the turn of the century, the
United States imposed an unequal treaty on the Panamanian people, whereby it has forcibly occupied the Panama
Canal, stationed large numbers of troops in the Canal Zone
and enforced a colonial rule there. This constitutes a
violation of the territorial integrity and State sovereignty of
the Republic of Panama as well as a threat to the
independence and security of all Latin American countries.
The Panamanian people have waged long and heroic
struggles against United States aggression and for the
recovery of their sovereignty over the Canal Zone. They
have won the sympathy and support of the people of Latin

52. Fourth, at present the main threat to world peace
comes from the imperialist policies of aggression and war*
The super-Powers, which possessa huge amount of nuclear
weapons, keep on stepping up their nuclear arms race. They
have established nuclear bases and stationed nuclear troop
6

on the territories of other countries; their planes, warships
and submarines carrying nuclear weapons are flying or
plying everywhere, posing a grave threat to the security of
the people of various countries. In order to oppose the
imperialist policies of aggression and war, and to safeguard
peace and security in Latin America, the peoples of Latin
American countries have put forward the just proposal for
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Latin
America. The Chinese Government attaches great importance
to and supports the efforts of the Latin American
countries for the denuclearization of Latin America. In his
note of 14 November 1972, the Chinese Foreign Minister,
Chi Per-g-fei, solemnly declared on behalf of the Chinese
Government:
“China will never use or threaten to use nuclear weapons
against non-nuclear Latin American countries and the
Latin American nuclear-weapon-free zone, nor will China
test, manufacture, produce, stockpile, install or deploy
nuclear weapons in these countries or in this zone, or
send her means of transportation and delivery carrying
nuclear weapons to traverse the territory, territorial sea
and territorial air space of Latin American countries”.5
We are pleased to find that China’s position regarding the
Latin American nuclear-free zone has been welcomed and
understood by many Latin American countries.
53. It must be pointed out that owing to the superPowers’ continued refusal to undertake not to use nuclear
weapons against the Latin American nuclear-weapon-free
zone or to dismantle the military bases in Latin America,
and to undertake not to send means of transportation and
delivery carrying nuclear weapons to traverse the territory,
territorial sea and air space of Latin American countries,
Latin America still cannot be freed from the threat of
nuclear war. A certain super-Power, while talking profusely
about supporting the establishment of a Latin American
nuclear-weapon-free zone, has created one pretext after
another for refusing to undertake commitments regarding
it. Therefore, unremitting struggles must be waged against
the super-Power policies of nuclear threat and nuclear
blackmail in order truly to bring about a Latin American
nuclear-weapon-free zone. The Chinese Government has
consistently stood for the complete prohibition and
thorough destruction of nuclear weapons. We are ready to
work together with the peoples of Latin America for the
attainment of this lofty goal.
54. Fifth, Latin America has very rich natural resources
and an enormous potential for the development of the
economy. But the economy of most Latin American
countries has so far remained underdeveloped in varying
degrees. This is a malignant result of the prolonged colonial
rule and imperialist aggression. It has been the common
aspiration of the Latin American countries and peoples to
alter the lop-sided unitary economy, rid themselves of their
dependence on the super-Powers, and attain an independent
status and equal rights in international economic relations.
In recent years Latin America has seen a new upsurge in the
struggle to safeguard national independence, protect
national resources and develop the national economy, Many
5 SeeA/C.1/1028.

Latin American countries have tightened their control,
restriction and management of foreign capital and have
nationalized a number of foreign monopoly enterprises
which were manipulating their national economy and
people’s livelihood, and infringing upon their independence
and sovereignty. The Latin American countries have continuously expanded the economic and trade relations
between themselves. The formation and growth of the
Andean Group and other regional organizations have played
an important part in the unity, co-operation and mutual
support among the Latin American countries, In the
struggle to protect the interests in the export of such
traditional products as petroleum and copper and to oppose
the imperialist monopoly of international markets and
shifting of economic crises, the Latin American countries
are becoming united with the Asian and African countries
on an ever-broader scale. The super-Powers have been
strongly condemned by the people throughout the world
for using what they call international economic co-operation as a means to retaliate and to exert political and
economic pressure upon those Latin American countries
which firmly oppose super-Power economic aggression.
55. Like the Latin American countries, China is also a
developing country. The Chinese Government and people
deeply sympathize with and firmly support the Latin
American countries and peoples in their just struggle to
safeguard national independence, protect national resources
and develop the national economy. We know from our own
experience that for the independent development of
national economy, it is most essential to rely on one’s own
strength and to wage a protracted arduous struggle in
pursuance of the policy of relying mainly on one’s own
efforts while seeking external assistance as an auxiliary. The
Chinese Government and people are glad to note that many
Latin American countries and people are gradually changing
their economic outlook and improving the people’s livelihood in a planned way while taking into account the actual
conditions and possibilities at home, and that they have
achieved successes. We believe that the industrious and
courageous Latin American people will certainly surmount
various difficulties, rid themselves of imperialist, colonialist
and neo-colonialist control and interference and attain
independence and a happy life.
56, On this occasion the Chinese delegation cannot but
point out that despite the steady upsurge of the Latin
American peoples’ struggles to achieve and safeguard
national independence, the United Nations, under obstruction and sabotage by the super-Powers, have over a long
period failed firmly to support and reasonably to meet the
many legitimate wishes and demands of the Latin American
countries. Today such a state of affairs must not continue
any longer. The United Nations should, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the Charter, truly respond to
the just demands of the Latin American countries and
peoples and play its due role for their just cause of
opposing imperialism, colonialism and neo-colonialism and
achieving and defending national independence.
57. The Chinese delegation holds that the Security
Council should support the struggle for independence
waged by the colonial peoples in the Carribean that have
not yet achieved independence; it should support the

struggle of the Panamanian people to recover their territory
and sovereignty over the Canal Zone; it should support the
Cuban people’s struggle to recover Guant&mmo, where the
United States is maintaining its military base; it should
demand the withdrawal of all foreign troops and the
dismantling of all foreign military bases from Latin America; it should support the struggle of the Latin American
countries and peoples to safeguard national independence,
protect national resources and develop the national
economy.

endeavour to establish peace and security in the world as a
whole. The absence of peace and security in one part of the
world cannot but negatively influence conditions in other
parts of the globe. It is for those reasons that the
Indonesian delegation-coming from a region which hasnot
‘known peace since the Second World War-is seriously
interested in contributing to the efforts towards establishing international peace and security in Latin America as
well as elsewhere.
63. Having said that, my delegation holds the view that
the maintenance and strengthening of peace and security in
a region should primarily be the responsibility of the
countries of that region. The problems of peace and
security in Latin America therefore should in the opinion
of my delegation remain primarily the concern of the
countries of Latin America themselves. Of course, we from
outside the area should try to contribute as much aswe can
to their efforts.

$8. The Latin American people are the masters of Latin
America. The affairs of Latin America should be settled
only by the Latin American countries and people themselves; no foreign interference is permissible. The Chinese
Government and people have always regarded as their own
struggle those of the Latin American peoples to safeguard
their independence and sovereignty, to defend their natural
resources and develop their national economies; and we
have regarded their victoces in these struggles as our own.
The Chinese Government and people wilI unswervingly
stand together with the countries and peoples of Latin
America, and we shall fight shoulder to shoulder and march
forward together.
59. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to associate itself with your words of
tribute and condolences with regard to the passing away of
Mr, Chacko. In the short period since Indonesia became a
member of the Security Council my delegation had come to
appreciate the valuable assistance which Mr. Chacko so
kindly extended to us as a newcomer to this Council.

64. My delegation can understand the desire of the
peoples of Latin America to be in a position to decide for
themselves the future of their region, because South-East
Asia too has experienced for too long the negative effects
of being the arena for the conflicting interests of outside
Powers. The birth of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN), comprised of Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, Singapore and Thailand and its efforts to
establish close co-operation among the countries of SouthEast Asia should be seen as an expression of the desire of
the countries to develop the region in close co-operation
with each other without intervention from outside Powers.

60. Mr. President, I shouldlike to express on behalf of my
delegation and on my own behalf, my most profound
gratitude to the Government and people of Panama for the
cordial and colourful reception and for the warm hospitality accorded to us. May I add that the friendly people and
the tropical climate and surroundings make us Indonesians
feel very much at home. May I also express my delegation’s
sincere appreciation and thanks for the excellent arrangements made by the Government of Panama for the Council
meetings, .which I am sure will be most helpful to the
successful conclusion of our deliberations.

65. As I have said, the region of South-East Asia has not
lcnown peace since the last World War. It is for this reason
that we rejoiced at the return of peace to Viet-Narn
however hesitant that return may appear to many. We
welcomed with a feeling of great relief the ceasefire in
Viet-Nam and subsequently in Laos and the results of the
recent peace conference on Viet-Nam held in Paris, We
hope that peace in Wet-Nam will soon be followed by the
end of the armed conflicts in Laos and the Khmer
Republic, giving peace a chance to return to the whole of
South-East: Asia.

61. It is a particular pleasure for the Indonesian delegation
to attend these meetings of the Security Council, being held
for the first time in Latin America, an area which has
always contributed, and continues to do so, towards peace
and security in the world. And it is most gratifying aswell
that the meetings are being held in Panama, a friendly
country with which Indonesia has always entertained
excellent relations and close co-operation.

66. South-East Asia is in need of peace. We need peace to
enable us to implement successfully our development plans,
national as well as regional, in order to make full useof our
abundant natural resources. It is the endeavour of the
members of ASEAN to work to that end through peaceful
and mutually beneficial co-operation among the countries
of South-East Asia. ASEAN seeks to develop South-East
Asia into a region that will be in a position to resist negative
influences from outside in order to prevent South-East Asia
from continuing to be the arena for the conflicting interests
of outside Powers, thereby contributing to international
peace and security. Of course, ASEAN would warmly
welcome close co-operation with and assistance from al1
countries outside its region and other regional and intern&
tional organizations as long as it is for mutual benefit and as
long as it does not mean interference in national and
regional affairs. ASEAN is passionately interested in peace,
as only the existence of peace can guarantee the successof
its efforts for national and regional development and

62. On 26 January 1973, the Council adopted resolution
325 (1973) stating that the Council should be convened in
Panama City to consider measures for the maintenance and
strengthening of international peace and security in Latin
America in conformity with the provisions and principles of
the Charter. As world peace and security are one and
indivisible, my delegation takes the agenda of the Council
to imply that we are convened here to consider measures
for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America as part of the common
8

progress. It is within this framework that the participation
of Indonesia in the International Commission for Supertision and Control in Viet-Nam and in the activities of the
United Nations and the Security Council, as well as in the
Group of Non-Aligned Countries and other forums, should
be viewed.

71. One of the problems that hasrepeatedly been brought
to the attention of the Council, asbeing a danger to world
Peace and security, is that of the continued existence of
KhdiSm.
It is now more than a decade since the world
community adopted the principle of decolonization a.~its
own, but we still witnessthe continuation of an outmoded
system which ought long ago to have become extinct.
Granted that the initial efforts of the United Nations
towards decolonization were successful,no one familiar
with the principles embodied in the Declaration on +Jle
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples in General Assembly resolution 15 14 (xv) can be
satisfied with the developments of recent years, In fact it
must be admitted that the implementation of those
principles has virtually ground to a halt, while there are still
remnants of colonialism to be eradicated. In the light of
this Indonesia calls for a rekindling of the spirit of
decolonization which infused the world in the decade after
the Bandung Conference6 for a reaffirmation and implementation of the principles of the Declaration that it is the
inalienable right of the people still under colonial domination anywhere in the world, whether they are in Latin
America or in Africa or Asia, to decide for themselves the
nature of the political path along which they elect to
develop, With regard to colonial remnants in Latin America
we hope that the time will soon come when the peoples in
those colonial territories will be accorded the right to
self-determination and independence. My delegation is
aware that negotiations are going on with regard to the
status of certain colonial territories in Latin America, and
we should like to expressthe hope that those negotiations
will lead to a speedy conclusion, thus eliminating a source
of tensions which may threaten peace and security in the
region.

67. Allow me now to say a few words about the problem
of sovereignty over natural resources, which in the opinion
of my delegation constitutes one of the important elements
for economic and social development of a country and its
people and, therefore, a factor which may influence peace
and security. It is important for a developing country to
attain a sufficient stage of material well-being to satisfy the
growing needs and the rising demands of its people and
thereby avoid social and political unrest, This well-being
may be achieved by an effective exploration and rational
exploitation of the country’s natural resources. We realize
that not all developing countries possess the means to
exploit their natural resources by their own indigenous
means. Most of them lack the necessary funds and technical
knowhow,
and need, at the start, outside assistance to
speed up the process.
68. Until a few years ago Indonesia was undoubtedly one
of the least explored countries of the world with regard to
its mineral wealth. As with other developing countries, the
main reason for this failure to assessand develop its wealth
lies in the diffcul.ty of raising sufficient capital domestically. Clearly, however, such valuable resources cannot be
allowed to remain untapped when they are so badly needed
for the economic and social development of the country.
69, Indonesia is of the view that private foreign investment can help provide the necessary financial and technolo
gical tools for the exploitation of its natural resources. It is,
however, necessary first to provide a framework within
which both the economic objectives of the nation and the
political and other objections to the negative aspects of
private foreign investment could be met in order to be able
to minimize, if not to prevent entirely, the possibility of
coercion by foreign economic and financial interests. The
Indonesian Constitution stipulates that the natural resources are national wealth and, as such, the property of
the people, controlled by the State. In order to conform
with this definition, guidelines for utilizing foreign capital
and engaging foreign enterprises as contractors for the
Government and its agencies were developed and formulated in a foreign investment law, assuring US that we shall
remain masters in our own house.

72. My delegation has listened very attentively to the clear
and frank statement of General Torrljos, head of the
Government of Panama /1695th meeting]. We sympathize
with and support the desire of the Government and the
people of Panama to do away with an anachronism-the
provisions of the Convention of 1903.7 We understand that
the United States is prepared to abandon the concept of
perpetual authority over the Canal territory. My delegation
understands also that there is a basic agreement with regard
to the sovereign rights of Panama over the’ territory.
Recognition of sovereign rights should in our view imply
effective exercise of those sovereign rights over the entire
territory as well; the logical consequencesensuing, from
those rights should be respected. The implementation is of
course a matter for negotiations, taking into account the
legitimate interests of both parties and the interests of the
world with regard to the efficient functioning of the quality
of the services of the Canal as an important waterway
connecting two important world seas.

70. The question of the effect of foreign investment upon
the social life and cultural values of the host country must
also not be overlooked. An insensitivity on the part of the
international investors towards the cultural setting they
have entered may easily lead to unnecessary frictions which
can only be detrimental to the future of international
investment itself. It is necessary that those who Seek the
rewards which such investment offers should adjust themselves to the milieu, the social and political climate, in
which they operate. The existence of affluent enclaves,
especially if they are foreign, contrasting blatantly with the
local surroundings will certainly not be conducive to
political and social peace.

73. My delegation reakes that these negotiations will not
be an easy exercise, hut we are convinced that, with
g-,odwfll on both sides and with the sincere desire to
6 A&n-AfricanConference,
heldat Bandung,
18-24Apnil1955.
7 Isthmian
CanalConvention.
Forthetext,see Treaties and Other
[ntermtional

Agreements of the United States of America,

~776-1949,
vol.
10.Department
of Statepublication
8642Washington,DC, U.S.Government
PrintingOffice,19721,
p.663.

9

accommodate each other’s position, while at the sametime
respecting the sovereign rights of Panama over the Canal
territory and the logical
consequences of those rights, a
mutually acceptable agreement can be reached. My delegation understands the impatience of Panama after nine years
of negotiations without any substantial results. Impatience
may turn into frustration, and frustration may lead to
unilateral action. I am sure that none of us, and in
particular the parties concerned, wishes for such a situation
to happen. We hope, therefore, that the successful conclusion of the negotiations between Panama and the United
States can be speeded up in order to avoid undesired
developments which not only will have a negative influence
on the success of the negotiations but may also endanger
peace and security in the region. Indonesia is convinced
that Panama, with the effective restoration of its sovereignty and territorial integrity, will be able to contribute
even more to international peace and security in Latin
America in particular, and in the world in general.

from Headquarters. That bridge has been built upon tbs
solidarity, in the first place, of the countries of the whole
third world, among which the non-aligned States play s
particularly active and dynamic role, And it has beea
specifically strengthened by the co-operation of the Latin
American, African and other groups in the United Nations,
in their mutual support for each other’s initiatives.
78. This is now a tested, established side of the Council’s
revitalized practice in discharging its primary responsibility
in the domain of peace and security.
79. My Government is indeed grateful to the Government
of Panama for this invitation, as we, with many others,
perceive this new practice as a means of strengthening the
Council by adjusting its role to contemporary trends in
international relations. It was in that context too that
Yugoslavia supported the Panamanian initiative from the
very outset. By its timeliness, this initiative has enabled us,
the Council, not only to act as a fire brigade, but to fulfti
our role along the lines of preventive diplomacy. By the
contents of its actual agenda-from decolonization to
denuclearization, from sovereignty over natural resources
and the economic foundations of peace and security to the
inalienable right of each country to its territorial integrity
and to non-intervention in its internal affairs, this initiative
is further developing the concepts of true international
security, in conformity with the real needs and aspirations
of our fast-changing world.

74. In conclusion, allow me to express the hope that at
some future date Asia will have the honour to play host to
the Security Council and that an invitation to that end
from an Asian country will meet with the same unanimous
support from the Council as did the invitation of Panama. I
am sure, however, that the Asian country which will host
the Council meetings will find it most difficult, if not
impossible, to match the generous hospitality that has been
lavished upon us by the people and Government of Panama.
75. Mr, MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): It is with a special feeling
of the symbolic sweep of history, it is indeed with the
excitement of participating in an event of broad political
importance and implications, both immediate and long
term, that the Yugoslav delegation is taking part in the
Security Council meetings in Panama and has the honour to
greet you, Ambassador Boyd, as you preside over these
meetings in the capital of your country. This must be a
special moment for you, because it was here that seven
decades ago your brave country regained its independence,
to start its yet unfinished struggle for full emancipation. My
delegation, deeply committed to the struggle for freedom
and independence, and opposed to all manifestations of
subjugation, coercion and foreign intervention, is proud
that it actively contributed to the Council’s right and just
decision to meet in Panama.

80. The Yugoslav delegation is indeed very gratified that
in this era of summits of the big, of conferences convened
by the big, the Security Council, a principal organ of the
United Nations, did not turn a deaf ear when a small
country wanted us to hear its case too, on its own soil. TO
us, in addition to anything else this constitutes a particularly telling instance of advances made in the democratization of international relations; and it is precisely becauseof
this
aspect that the initiative Panama enjoyed, and continues to enjoy, the wide support of such a large number of
non-aligned countries, countries of the third world, on all
continents.
81. Peace, security, independence and sovereignty for ah
cannot be secured by dealing only with the problems of
some. This also means that peace and security for anyone
can only be the product of a universal effort in which
everyone, small or big, participates on the basis of equality
and of equal sovereignty, and when the truly vital rights of
every country, however small, are equally respected and its
grievances equally attended to.

76. We are met here at a truly multiple crossroads: for
here, the Panama Canal-one of the great waterwaysof the
world, an inseparable and sovereign part of Panama, linking
the Atlantic and the Pacific, the East and the West-is
intertwined with the story of the emancipation of Panama
and of the whole Latin American and Caribbean world,
And by coming here -the Security Council-expressing its
responsibilities and concerns for the maintenance of international peace and security in all parts of the world-has
performed a vital role, underlining that organic link which
exists between the democratization of international life, in
the United Nations and elsewhere, and the true contemporary needs and aspirations of Panama, Latin America, the
Caribbean and, by the same token, the whole international
community,

82. Consequently, the vital rights, interests and basic
needs of a small country, as well as the essential precepts of
international justice and progress and the best interests cf
world peace and security are at stake when we now
consider the just demands of the Government and people of
Panama concerning the so-called Panama Canal Zone. That
is why I want, at the outset of my statement to expressmy
delegation’s deep satisfaction that we are given this opportunity to state here, on the soil of Panama, after the firm
and broad-visioned statement of the head of Government,
General Omar Torrijos Herrera [1695th meeting], our fell
support for Panama’s indisputable right to have its effective

77. A special bridge connects Addis Ababa with Panama:
two historic series of meetings of the Security Council away
10

sovereignty and jurisdiction fully established over every
inch of its territory-its inherent right fully to integrate
both parts of its own country and nation, and to be the
sovereign owner and user of all its natural resources and
geographic assets, There must be, in all these respects, full
reintegration of the so-called Canal Zone with the rest of
Panama, and respect for the national sovereignty of the
Republic of Panama, and without delay.

were “discovered” by other parts of the world-which only
proves how relative each single vantage point is. Brave and
far-sighed leaders and liberators, emancipators and revolutionaries like Simon Bolivar, Jose de San Martin, Benito
Juarez and others fought successful wars of liberation and
independence long before marry areas in other continents
were liberated from colonialism, imperialism, hegemony
and dominatiorr of all kinds, Since then, it has been hard to
equal the creativity and the amount of political and
theoretical labour exercised by Latin American countries,
their statesmen and lawyers, in developing the concepts,
institutes and practices of international law and international behaviour, especially and precisely in the fields
essential for the maintenance of peace and security, such as
the peaceful settlement of disputes through mediation,
good offices, conciliation, arbitration and the prevention of
disputes through consultation. It was Latin America that
set an example by being the first fully to respond to the
exigencies of the nuclear age by proclaiming at Tlatelolcos
the denuclearization of their region, and establishing a
special organization to ensure and monitor its implementation.

83. For these reasons my delegation fully agrees with the
precise and clear-cut statement of the Minister for External
Relations of Peru, General de la Flor Valle, who stated
before the Council on 15 March:
“The Canal Zone, which geographically, politically,
economically, and socially belongs to the Republic of
Panama, is an indissoluble part of its national territory
and its restoration is one of the inevitable and fundamental factors in the development of the Panamanian
nation and in the elimination of a focus of permanent
tension in America.” [1696th meeting, para. 31.1
My delegation also fuIly supports the just demand expressed in the statement of the Foreign Minister of Panama,
His Excellency Juan Antonio Tack [1698th meeting] that
the abrogation of the 1903 Convention and the recognition
of the effective sovereignty and total jurisdiction of Panama
over all its territory must be stated in a crystal-clear manner
during these meetings of the Council.

86. We have come here to share in a joint effort of coping
with the problems of us all. On our small planet Earth, seen
and perceived from outer space as one ship with one fate,
the fate of one nation, of one region or of one continent
affects the fate of us all. And wherever the Security Council
goes-last year to Africa, this year to Latin America and
next year probably to Asia-it helps all of us by obtaining a
better knowledge of interdependent attitudes and problems
by learning their accumulated experiences and wisdom at
first hand and by relating national, regional and world
problems.

84. There must not be any unwillingness or delay in
satisfying Panama’s demands. We hope for the sake of all of
US, that at least at this stage of history, unlike in the past,
there will not have to be more bloodshed and more lives
sacrificed as the only way to have the dictates of advancing
modern and progressive concepts prevail. Panama should
assume full responsibility for the functioning of the
tram-oceanic Canal, We have full confidence in every
nation’s ability to operate for the benefit of and in
sovereign co-operation with the whole international community whatever resources and installations are on its
territory and justly belong to it. All paternalistic claims to
the contrary were emphatically disproved in casesinvolving
other international waterwaysnot long ago. Equally, arising
from the principle of the inadmissibility of the presence of
foreign troops and basesin a country against that country’s
uncoerced will, the arrangements for the defence of any
part of the territory of the country should be freely and
solely decided by Panama. We completely agree with the
view of the Government of Panama that so-called vital
interests of national security entitle no one to infringe the
independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity of any
other country. We of course agree that it would be
preferable for all that to be done through negotiations by
the parties directly involved, provided the negotiations are
conducted in good faith and are aimed at the timely and
effective granting of Panama’s basic rights,

87. Every region, every nation, relates to all others, and
each is both teacher and student. And they all, jointly and
separately, embody and reflect in themselves all the basic
problems of the world. This is also reflected in the
tremendous activity and dynamism, in the strong urgencies
and winds of change and in the revolutionary hopes and
aspirations sweeping this restless continent with its diverse
nations and cultures, engaged in the quest after new
ways-just like any other.
88. It suffices to mention that, in the last 20 years, of 10
problems concerning Latin America that were actively
considered by the Security Council more than half ccnstituted grave and dangerous crises directly global in their
scope, often involving the fateful questions of peace and
war, survival and holocaust for us all. All of them involved
the basic rights to independence, sovereignty and nonintervention. And most of them were primarily brought
about or greatly influenced by outside factors and Powers.
In that, of course, Latin America shares the fate of all other
regions. And that is why when we consider the issues of
peace and security here we are considering the problems of
the world, since any improvement in the atmosphere
anywhere contributes to improvement elsewhere, The time
has long passed when any portion of the globe could be set

85. Our agenda calls for the “consideration of measures
for the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security in Latin America”. In adopting that
agenda we did not come here to discover Latin America.
‘bd historic continent and its ancient and incomparable
civilizations e,xisted and flourished a long time before they

8 Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(United Nations, Peaty Series, vol. 634, p, 326).

11

aside, kept isolated and fenced off from the tides of the
world on either ideological or strategic grounds.

and active coexistence is not a prescription for a social
status
quo. On the contrary, peaceful and active coexistence based on the right to self-determination and non-intervention is the only way that makes room for the playing
out of needed social processes and transformations while
denying to anyone from outside, under any pretext, the
right to intervene in an attempt to stop &em. Such
attempts more than anything else are constantly bringing
the world to the brink of confrontations and conflagrations.

89. It is therefore no accident that Yugoslavia, an independent, socialist and non-aligned country, was particularly
conscious of the role of Latin American and Caribbean
countries and peoples in world affairs, of the similarity of
some of our basic problems, fears and possibilities, and of
the need to establish direct and intensive dialogue and ties
with them, for the benefit of both. In successfully
accomplishing this we have been helped in no small
-measure by our sharing the same supreme concerns for
peace and peaceful coexistence, for national independence
and sovereignty, and for equal international, political and
economic relations in opposition to anybody’s domination
and hegemony, under any pretexts whatsoever. It is for that
reason, too, that we follow with particular sympathy the
struggle for and the progress of their continent’s political
and economic emancipation.

93. When we, as a non-aligned country, together with
other non-aligned States present here as members of the
Council or participating in its current session, listen to the
statements of the statesmen of Latin America expressing
the aspirations of their countries, we naturally feel the
highest degree of identification with them. Again, it is no
accident that the Yugoslav delegation’s viewsexpounded in
this statement are in marked consonance with the draft
resolutions suggested for our consideration. We are confident of that because all the great documents of historic
non-aligned summit conferences-the first in Belgrade in
1961; the second in Cairo in 1964; the third in Lusaka in
1970-have endeavoured to develop existing principles and
to formulate new principles and concepts to serve the
universal democratic and progressive needs of our time+
They could not but reflect the true interests and best
aspirations of mankind. Consequently, again, it is equally
natural that so many common themes, concerns and
requests run through the documents and decisions of the
non-aligned, of the main bodies of the United Nations when
upholding the interests of the overwhelming majority of
members, and especially of those meetings and organizalions of Latin-American and Caribbean countries, such as
the Special Committee on Latin American Co-ordination,
the Caribbean Free Trade Association, the Andean Group
and others, through which they work out their continent’s
emancipation. It was, then, of both symbolic and substantive significance that the last important meeting of the
non-aligned countries and the one with the largest number
of participants to advance their joint platform further-the
Conference of Foreign Ministers-was held in Georgetown,
Guyana. And there, out of 70 participating members,
observersor guest delegations, 15 were from Latin America,
five as members and i0 as observers, the largest number SO
far. We are looking forward to the possibility of their wide
participation in the forthcoming Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries to be held
in Algiers in September of this year.

90. One should at this point also mention Yugoslavs who
have emigrated to many Latin-American countries, such as
Chile and Peru-a small number of them are respected
agriculturists here in Panama-where many thousands of
them have through hard work contributed their share to the
economic, political and cultural achievements of their new
homelands, at the same time constituting bridges with the
old one.
91. The links between my country and the countries of
this region are truly well developed and very active.
Yugoslavia maintains active diplomatic relations with 18
Latin-American and Caribbean countries. It has 11 diplomatic missions in the area. President Tito was one of the
first-as early as 1963-heads of State to make a state visit
to a great number of Latin-American countries, acrossthe
whole continent. We are maintaining and developing considerable trade and economic relations with the partners of
the area. Yugoslav construction firms are involved in many
development projects all over the continent. Here in
Panama, for example, a large and internationally known
Yugoslav socialist enterprise, Energoprojekt, is helpint in
the construction of the Bayano Hydro-Electric Power PIant
and the extension of Tocumen Airport.
92. Yugoslavia, as a country born in a socialist revolution
and the national liberation war and engaged in the
construction Of our socialist society, is, of course, actively
interested in and sympathetic to the advance of progress
and progressive forces everywhere. The ending of all class,
racial, colonial, imperialist, great-Power domination, hegemony and exploitation wherever they exist is close to the
hearts of the Yugoslav peoples. Every genuine progressive
struggle and revolution, every true national liberation war,
every movement for the emancipation of nations, racesand
classeshas had and will have our support. But at the same
time we know that the struggle for progress in every
country must in the first place be the answer to its own
needs and the achievements of its own forces. That each
people and each country has the right to choose its own
way of life and its own socio-political system without
interference from outside must be an absolutely respected
principle of international life. And there is no single recipe
that everyone must use. It therefore follows that peaceful

94. Thus, against the background of my country’s heritage
and the basic principles of its foreign policy and its ties of
friendship, co-operation and solidarity with the countries of
this continent, it is inherent that the Yugoslav Government
fully supports all major requirements raised here by SO
many important statesmen, foreign ministers and representatives of the region, requirements expressive of forward.
looking recognition of the topics on our agenda and of
what the Security Council must do about them. Let me
very briefly set forth our position on the important ones.
95. First, we fully support the views and demands to the
effect that all remnants of colonialism, all colonial enclaves
and all vestiges of foreign domination-particularly
those
12

affecting the territorial integrity of States or their right to
choose their own ways of life-should once and for all be
removed from this great continent, and without delay. Of
course, the cause of emancipation and independence has
never stopped here, and in the last decade or so it has made
significant advances in and around the Caribbean and
elsewhere, though there have been some reversestoo. But a
closer look at the map of the eastern seaboard of South
America, of islands like the Malvinas and other Territories
in the Caribbean and Central America, reveals a multitude
of colonial or neo-colonial situations fully 13 years after
the adoption of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence. to Colonial Countries and Peoples. One of
the great merits of the Security Council’s coming to
Panama is that it has afforded all of us a keener realization
that the serious problems of doing away with the remnants
and strongholds of colonialism are indeed world wide and
of how much is yet to be done and fought for. It is our
opinion that a new time-table for complete decolonization
should be envisaged here, since the process of decolonization must be speeded up. For the countries of the third
world that has alwaysbeen a most cardinal concern.

significant proposal .of a charter on economic rights and
obligations of the States has therefore our full support. All
of these combined constitute the needs of the contemporary world that must be met.
99. Total opposition to any kind of colonial, neo-colonial,
imperialist or any other economic exploitation, domination
or discrimination is one of the basic principles embodied in
the core of our foreign policy, ever since the very inception
of new Yugoslavia. In the context of all this, it waslogical
for us to support the new advanced position and national
requirements of Latin American countries for the recognition of the 200.mile limit to the territorial sea, the
national sovereignty over the natural resources of the
sea-bedand the sea itself through the new concepts of the
patrimonial sea and the like.
100. Fourthly and finally, it goes without saying that
Yugoslavia, together with its non-aligned partners, is
strongly supporting the cause of peaceful and active
coexistence of all States, on the basis of sovereign equality,
independence, respect for territorial integrity, non-interference and non-intervention, We should support the
strictest observance of these basic precepts of international
behaviour here in Latin America too. These principles must
be respected in relations between all countries irrespective
of differences or similarities in their social and politid
systems and ideologies. It is on the basis of that understanding that we support the normalization of relations
between all countries in Latin America against any form of
discrimination and establishment of artificial barriers
among them, and against any attempts for isolation,
blockade or economic coercion. And that is why we hail
any advance in that direction as their contribution to the
co-operation replacing confrontation everywhere.

96. Secondly, we have already stated our views on the
historic Treaty of Tlatelolco done at that historic site in
Mexico and we join all those concerned in urging that it and
its two Additional Protocols be adhered to by all States
entitled or invited to adhere to it, without any discrimination, hoping that the successful denuclearization of that
vast region will lead in time to denuclearization’s spreading
over the entire globe. In addition, in the context of our
advocacy of general and complete disarmament, elimination
of nuclear weapons, and prohibition of all nuclear tests, we
have particularly insisted that no one has the right to
conduct nuclear tests in other people’s areas and to
contaminate their environments.

101. In order to succeed, that process must be facilitated
by everyone and hampered by no one, and it must not be
selective or discriminatory on any grounds. In our world of
growing co-operation and dbtente, the methods of blockade, isolation and pressure, always onerous, are now
anachronistic indeed. We welcome increasing normalization
of relations between hemispheric countries and Cuba and
the growing participation of Cuba in the activities of
international and regional organizations. It is high time that
the cold war isolation and blockade of Cuba were removed,

97. We also supported demands for the removal of all
foreign military bases and installations, especially in the
context of the military and strategic rivalries in the oceans
and other areas of the world. These should be regulated by
the peoples and countries who live in those areas. As we
have stated in the Yugoslav Government’s reply to the
Secretary-General concerning the strengthening of international peace and security:
“Among a large number of countries, particularly the
non-aligned, the concept of zones of peace, security and
co-operation as an alternative to regional pacts and
systems of security-in which the great Powers play a
leading role-is being developed.“9

102. The countries of Latin America have led the world in
the art of preventive diplomacy, The latter has never been
more needed than now, in our nuclear age, with the arms
race still going apace, with the successesof detente mixed
with the existence of yet unsolved dangerous hotbeds of
tensions and wars in many parts of the world.

98. Thirdly, it wasfrom Latin America that the first and
clearest formulation of the new concepts of economic
security and sovereignty over natural resources came.
Coincidentally, the non-aligned countries, from the very
beginning of their movement, have stressed that the
existence and widening of the gap between developed and
developing nations and regions is one of the most serious
dangers to world peace, as international security, disarmament, and the economic development of all countries are
interdependent. The idea of Mexican President Echeverrfa’s

103. Mr. President, this opportunity for the Security
Council to act and assistin easing and preventing potential
crises and to remain seized of a wider and updated agenda,
embodying the concerns shared by this continent and the
whole world, would fully justify--even if there were
nothing else that did-our coming here, to the proud capital
of your beautiful country.
104. I-et me thank the Government of Panama most
sincerely and once again for its kind and timely invitation,

9 SeeAl8775 of 5 October 1972.
13

its generous and warm hospitality and the magnificent
organization and arrangements for our work and life in its
friendly midst. What better place can one find to promote
the peace and security of all of us than here in the tierra de
la paz, in the country which is literally the puente del
mundo and whose official credo is ‘Fro mundi beneficio’l

Latin America-about its people, about its history and its
culture and all its magnificent ancient and modern monuments to both; about its aspirations; and also about its
problems.
110. It is those aspirations and problems that provide the
justification for our presence here today and the themes for
our meetings. Our agenda requires us to focus on them and
to consider them with wisdom and understanding. We have
listened during the past few days to a distinguished
succession of foreign ministers describing, with the eloquence we would expect from them the challenges that
they face individually and collectively. It is now the turn of
the Council
to digest and synthesize all they have said and
to consider how best their desires can be met.

105. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): My first agreeable duty is to convey to the Government and the people of
Panama the warm greetings of the Prime Minister of
Australia, who is at the same time my Minister for Foreign
Affairs and also those of the Australian people. It gives me
special pleasure to convey these greetings through you, Sir,
as President of this Council. You will recall that at our last
meeting in New York I said that I looked forward to the
opportunity of paying a proper tribute to you in your own
country in the presence of your own people, and I now
seize that opportunity to congratulate you on your
accession to the Chair and on your able guidance of the
Council’s business. Through you i must also congratulate
the Government of Panafna on the admirable arrangements
it has made for these meetings of the Council and for the
comfort and convenience of its members, And, finally, let
me offer the sincere thanks of my delegation for the very
generous hospitality that has been extended to us during
our stay in this friendly and progressive city.

111. Of all the common themes that emerged from last
week’s discussion, the difference between Panama and the
United States over the future control and administration of
the Canal and the Canal Zone clearly occupied most
attention. In so far as it is appropriate to comment on what
is essentially a bilateral dispute, I should simply like to
make three points. The first is obvious: it is that the
continued operation of the Panama Canal at the same high
level of efficiency as at present is of vital importance to
commerce, communication and security throughout the
world and is thus of paramount interest to all of US.
Secondly, there can be no disagreement that the 1903
Convention contains features that are anachronistic and
overdue for change, We can all, I am sure, fully understand
the impatience of the Government and the people of
Panama to have the agreement brought up to date to accord
with present-day realities and international concepts. Thirdly, my delegation understands that a significant measure of
agreement already exists between the two parties on the
broad outlines of the changes that are necessary, and we
believe that with goodwill on both sides there should be no
insuperable difficulty in settling the remaining differences.

106. It is, I suppose, a consequence partly of history and
partly of the great width of the Pacific Ocean that it took a
long time for Australia and Latin America to get to know
one another. I think I would be correct in saying that the
name of Simon Bolivar was familiar to very few of us
Australians before the Second World War. Our peoples lived
and moved for the most part in different worlds.
107. In the light of our presence here today it is
appropriate that I should record that the first substantial
links across the breadth of the South Pacific Ocean were
forged at the birth of the United Nations. It was at San
Francisco in 1945 that Mr. Herbert Evatt, at that time
Foreign Minister of Australia, established with the leaders
of certain Latin American delegations a community of
interest and a close identity of approach to many of the
problems involved in drawing up the Charter of the United
Nations. It was largely as a result of these friendly and
fruitful associations that Australia entered into diplomatic
relations with Brazil and Chile very shortly thereafter, with
both countries establishing diplomatic missions in Canberra
at legation level and Australia doing the same thing in Rio
de Janeiro and Santiago.

112. It is not for the Security Council to attempt to
dictate to the two parties the terms of reference under
which they are to negotiate revision of a bilateral agreement
of this kind. But the Council’s broad responsibility in
connexion with the preservation of international harmony
and international peace and security justifies it in expressing the hope that the parties will find it possible to resume
negotiations and try to reach an early settlement. In this
respect my delegation shares the views expressed in the
Council by the Foreign Ministers of Mexico [1696fjr
meetingJ and Jamaica [1698th meetingl and by the
representative of Indonesia a few moments ago.

108. Since that time these links have been reinforced by
exchanges of embassies with other Latin American States,
by the growth of trade and by the presentation of cultural
exhibitions. It has become a regular practice for an
Australian parliamentary delegation to visit Latin America
every few years. The direct air route between Australia and
Mexico serves to stimulate the flow of tourism in both
directions. And Australia, as a signatory of the Antarctic
Treaty, shares with Argentina and Chile a particular interest
in that continent and its future.

113. My Government has not yet had sufficient time to
offer considered comments on the text of the draft
resolution which was submitted in document S/10931 and
introduced at our last meeting under the SponsOmhiP Of
Panama and Peru. It might have been preferable for Council
members to, have had a little more time to consult about it
before it was actually introduced; but, in any event, I
understand that it is likely to undergo changes and so I shall
withhold comment on it in its present form.

109. In all those ways, as well as through the United
Nations, more Australians have come to know more about

114. Speakers in the debate last week referred to a
number of other matters which have in the past found their
14

118. Let me conclude where I began, with a salute to the
people of Panama for their warm and friendly hospitality,
and to the other States of Latin America. I say again that
we in Australia are conscious of their aspirations, as well as
their problems; we are also well aware that although they
have their disagreements they are linked by a strong thread
of common interest, to which there is no better testimony
than the vigorous reaffirmation of Support given in these
past few days to the Treaty of Tlatelolco calling for the
denuclearization of Latin America. Australia was happy to
support General Assembly resolution 2286 (XXII) whereby
the United Nations endorsed the Treaty, and we also
supported the Assembly’s subsequent call to those Powers
which have still not done so to sign and ratify the Treaty
and its Additional Protocols. It is an impressive symbol of
regional solidarity in the true sense, and a testament to the
basic vision, vitality and strength of purpose that characterizes the peoples of Latin America.

rightful place on the agenda of the General Assembly, and
will continue to do so, but which are being brought to the
notice of this Council in a Latin American context. One
such subject is colonialism or, to be perhaps more precise,
the remnants of colonialism in Latin America.
115. The attitude of my Government towards colonialism
in general is well known. Australia looks forward to the day
when it will no longer be an issue before the United Nations
and when we shall perhaps be left only with the problem of
disposing of those very small Territories which see no
prospect of a viable existence for themselves as independent
States, We attach particular importance to the principle of
self-determination, under which dependent peoples must
have the unqualified right to choose their own future,
whether it be full independence or some form of association with an already independent State or with another
Territory graduating towards independence. It is only right
that this same principle of self-determination should be
applicable to the residual colonial situation in Latin
America, even if it means that a dependent Territory may
not for special reasons wish at this time to accept
independent status, though the administering Power is
willing to grant it; and we are pleased to hear three
fellow-members of the Commonwealth of nations interpreting the principle in this way.

119. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next name on the list of speakers is that of the Chairman of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, Mr. Salim.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
120. Mr. SALIM (Chairman, Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples): On behalf of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, I wish to express my
sincere appreciation for the opportunity to address the
Security Council at this historic series of meetings in
Panama in my capacity as Chairman of the Special
Committee.

116. The question of sovereignty over natural resourcesis
clearly one that exercises a number of Latin American
Governments. My own Government recognizes the right of
countries, and particularly developing countries, to regulate
the exploitation of their natural resources for the benefit of
their economies-the right, in the words of the representative of Argentina [1697th meeting], freely to dispose of
their natural resources, both renewable and non-renewable,
This concept encompasses the right of countries to nationahze or expropriate property owned by foreign nationals,
and we recognize that right. However, we consider also that
there is a concomitant duty in cases of nationalization to
ensure that there is prompt, adequate and effective compensation. Where disputes arise over compensation, we
believe that these should be settled wherever possible in
national courts, If disputes cannot be settled in this way,
General Assembly resolution 1803 (XVII) provides for
recourse through arbitration or international adjudication,
and Australia believes that this is fair and reasonable. We
have aiways felt that many more problems of his kind could
be settled if greater use were made of the International
Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes.

121. I also wish to join with many distinguished and
eminent personalities who have preceded me in expressing
our deep appreciation and gratitude to the Government and
people of Panama for the warm reception and outstanding
hospitality accorded to us all.
122. At the very outset, I should like to join you,
Mr. President, and also those of my colleagues who have
preceded me in expressing our very profound sadnessat the
most untimely death of Mr. Chacko, Deputy to the
Under-Secretary-General for Political and Security Council
Affairs. Mr. Chacko was a dedicated and devoted intemational civil servant who made an outstanding contribution
to the work of our Organization. I had the privilege oh a
number of occasions to work very closely with him and
tremendously valued our invaluable association, both on an
official and on a personal level. He wasindeed a great son
of a great country and his loss is undoubtedly a blow to the
United Nations, as also to the people and Government of
India. In my capacity as Chairman of the Special Committee, I have already transmitted a message of condolences to
the Secretary-General, to the Indian delegation and also to
the bereaved family.

117. There have been various references, some of them
phrased in strong and importunate terms, to the harmful
effects of foreign investment in Latin America. This
concern is not confined to Latin America; there has been an
increasing tendency in Australia, at the level of government
and among the general public, to question the growing
dominance of investment capital from abroad in certain
important sectors of our economy. We can thus understand
the anxiety of some Latin American countries about the
possibly adverse consequences of unregulated foreign
investment on their economic and social structures. Nevertheless, Australia, like many Latin American countries, has
in the past owed a great deal of its development to
investment from overseas,and it will continue to do so.

123. It is most svmbolic that the Security Council,
charged with the primary responsibility of maintaining
15

peace and security, has decided to hold these historic
meetings in Panama, for this country’s dedication and
commitment to the ideals embodied in the Charter are very
well known in the world community. We are also all
familiar with the heroic struggles waged by the courageous
people of Latin America for justice, peace, freedom and
independence, under the leadership of such men of uncompromising conviction and dynamism as Simon Bolivar, San
Martin, Belgrano, Jua’rez, Artigas, Jose Martf, Sucre, Santa
Anna and many other champions of freedom and national
independence, which ultimately led them to assume their
rightful place among the free nations of the world. Indeed,
countries of Latin America are today among the staunchest
supporters of the peoples that, in the colonial Territories in
Africa in particular, are struggling to regain their basic
human rights and human dignity. As many of us present
here today have no doubt had the privilege of closely
working with our friends and colleagues from this hemis.
phere, I am sure that I need not at this stage elaborate
extensively on the effective contributions made by our
brothers and sisters of Latin America, particularly in the
field of decolonization. Speaking for myself, both as the
Chairman of the Special Committee on decolonization and
as the representative of an African nation which has
regained its national independence after decades of colonial
subjugation, the United Republic of Tanzania, I wish to
express my deep sense of appreciation of the active role
played by the Government and people of Panama in
support of the colonial peoples’ struggle for their liberation
and dignity. I am like many around this table, fully aware
of this country’s commitment and dedication to this noble
cause.

by Ecuador, whose representative, Mr. Sevilla-Borja, brilliantly and with utmost seriousness, presided over the
Special Mission which visited the liberated areas of Guinea
(Bissau) at the invitation of the liberation movement of the
territory in April last year, As a result of that mission the
United Nations, and indeed world public opinion at large,
are much richer in knowledge of the actual developments
and realities that prevail in the liberated areas of one of the
Portuguese dominated territories. The Special Committee
and the international community at large will continue to
rely on the active support and solidarity of the Latin
American nations for the common task geared towards the
complete liquidation of colonialism in all its forms and
manifestations. The importance of such support-moral,
diplomatic, political and other-need not be overemphasized.

124. In this connexion we were extremely moved by the
most inspiring address made by the head of Government of
Panama, General Omar Torrijos, and his tribute to that
valiant combatant of African liberation and now a martyr
of the African continent, Amflcar Cabral, the late Secretary-General of the PAIGC (Partido Africano da Independe^nciada Guint? e Cabo Verde) [1695tk meeting/. It is not
really necessary to dwell too long on what is obvious. But
allow me, Mr. President, at this point also to recollect the
constructive and dynamic role played by the delegation of
Panama, headed by you, Sir, our esteemed and old friend,
during the Council’s meetings away from Headquarters in
Addis Ababa last year, The unparalleled co-operation
extended and the attentive collaboration displayed in that
connexion by the Panamanian delegation will long be
remembered and will, I am sure, continue to serve as an
irreplaceable bridge linking our two hemispheres and as an
unshakable foundation for our solidarity with the cause of
justice and freedomand our everlasting friendship.

126. Having met away from United Nations Headquarters
in 1972 at Addis Ababa, the Security Council has immeasurably enhanced its capacity in dealing with problems
particular to that region of the world. Those meetings of
the Council have patently demonstrated the fact that, apart
from seeking solutions to specific problems, the world
community could, in the process, generate much needed
catalytic forces towards the fulfilment of the manifest
destiny of the peoples under colonial domination and alien
subjugation-the ultimate achievement of their fundamental
rights and freedoms and the consolidation of their national
independence and sovereignty. Those meetings of the
Council have given perspicuous indications and signal
encouragement to the people concerned that no elements
alien to their genuine and unmitigated inspirations could
and would stand in their way in the attainment of the goals
set forth in the Charter and in other relevant instruments of
the United Nations, including in particular the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security. I am confident that the current
series of meetings of the Council will likewise bring about
the impetus so much needed at this juncture to the final
and effective solution of many a problem confronting this
region of the world, in particular those affecting the
peoples still under colonial and alien domination-a detailed
account of which has exhaustively been given by a number
of outstanding leaders and statesmen of this hemisphere
during the current debate in the Council. For the Council
cannot afford the luxury of being an idle spectator when
the rights of people are trampled underfoot in whatever
form or guise. It has the responsibility to act and act firmly
to bring to a speedy end the anachronistic colonial situation
and its remnants in the Latin American region,

125. Indeed, the contribution of the Latin American
countries in the field of decolonization is of long standing.
For, as the representative of Argentina, Ambassador Ortiz
de ROW, rightly pointed out in his address to the Council
the other day (1697th meeting], the Latin American States
have been the staunchest supporters of the colonial people
since long before most of the present-day African States
attained their independence and indeed before the very
inception of the Special Committee on Decolonization.
Turning to more recent times, I must record with appreciation and profound admiration the outstanding role played

127. In the context of the specific mandate entrusted by
the General Assembly to the Special Committee, and having
regard to the situation of colonial and alien subjugation
which still remains in the Latin American region, it is a
matter of profound concern and deep regret that the full
implementation of General Assembly resolution 15 14 (Xu)
continues to elude a harmonious and unrestricted application, Admittedly, political and constitutional progress has
taken place in some of the territories such as the Bahamas,
which is about to emerge as a free and independent nation.
But there can be no doubt whatsoever that the POWOIS
16

concerned in most caseshave yet to implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions and decisions and that the
extent of their compliance with these decisions has, if any,
fallen far short of the purposes and objectives of the
Charter and the Declaration with respect to individual
Territories. A brief perusal of recent reports of the Special
Committee and other pertinent documentation relating to
all those Territories will serve as eloquent testimony to the
undisguised perpetuation of the classic and other forms of
colonial and alien domination over the Territories.

129. The Special Committee on Decolonization, as the
United Nations organ charged with the task of seeing the
most suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration, has been requested by the
General Assembly not only to formulate specific proposals
for the elimination of the remaining manifestations of
colonialism but also to make concrete suggestions which
would assistthe Security Council in considering appropriate
measures under the Charter with regard to developments in
colonial Territories everywhere.

128. It is the considered view of the Special Committee
that, whatever the problems confronting those Territories,
the colonial Powers must once again be made awareof the
fact that, no matter how small the size or population of the
Territories may be, no matter how geographically isolated
their location may be, the peoples of those Territories
should in no way be deprived of their inalienable right to
self-determination, freedom and independence, as provided
in the Charter and the Declaration on Decolonization.The
overriding consideration should be that any decisions
regarding the future political status of the Territories
should stem from the full and freely expressed wishes of
the people themselves. Given this very wide concurrence of
interest and concern, it should be possible to develop
agreed approaches which, when applied, could and would
help to reconcile such differences of view as have occurred
in recent years concerning political changes in some of
these Territories. I am convinced that such a result could be
achieved if the Powers concerned were to associate the
United Nations more closely with their efforts to achieve
the objectives of the Charter by agreeing to the dispatch of
visiting missions and ensuring, in an appropriate form
active participation by the United Nations in the processes
involved in the exercise by the inhabitants of their right to
self-determination, The value which the United Nations
attaches to the sending of such groups is all the more borne
out by the constructive results achieved as a result of the
dispatching in June 1972 of a Visiting Mission to Niue
under the administration of the Government of New
Zealand and the participation of the Special Committee in a
United Nations Visiting Mission in Feburary 1972 to Papua
New Guinea under Australian administration in connexion
with the elections to its Third House of Assembly. Those
missions, made possible through the co-operation of the
Governments of New Zealand and Australia, served to.
prove once again that there exists no substitute for
first-hand information on the political, economic and social
situation in the Territories and on the views, wishes and
aspirations of the people, as a means of enhancing the
capacity of the United Nations effectively to assist the
people concerned to achieve the goals established in the
Charter and the Declaration, and at the same time to ensure
that those people are sufficiently cognizant of the applicability of the Declaration and of the various possibilities
open to them within that context, But whether the
administering Powers would prefer the path of co-operation
with the United Nations or not-that is not the primary
issue.
The main and fundamental question remains the
elimination of the anachronistic colonial presence in the
region. And it is my hope that the Governments and people
of the independent States of Latin America will by their
policies and action contribute to the promotion and
attainment of this objective.

130. In conformity with that request, the Committee has
in the past submitted a ilumber of recommendations in that
regard to the General Assembly and, through it, to the
Security Council, setting out some of the fundamental
basesfor the effective solution of the acutely critical and
explosive situation obtaining in some of the remaining
colonial Territories-a situation which not only is incompatible nrith the purposes and principles of the Charter but
also constitutes an impediment to world peace and cooperation. It is in this connexion, and in the light of a
broader and more inclusive interpretation of the item
placed on the agenda of this series of Council meetings that
the universal and inherent implication of international peace
and security knows no regional or hemispheric boundaries,
that I deem it appropriate and opportune to refer merely to
some of the burning issues affecting the African Territories
which are still under colohial and alien domination.

1

131. If I speak on these matters, it is because I know that
I do so with the full knowledge of the unabashed spirit of
anti-colonialism and the resolute solidarity of our Latin
American friends and colleagues in the cause of universal
human freedoms and human dignity, as has been amply and
eloquently borne out in the various statements made in this
Council by a number of Foreign Ministers and other
representatives from this region during the past few days
and this morning, In doing so, I am guided also by the
urgent and pressing need for the mobilization of world
public opinion in support of the decolonization struggle.
For far too long the barrier of silence imposed by the world
press has remained unbreached regarding the heroic liberation struggle being waged by the colonial peoples in those
Territories and the brutal process of annihilation of those
peoples forcibly pursued by the colonialist and racialist
rkgimes of the region. It is against these backgrounds that
the General Assembly has repeatedly called upon all
competent organs of the United Nations, as well as all
eovernments. organizations and individuals, to do their
itmost to arou& world public opinion with a view to
assisting the peoples of those Territories to achieve the
goals set forth in the Charter and the Declaration,
132. I am singling out the colonial situation in southern
Africa merely because it is there that the combined forces
of colonialism and racism have decided to put up a
stubborn and desperate resistance to the tide of liberation.
It is in southern Africa that the dignity and worth of the
human person is being challenged on the basis of the
pigment of his skin. It is there that the danger looms of an
all-out conflagration with severe repercussions upon racial
harmony in the continent and beyond. Furthermore, it is in
southern Africa that the world has witnessed an incredible
display of hypocrisy and callous indifference on the part of

a number of Western Powers which, while paying lip service
to the cause of freedom, human dignity and racial equality,
actually connive and collaborate with the racist and
colonialist forces for the maintenance of the status quo in
order to derive short-term economic advantages at the altar
of the African peoples’ humanity.

although I am perfectly aware that the agenda of this series
of meetings relates to the Latin American region. This is
because colonialism particularly in southern Africa, cons&
tutes a serious threat to international peace and security,
Such a threat knows no hemispherical boundary, and thus
it is very pertinent that when this Council considers the
question of the maintenance of peace and security in the
Latin American region it should bear in mind that
particular threat which looms large over the Africsn
continent and whose repercussions will undoubtedly affect
this region as well.

133. I need not give you a long resume of the struggle of
the people of Angola, Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau)
against the barbaric wars unleashed against them by the
r&ime in Lisbon. The head of the Government of Panama
has, by his reference to Amflcar Cabral, in a way summed
up the situation for this Council. Cabral was murdered in
the vain attempt to stifle the liberation process of the
people of Guinea (Bissau) and Cape Verde. Before him, the
leader of the Mozambique Liberation Front, Eduardo
Mondlane, was equally brutally assassinated. But between
those two murders, and indeed before and after them, there
have been murders of Africans-women and children
alike-perpetrated by the fascist Portuguese authorities with
weapons and ammunition faithfully supplied by some of
Portugal’s allies in NATO. The question, then, is how long
the international community can remain complacent with
regard to the monstrosities committed by that regime. In
saying this I am fulJy conscious of the fact that, irrespective
of acts of omission or commission by certain Member
States, the liberation struggle will continue to forge ahead.
However, I do believe that, as we preach the principle of
the indivisibility of freedom, we owe it to our own moral
conscience to do everything in our power to bring the
Portuguese colonialist barbarism to a speedy end. The
Special Committee hopes that every State will play its part
in the accomplishment of that goal. Addressing the Council
here in Latin America, I must express my confidence that
the countries of Latin America, three of whose representatives-Chile, Trinidad and Tobago, and Venezuela-serve the
Special Committee with devotion and distinction, will spare
no effort in supporting the struggle of the peoples under
Portuguese domination to regain their freedom and independence, without enduring further untold sacrifices, both
human and material.

136. Furthermore, it was only logical that I should refer
to the questions of decolonization outside of the region
with which the Council is currently directly concerned, as
those are precisely the manifestations of coIonialism whose
underlying elements cruelly and repulsively confront this
hemisphere and are encompassed in the common goal of
the colonizers and the metropolitan Powers-namely, the
perpetuation of dominance of power by the strong over the
weak, as was so rightly pointed out by the head of the
Government of Panama in his opening remarks at the
opening meeting. We can no longer tolerate, anywhere in
the world, this abhorrent violation of the fundamental
rights of the indigenous populations; an immediate end
must be put to the plundering of their natural and human
resources and their forcible political and cultural subjugation. The situation calls for immediate action. It does not
allow for compromise, because, as the President of Tanzania once said, compromise on a matter of human rights is a
denial of those rights, In President Nyerere’s own words:
“There can be no peace without justice; the greater the
movement for justice, the greater the chances of peace”.
137. The United Nations is confronted by a grave
challenge, a challenge to the principles which it is pledged
to uphold. It must meet this challenge if it is to serve
effectively the purposes to which it is dedicated. The role
to be played by the Security Council in that regard is a
crucial one. The inability to achieve any appreciable
progress in the past several years towards the final goal of
the Declaration has already been a source of grave
disappointment and continuing frustration. The greatest
danger which confronts the Organization at the present
time is, I believe, that the present impasse should lead to
disillusion and even scepticism about the willingness of the
international community to help the peoples under colonid
and alien domination in their just struggle to exercise their
right to self-determination and independence.

134. The United Nations must also assume its responsibilities and effectively confront the challenge imposed on it
by the regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury with regard to the
continuing illegal occupation of Namibia and the perpetuation of the illegal white minority rule in Southern Rhodesia
(Zimbabwe). The Governments and peoples of the world
and more particularly those which cherish the ideals of
freedom and human dignity have the responsibility of
working energetically for the implementation of the Organization’s decisions and resolutions, including the granting of
moral, political and material assistance to the national
liberation movements which have been forced to take up
arms to free themselves from tyranny and present-day
slavery. The Security Council, responsible as it is for the
maintenance of international peace and security, not only
must adopt resolutions aimed at ending colonialism in all its
forms and manifestations but must, above all, take steps to
ensure their implementation and give maximum encouragement to those who do so.

138. I should like to conclude by adapting the words used
by the head of Government of Panama when he addressed
the Council the other day and state in all solemnity that
every hour that colonialism in whatever form or manifestation, is allowed to prevail in any part of our planet
constitutes 60 minutes of shame and scandal for the
international community.
139. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish]: The
last name on my list of speakers for this morning is that of
the representative of Guatemala, Mr. Luis Aycinena, whom
I invite to take a place at the Council table in order to make
a statement in exercise of his right of reply.

135. I make absolutely no apoligies for making some
references to the explosive situation in southern Africa
18

out a messagefrom President Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia,
to the President of the Security Council. It reads as follows:

140, Mr. AYCINENA (Guatemala) (interpretation from
Spanish): I must say that I am deeply sorry to find myself
once again constrained to distract the attention of the
Security Council, perhaps drawing away energies that
should be turned to other subjects, but I will be very brief.

“On the occasion of the holding of the first Security
Council meetings on Latin American soil, in Panama City,
I take this opportunity to transmit to you the best wishes
for successfulwork of the present meetings.

141. The position of Guatemala was clearly set forth in
the statement I made on Friday afteroon [1698th meetilrgl, and I would refer my listeners to that statement. But
this morning the representative of Trinidad and Tobago,
with a respect and courtesy for which I am grateful, again
referred to the problem of Belize, Yet I am convinced that
these interventions, far from seeking concord and peace,
wouId almost seem to be seeking conflict or direct
confrontation. Whether what is done is done in the belief
that it renders the people of Belize a service, I do not know;
but what is clear to me is that they are being done a
positive disservice. These are provocative attitudes regarding
a very painful situation for us, involving a long-standing
quest for justice, and they imply utter contempt for the
rights of the people of my country, which is something my
Government cannot condone.

“Yugoslavia attaches great importance to the activities
of the Council in matters of strengthening international
peace and security all over the world. I feel it to be most
beneficial for the Council to meet periodically away from
United Nations Headquarters. The usefulness of this was
confirmed by the successfulmeetings in Addis Ababa last
year.
“The countries of Latin America have made an important contribution to United Nations activities in
various fields. Therefore I am confident that the Security
Council, through decisions to be adopted at its meetings
in Panama City, will support the just aspirations of the
countries of Latin America in their search for general
development based on full respect for the principles of
self-determination, sovereignty, non-interference, and
international co-operation on an equal footing, I wish to
express my deep appreciation to the Government of
Panama for its fivitful initiative and my full confidence
that the present meetings of the Council will contribute
to the strengthening of international peace and security,”

142. May I conclude by saying that in the meantime
Guatemala categorically reaffirms its sovereign rights over
the Territory of Belize, inalienable and imprescriptible as
those rights are.
143. The PRESIDENT (interpretation ffom Spanish):
Before adjourning this meeting, I have the honour to read

The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m

19

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the world.
Consult your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les Iibrairies
et les agences
ddpoaitaires
du mondc entiec. Informez-vous
auprea de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAIC TIOJIYYMTL

MBAAHIM

OPTAHABA~HR

OBLEAHHEHHLIX

HAII;MH

MD~~WR
Oprawusanuu
06zegaHeanhm
Haqnl
MO)~(HO ~ynmz
a KHUXW~~X Mara3HHaX w &rewrcTaax
no acex patioaax
Mupa. HaaoJmTe
cnpasKw 06 H3AaWWSIX
sameM KHUH(HOM hmmsaae
unu mima-re
no a~peoy : Opranasaqnff
06zegaHeHHbrX
HaqHk
CeKqw~ no npoRaHte H~A&HUR, Hbm-Hopn
unu XCeHeaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U,S. 2.00

(or equivalent

NACIONES

a

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones

in other

currencies)

73.82076~April

1976-

1,925
