United Nations

A/RES/68/150

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 February 2014

Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 67 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2013
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/68/454)]

68/150. Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 3
and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16
of 16 April 2004 4 and 2005/5 of 14 April 2005 5 and relevant Human Rights Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of 28 March 2008, 6 18/15 of 29 September
2011 7 and 21/33 of 28 September 2012, 8 as well as General Assembly resolutions
60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006, 62/142 of 18 December
2007, 63/162 of 18 December 2008, 64/147 of 18 December 2009, 65/199 of
21 December 2010, 66/143 of 19 December 2011 and 67/154 of 20 December 2012
on this issue and resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December
2007, 63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December 2009, 65/240 of
24 December 2010, 66/144 of 19 December 2011 and 67/155 of 20 December 2012,
entitled “Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and
follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
7
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
8
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
2

13-44845

*1344845*

Please recycle

Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/68/150

Acknowledging other important initiatives within the General Assembly aimed
at raising awareness about the suffering of victims of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including in the historical perspective, in
particular regarding commemoration of the victims of the transatlantic slave trade,
Recalling the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and the Judgement of the
Tribunal, which recognized as criminal, inter alia, the SS organization and all its
integral parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially accepted members
implicated in or with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes
against humanity connected with the Second World War, as well as other relevant
provisions of the Charter and the Judgement,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 9 in
particular paragraph 2 of the Declaration and paragraph 86 of the Programme of
Action, as well as the relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference, of 24 April 2009, 10 in particular paragraphs 11 and 54,
Alarmed, in this regard, at the spread in many parts of the world of various
extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and
skinhead groups, as well as similar extremist ideological movements,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism
incited by violent nationalism, racism, xenophobia and related intolerance,
1.
Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration 9 and of the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference, 10 in which States condemned
the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and violent nationalist
ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
2.
Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared
in accordance with the request contained in General Assembly resolution 67/154; 11
3.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for her commitment to maintaining the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance as one of the priority activities of
her Office, and welcomes in this regard the launch by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights of the database on practical means to
combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
4.
Expresses deep concern about the glorification, in any form, of the Nazi
movement, neo-Nazism and former members of the Waffen SS organization,
including by erecting monuments and memorials and holding public demonstrations
in the na me o f the glo rifica tio n o f the N a z i pa st, the N a zi mo ve me nt a n d
ne o -Nazism, as well as by declaring or attempting to declare such members and
those who fought against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi
movement participants in national liberation movements;

_______________
9

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
11
A/68/329.
10

2/6

Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/68/150

5.
Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur that “any
commemorative celebration of the Nazi Waffen SS organization and its crimes
against humanity, whether official or non-official, should be prohibited by States”; 12
6.
Expresses concern at recurring attempts to desecrate or demolish
monuments erected in remembrance of those who fought against Nazism during the
Second World War, as well as to unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such
persons, and in this regard urges States to fully comply with their relevant
obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949; 13
7.
Notes with concern the increase in the number of racist incidents
worldwide, including the rise of skinhead groups, which have been responsible for
many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic violence
targeting, inter alia, persons belonging to national, ethnic, religious or linguistic
minorities;
8.
Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified to fall within the scope of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,3
that they may not be justified as exercises of the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and of association as well as the rights to freedom of opinion and
expression, and that they may fall within the scope of article 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 2 and may legitimately be restricted, as set
out in articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Covenant;
9.
Expresses deep concern at attempts at commercial advertising aimed at
exploiting the sufferings of the victims of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed during the Second World War by the Nazi regime;
10. Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of
the countless victims of crimes against humanity committed in the Second World
War, in particular those committed by the SS organization and by those who fought
against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and may
negatively influence children and young people, and that failure by States to
effectively address such practices is incompatible with the obligations of States
Members of the United Nations under its Charter and is incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Organization;
11. Also stresses that such practices fuel contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the
spread and multiplication of various extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for
increased vigilance;
12. Expresses concern at the human rights and democratic challenges posed
by all extremist political parties, movements and groups;
13. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to put an end to the
practices described above, and calls upon States to take more effective measures in
accordance with international human rights law to combat those phenomena and the
extremist movements, which pose a real threat to democratic values;

_______________
12
13

Ibid., para. 137.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.

3/6

A/RES/68/150

Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

14. Encourages States to adopt further measures to provide training to the
police and other law enforcement bodies on the ideologies of extremist political
parties, movements and groups whose advocacy constitutes incitement to racist and
xenophobic violence, to strengthen their capacity to address racist and xenophobic
crimes, to fulfil their responsibility of bringing to justice the perpetrators of such
crimes and to combat impunity;
15. Notes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur regarding the
responsibility of political leaders and parties in relation to messages that incite
racial discrimination or xenophobia;
16. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into
national criminal law a provision according to which committing an offence with
racist or xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an aggravating circumstance,
allowing for enhanced penalties, and encourages those States whose legislation does
not contain such provisions to consider that recommendation;
17. Underlines that the roots of extremism are multifaceted and must be
addressed through adequate measures such as education, awareness-raising and the
promotion of dialogue, and in this regard recommends the increase of measures to
raise awareness among young people of the dangers of the ideologies and activities
of extremist political parties, movements and groups;
18. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of
education, including human rights education, as a complement to legislative
measures, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;
19. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, in which he emphasized the
importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and human suffering
which arose out of the adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism;
20. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed
at bringing communities together and providing them with space for genuine
dialogue, such as round tables, working groups and seminars, including training
seminars for State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising
activities, especially those initiated by civil society representatives, which require
continued State support;
21. Calls upon States to continue to invest in education, in both conventional
and non-conventional curricula, inter alia, in order to transform attitudes and correct
ideas of racial hierarchies and superiority promoted by extremist political parties,
movements and groups and counter their negative influence;
22. Underlines the potentially positive role that relevant United Nations
entities and programmes, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
23. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties
to that instrument condemn all propaganda and all organizations that are based on
ideas or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or
ethnic origin, or that attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination
in any form, and undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to
eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, to that end, with due
regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1
and the rights expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention, inter alia:

4/6

Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/68/150

(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas
based on racial superiority or hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well
as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons
of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and organized and all
other propaganda activities, that promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall
recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable
by law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or
local, to promote or incite racial discrimination;
24. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial
superiority or hatred, or incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of
violence or incitement to such acts, shall be declared offences punishable by law, in
accordance with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions
are consistent with freedom of opinion and expression;
25. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression, as well as full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information, including through the Internet, can play in combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
26. Expresses concern about the use of the Internet to propagate racism,
racial hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerance, and in this
regard calls upon States parties to the Covenant to implement fully articles 19 and
20 thereof, which guarantee the right to freedom of expression and outline the
grounds on which the exercise of this right can be legitimately restricted;
27. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and
communications technologies, including the Internet, to contribute to the fight
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
28. Also recognizes the positive role that the media can play in combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, promoting a
culture of tolerance and representing the diversity of a multicultural society;
29. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the
Convention to give serious consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a
matter of priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur;
30. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and
international levels with the aim of countering all manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular regarding issues
raised in the present resolution;
31. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and
international and regional human rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively
all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, as well as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including
neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements
that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;

5/6

Combating glorification of Nazism and other practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/68/150

32. Encourages States parties to the Convention to ensure that their
legislation incorporates the provisions of the Convention, including those of
article 4;
33. Encourages States to adopt the legislation necessary to combat racism
while ensuring that the definition of racial discrimination set out therein complies
with article 1 of the Convention;
34. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a
view to countering extremist political parties, movements and groups, including
neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and similar extremist ideological movements should
be in conformity with the relevant international human rights norms, in particular
articles 4 and 5 of the Convention and articles 19 to 22 of the Covenant;
35. Also recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its
resolution 2005/5,5 that the Special Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue,
make relevant recommendations in his future reports and seek and take into account
in this regard the views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
36. Encourages States to consider including in their reports for the universal
periodic review and to treaty bodies information on the steps taken to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including with the
aim of implementing the provisions of the present resolution;
37. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the
General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session and to the Human Rights Council at its
twenty-sixth session, reports on the implementation of the present resolution, in
particular regarding paragraphs 4 to 6, 8 to 10, 19 and 20 above, based on the views
collected in accordance with the request of the Commission, as recalled in
paragraph 35 above;
38. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that have provided
information to the Special Rapporteur in the course of the preparation of his reports
to the General Assembly, and notes the increase in such contributions received from
States;
39. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences
and best practices in the fight against extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other extremist ideological
movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
40. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to
cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in
paragraph 35 above;
41. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant
actors to disseminate, as widely as possible, information regarding the contents of
and the principles outlined in the present resolution, including through the media,
but not limited to it;
42.

Decides to remain seized of the issue.
70th plenary meeting
18 December 2013

6/6
