V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Nations system, regional and international organizations
and other intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations, as well as international financial
institutions, to provide assistance bilaterally and multilaterally, as appropriate, to Djibouti in order to enable it to
cope with its difficult economic situation and to implement its development strategies, including the programme
of assistance that was presented at the round-table of
development partners convened by the Government of
Djibouti in November 1983;
5. Appeals to the international community to provide
financial, material and technical assistance, as a matter of
urgency, to alleviate the sufferings of the population affected by drought and for the implementation of the droughtrelated projects and programmes;
6. Requests the appropriate specialized agencies and
other organizations of the United Nations system to maintain and increase their current and future programmes of
assistance to Djibouti, to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in organizing an effective international programme of assistance and to report periodically to him on
the steps they have taken and the resources they have
made available to help that country;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Djibouti;
(b) To keep the situation in Djibouti under constant
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and the international financial institutions
concerned, and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of 1985, of the current status of the special programme of economic assistance for
Djibouti;
(c) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of Djibouti and in organizing and implementing the
special programme of economic assistance for that country
in time for the matter to be considered by the General
Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/201. Assistance to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
5 of 17 May 1984 on emergency assistance to the drought
victims in Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation the appeals made by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
for emergency assistance to Ethiopia,
Having heard the statement made by the Commissioner
for Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia on 2 November
1984 115 concerning the critical food situation and the sad
state of affairs that prevails in the disaster-stricken areas of
Ethiopia,
Alarmed by the catastrophic effects of the serious and
persistent drought that poses imminent danger to the survival of millions of drought victims,
115 See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thlr/1•-ninth Sesswn,
Second Commillee, 32nd meeting, paras. 39-42
•
116 A/39/572.
117
See Official Records of 1he General A 1semhl1. l'hlr/v-mnth Sfssum. Plenary Meetings. 21 st meeting, paras 48-104
•

153

Deeply disturbed by the grave food situation and the
widespread and deadly famine that prevails in the disasterstricken areas,
Convinced that long-term solutions are imperative in
order to avoid the recurrence of a tragic human drama
such as the one which is currently unfolding in the disaster-stricken areas,
I. Commends the generous response of the international community to the tragic situation in Ethiopia;
2. Expresses its deep gratitude to all States, governmental and non-governmental organizations and individuals that have provided emergency humanitarian assistance to Ethiopia;
3. Urges all Member States, organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to assist the Government
of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide for the emergency
needs of the drought victims and to deal with the problem
of medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts:
(a) To mobilize resources for relief and rehabilitation,
including assistance for the victims of drought who wish to
resettle in areas less prone to drought;
(b) To apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its
first regular session of 1985, of the situation of the drought
victims and the response- of the international community
to their plight.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December I 984

39/202. Economic and financial assistance to Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to Guinea, 116
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/
59 of 26 July 1984, in which the Council confirmed the
urgent need for international action to assist the Government of Guinea in its efforts to bring about national reconstruction, rehabilitation and development,
Noting the statement made by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guinea on 4 October I 984, 117 in which he described his country's serious socio-economic and financial
problems,
Noting with concern the grave balance-of-payments
problems facing Guinea,
Deeply concerned by the weakness and underdevelopment of Guinea's economic and social infrastructure,
which constitutes a major obstacle to the country's economic development and to raising the living standard of its
population,
Taking note, in this context, of the results of the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, in
particular the Substantial New Programme of Action for
the 1980s for the Least Developed Countries, 118
Recalling that Guinea is one of the least developed
countries,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General:
118 Report of the Unued Natwns Conference on the Least D1•1·eloped
Counrrw,. Pans, 1-14 S1•ptemher 19/i/ (llnited Nations publication. Sales
No. E 82 I 8). pan one. secl. A
