S/PV.8481

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8481

st meeting
Monday, 11 March 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Gueguen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Tshabalala
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2019/193)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-06656 (E)
*1906656*

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the loss
of Ethiopian Airlines flight ET-302
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the members of the Security Council, I would like
to express our deep sorrow at learning that so many
lost their lives yesterday in the tragic air incident in
Ethiopia. The passengers lost hailed from more than
35 nations, and many were part of the United Nations
family. The members of the Council express their
profound sympathy and condolences to the families
and loved ones of the passengers and crew who lost
their lives.
I ask all those present to stand and join me in a
moment of silence in memory of those who perished.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2019/193)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Afghanistan to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, National Security Adviser
of Afghanistan.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; and Ms. Storai Tapesh, Deputy
Executive Director of the Afghan Women’s Network.
Ms. Tapesh is joining via video-teleconference
from Kabul.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/24

begin

its

11/03/2019

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/193, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: Before I begin my remarks on
Afghanistan, may I be allowed to express my sincere
condolences and sympathy in connection with the
loss of so many lives, including our United Nations
colleagues, in the Ethiopian Airlines accident.
I turn now to the issue of Afghanistan. The last
three months have seen significant developments in the
areas of both peace and elections.
First, on peace, further efforts have been made
to bring an end to the decades-long conflict in
Afghanistan, yielding tangible progress. The United
States and the Taliban have continued to engage in
intensive direct talks; a number of countries have
extended support to facilitate those talks. At the meeting
of the International Contact Group, held in London in
late January, participants welcomed the ongoing United
States-Taliban talks and expressed hope that they
would enable direct talks to take place between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. In early
February, there was a meeting between some Afghan
representatives and the Taliban in Moscow that provided
an opportunity for them to have a better understanding
of each other’s views and thinking on peace. Despite
such engagements, the Taliban has not yet accepted to
engage in direct talks with the Government. I stress the
imperative need for the Taliban to talk directly with
the Government.
Amid these efforts for peace, we must recognize
that all international efforts, including regional
efforts, need to come together to support an Afghanled and Afghan-owned peace process. In order for
such a process of peace and the implementation of
an agreement to be sustainable, the support and
cooperation of the international community, particularly
regional countries, are essential. The United Nations
welcomes various efforts and initiatives undertaken by
countries concerned, but stresses the need for all those
constructive efforts to be in concert and aligned in
support of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace efforts,
as agreed in Geneva last November. In this context, we
understand that the Government of Afghanistan has
proposed to hold the third meeting of the Kabul process
on peace.
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

In working towards peace, we must acknowledge
the profound and legitimate concerns of many citizens
regarding possible compromises on the gains made
over the past 18 years in the name of peace. The United
Nations shares many of these concerns, particularly
regarding the fate of women’s rights, freedom of
expression, including media rights, and space for civil
society to function effectively, all of which must be
protected under a peace agreement. To address these
effectively, the peace process must be inclusive of the
meaningful participation of groups representing all
segments of Afghanistan’s diverse society including
women, youth, ulemas and community and political
leaders. We need to think also of the rights of the
victims and the issues of transitional justice.
In particular, we must strongly support and
advocate for the perspectives of Afghan women, who
are expressing a clear determination to safeguard their
hard-won civil, political and economic rights under
any peace agreement. I commend the Government
of Afghanistan for its commitment to women’s
participation. Building on these steps, we must
ensure that women’s representation is strengthened
and diversified. Equally, there is a need to engage
Afghanistan’s younger generation. Afghan youth stand
to gain the most from the tangible benefits of peace:
enhanced security, freedom of movement and increased
education and employment opportunities.
Afghanistan is set to hold a presidential election
this year. We expect this to be a critical step forward in
further consolidating its representative political system.
The holding of the presidential election on schedule,
however, will be very challenging. The widespread
irregularities during last October’s parliamentary
elections undermined confidence in the electoral
management bodies. These problems continued
throughout the counting process, and the complete
finalization of election results remains delayed for
several months. As these problems mounted, political
stakeholders expressed increasing scepticism about the
ability of the Independent Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission to deliver a credible
and timely presidential election.
In response to these concerns, the Election Law was
amended by a presidential decree, in consultation with
stakeholders, and a selection process of new members
and heads of secretariats for the two commissions was
held in early March, involving civil society, political
parties and the presidential candidates. The two

S/PV. 8481

commissions must now work to rebuild public trust
in the country’s electoral processes. The integrity and
collegiality of the two bodies are critical, as is the
support of all Government institutions, most notably
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
All candidates and political actors need to commit to
respecting the independence of the two commissions
so as to enable them to work without any interference.
The United Nations is prepared to work closely with the
newly composed commissions.
With less than five months remaining until
election day, the technical and political challenges are
daunting. The new commissioners will need to take
urgent decisions on the implementation of the amended
Election Law, which provides for reforms, including the
use of biometric technology and change in the electoral
system. In addition to the presidential election, the law
provides for the conduct of three additional elections:
provincial council elections, district council elections,
and parliamentary elections for the province of Ghazni.
The commissioners will need to assess whether the
current electoral calendar will permit the holding of
four simultaneous elections in July. It will likely be a
stark choice — either to hold the presidential election
on schedule or to implement all that are stipulated in
the amended Election Law, knowing that this may
entail a significant postponement of the presidential
election. The United Nations will continue to work
with Afghan stakeholders to help them ensure that the
electoral process is conducted in a credible, transparent
and inclusive manner. It is important, however, that
Afghan institutions and stakeholders fully realize that
the ultimate responsibility and ownership for elections
rests with the people of Afghanistan.
All this is taking place in the context of a war
that continues to inflict a devastating toll on civilians.
According to statistics provided by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, 2018 was the
deadliest year on record for the Afghan conflict, with
a total of 10,993 civilian casualties, including 3,804
civilians killed. In particular, the deliberate targeting of
civilians is a war crime. The casualties caused by such
attacks of Da’esh or the Islamic State-Khorasan Province
more than doubled from 2017 to 2018, accounting for
over 50 per cent of attributed attacks targeting civilians
in 2018. Also alarming is the impact of the conflict
on Afghan children. Last year, the number of children
killed in the conflict reached a record high, with over
900 child deaths verified and thousands more injured,

19-066563/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

including by explosive remnants of war. They also
remain vulnerable to recruitment and use by parties to
the conflict.
But even these figures do not capture the full
human cost of the war. We must not forget the harsh
realities of life for too many Afghan citizens. Today,
over half the population in the country lives under the
poverty line; the proportion increased from 37 per cent
in 2014 to 54 per cent in 2018. Over the past year, severe
drought has worsened living conditions still further;
13.5 million people in the country are severely food
insecure. This means that they survive on less than
one meal a day. The Government of Afghanistan, in
partnership with the United Nations family, is doing
what it can to address these urgent needs. Last year, the
United Nations issued its humanitarian response plan
which was 78 per cent funded, and this year we require
$612 million. While I wish to reiterate my gratitude
to all donors that contributed generously last year,
the response this year started very slowly; it currently
stands at 4 per cent funded. I hope that the Security
Council will also call on the international community
to boost funding to address this critical situation
without delay.
The issue of narcotics is another major
socioeconomic challenge. Despite a decrease in opium
production in 2018, the significant levels of opium
poppy cultivation and illicit trafficking in opiates
remain a threat to stability in the country. While a
drug-use survey has not been undertaken in the country
for a number of years, indications are that an estimated
10 per cent of the adult population uses narcotics
regularly. In order to tackle that complex issue, the
whole demand and supply chain needs to be addressed
as a responsibility shared among Afghanistan, its
neighbours and the international community.
Looking forward, Afghanistan and its international
partners have begun exploring potential opportunities
to expand development assistance in a post-settlement
context. In order to contribute to sustainable peace,
such assistance must build on existing achievements
and deliver tangible benefits to those most in need.
As the political situation evolves, the United Nations
family remains committed to supporting the country’s
humanitarian and development. goals.
Now is the moment for the international community
to look at Afghanistan with renewed focus and reassess
how we could contribute to the efforts towards peace
4/24

11/03/2019

and work with the people and the Government of
Afghanistan to improve socioeconomic conditions
and promote further development. This year is likely
to bring both numerous challenges and unprecedented
opportunities. Addressing the challenges and taking
advantage of the opportunities will require the
concerted efforts of the international community, with
Afghanistan in the lead.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Tapesh.
Ms. Tapesh: It is a great honour to address
the Security Council on behalf of the Afghan
Women’s Network.
We, the women of Afghanistan, have cautious
optimism for peace. Yet we are concerned more than
ever that women’s civil rights will be compromised in
the name of peace. An inclusive approach to peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan will ensure that the voices
of all Afghans, especially women, are included and that
the benefits of peace are shared. Any agreement related
to peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan that fails
to meaningfully engage women and gender-equality
experts or fails to promote and protect the rights of
women and reflect the realities of women will not
result in peace for women. Rather, it will serve to bring
Afghanistan back to the social and political exclusion
that women were once subjected to and deepen the
drivers of conflict.
Today in Afghanistan, women play a significant
role in every sector in the country, including
decision-making. In the parliamentary elections in
October 2018, men and women from diverse areas
of Afghanistan chose to vote for women candidates,
dispelling myths concerning women’s participation and
demonstrating that many of them have turned towards
promoting women’s rights. The Afghan Women’s
Network led a series of consultations in 2018 involving
women and women’s organizations across the entire
country. Through this statement the Afghan Women’s
Network shares the voices of those women from all 34
provinces of Afghanistan.
First, the women of Afghanistan call for their
full, equal and meaningful representation in peace
and reconciliation processes relating to Afghanistan.
Women are best placed to raise the concerns and
priorities of women, as well as to find broad-based
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

solutions that benefit all of society. Afghan women
emphasize the need for a transparent and accountable
peace process that protects and promotes women’s
human rights, supports justice for victims of violence
and war and prevents a culture of impunity.
Secondly, we see the momentum towards a ceasefire
as critical. But women must be included in the securitysector reform, and gender advisers must be included
in all stages of a ceasefire. An inclusive process will
ensure that a ceasefire includes gender-awareness
provisions, identifies violations related to gender-based
violence and provides arrangements for women to
monitor compliance with the ceasefire agreement.
Thirdly, the Constitution provides women and
men with equal rights in line with sharia and Islamic
principles. The Constitution was agreed upon by women
and men across Afghanistan at the Constitutional Loya
Jirga. It is imperative that those voices be respected and
that the gender-equality provisions of the Constitution
be maintained.
Lastly, violence against women and girls remains a
serious concern in Afghanistan. Despite the introduction
of new laws, there remain persistent obstacles to the
implementation of the law, with women and girls as
well as the broader community not being fully aware of
their rights and protections under the law. As we look
forward, we must ensure that all conflict-resolution
processes, including the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme, equally involve women
as both participants and beneficiaries. They must also
improve protection and ensure access to justice for all.
Let me conclude by stressing what practice and
evidence has taught us. An inclusive approach to
peace and reconciliation that promotes and protects
the rights of women is critical for the effectiveness and
sustainability of peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Tapesh for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Mohib (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to express the deepest condolences of the people
and the Government of Afghanistan over the recent
tragic crash of the Ethiopian airliner, which resulted in
many lives lost, including United Nations personnel.

S/PV. 8481

I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening today’s meeting on the situation in
Afghanistan. It is an honour for me to represent my
country today in delivering my first address to the
Security Council. I would like to congratulate France
on assuming the presidency of the Council, as well
as to thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his report (S/2019/193). We also recognize his Special
Representative, Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his leadership of the work of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. I would also like to recognize Ms. Storai
Tapesh, Deputy Executive Director of the Afghan
Women’s Network, who joins us today via videoteleconference.
As we approach the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) this week, I would like to acknowledge
the United Nations strategic engagement and support
for Afghanistan’s stability. The United Nations has a
supportive role to play in working with the Afghan
Government and people to bring about peace. Today I
will share with members an update on where we are
and the road ahead towards peace. To understand our
approach to peace, the Council first has to understand
the many new realities in Afghanistan today.
First of all, Afghanistan has undergone an era of
social transformation. Seventy-five per cent of our
population is under the age of 35, has grown up in a
democracy and has a different set of expectations
and principles than their parents’ and grandparents’
generations. Our generation was born in war and grew
up in conflict or exile. We yearn for peace and wish for
peace to complement what we have built over the past
18 years, not reverse it. We must safeguard our future.
Millions of Afghans have benefited from the best
of national and international education opportunities,
and members of this generation are now in positions
of leadership and senior management. We have also
experienced the transformation of our female citizens
from victims of institutionalized discrimination under
the Taliban regime to active, empowered, engaged
contributors to all spheres of society and politics.
Women also collectively play a vital role in our
economic growth and national security. I would like
to congratulate my colleague Ambassador Adela Raz
on presenting her credentials last week to SecretaryGeneral Guterres and becoming the first Afghan
women to hold that post. Ambassador Raz, as a child,
studied in a secret school during the Taliban regime.

19-066565/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

She symbolizes the transformation that women and
girls have fought to achieve over the past 18 years.
Against the backdrop of those two social
transformations, President Ghani introduced the
decade of transformation when he took office in
2014 — a comprehensive, whole-of-Government
reform agenda to implement the rule of law, tackle
corruption systemically, implement more efficient
and effective national development programmes and
increase economic growth and revenue collection. We
are moving the country towards self-reliance. It is a
reform package designed to meet the demands of the
new generation of Afghans for fair, clean and meritbased governance that is focused on the needs of the
citizen, not the pockets of the political elite.
Five years into the decade of transformation, we
have accomplished a tremendous amount, despite the
competing priorities of war, elections and drought, as
well as considerable resistance from those who are
benefiting from corrupt systems. To name just a few
highlights, last year the indicators of the World Bank’s
Doing Business 2018 report recognized Afghanistan as
the top reforming country for improving the business
climate. Our access to information law was recognized
as the best in the world. The Government increased
domestic revenue by 91 per cent from 2014 to 2018 and
met every benchmark of the International Monetary
Fund during the same period. We have set a new tone of
intolerance towards corruption. Since inaugurating our
national strategy to counter corruption in 2017, we have
already completed well over half of the goals and are
now working towards a new set of benchmarks that will
expose and address the next layer of problems in this
long-term process of rooting out corruption.
We have invested tremendously in efforts to connect
our region through trade and by addressing regional
energy needs. Our farmers, producers, entrepreneurs,
businessmen and businesswomen are now able to
look outwards to export their products via the Lapis
Lazuli Corridor to Europe, the Chabahar port in Iran
to India and air corridors to Turkey, Saudi Arabia,
China and beyond. We exported nearly $1 billion-worth
of products last year. We are moving from an aid to a
trade economy.
The result of the past five years is that we have laid
a legal foundation for a modern economy, society and
State. We have also changed the tone of governance in
Afghanistan. We have achieved all this thanks to the
6/24

11/03/2019

creativity, perseverance and bravery of the Afghan
people and the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. We are grateful to the international community
for the support and assistance they have provided.
Continuing support for the decade of transformation
will allow us to see the fruits of our sacrifices in
both blood and treasure, but as Afghans we have the
primary responsibility. We own the problems, and we
are implementing solutions. The past five years have
delivered us to the doorstep of peace. The country, and
indeed the world, are abuzz with both the excitement
of its possibilities and the concerns and uncertainties
that surround it. Two years ago, peace was not part of
the vocabulary when we spoke of Afghanistan. The
National Unity Government made it a priority and
took risks for peace, and today it is something we are
working towards.
Let me give some insight as to where we stand with
regard to peace today and where we are heading. After
President Ghani’s unconditional peace talks offer in
February 2018, followed by the ceasefire in June 2018
and the announcement of an Afghan negotiating team
and peace road map in November 2018, we have been
working to build consensus across the country over the
past few months. In December 2018, the Government
hosted a jirga, with the participation of 2,500 young
people from 34 provinces. In February, the country’s
first women’s gathering was held in the Loya Jirga tent,
in which 3,500 women gathered from all provinces to
reach a consensus on what they expect from the peace
process. They represented the voices of 15,000 women
who had been consulted over a six-month period. This
spring, the Government will convene a consultative
loya jirga, which will further bond the collective voice
of the Afghan people. That will be followed by the third
Kabul process conference, where we will be looking
practically at implementing a post-peace plan.
Peace is imperative and urgently needed, but not
at any cost. The Constitution must be respected, as
must be the democratic State and elected Government
that it constitutes. The process must be inclusive and
representative of the new Afghanistan, not a deal made
among elites. If peace is going to belong to and be
maintained by Afghans, it must ultimately be owned by
Afghans themselves. The Afghan Government and the
Afghan people have made commitments to peace. Now
it is up to the Taliban to prove its commitment. It has so
far failed to seize opportunities for peace, yet we stand
ready to engage in direct talks. If the Taliban genuinely
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

wants peace, it should demonstrate it through positive
deeds, not by continued attacks on innocent people and
our security forces.
Peace also goes hand in hand with elections. We
thank the United Nations for its steadfast support
for the democratic process in Afghanistan and count
on its continued technical support for the upcoming
polls. The Afghan people have, time and again, gone
to the polls to reinforce and strengthen their belief in
democracy. In October 2018, 2,565 candidates, most of
them of a younger generation, contested 249 seats in the
Parliament. More than 4 million Afghans came out to
vote, of whom more than 35 per cent were women.
It is the Government’s responsibility to match our
people’s trust in their democracy with reforms and
uphold, strengthen and protect our democratic systems.
Since mismanagement, poor administration and
organization were exposed during our parliamentary
elections, we have been working to add further
credibility and transparency to the process. After the
Cabinet approved amendments to the electoral law, an
unprecedented initiative took place two weeks ago.
Current presidential candidates came together to elect
new commissioners of both the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission.
I will add that, in another first for our country, both
newly elected Commission heads are women, elected
by their predominately male colleagues. The Afghan
people and our international partners have made
enormous sacrifices to build our democracy, and the
Afghan people are counting on the elections. I would
like to emphasize that we welcome international
monitors in every phase of the elections this year.
As we pursue peace, we are also simultaneously
maintaining military operations and implementing
reforms to strengthen our Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces (ANDSF). The ANDSF defied
predictions of collapse and failure when it took over in
2014, by protecting not only Afghanistan’s sovereignty
but also safeguarding the world from the threat of
global terror. After the implementation of new policies
and strategies, we have seen improved operational
output on the battlefield and a substantial increase in
offensive operations. Our security forces have not only
held ground, but solidified control over territories and
weakened pockets of enemy contingents, including
Da’esh elements in the eastern and northern parts of
the country.

S/PV. 8481

While fighting a war on several battlefields, with
a shortage of needed equipment and capabilities, the
Government implemented a complete overhaul of the
security sector, which allowed for a much-needed
generational change in leadership. I was honoured
to witness the promotion of one of those new, young
leaders on Armed Forces Day at the Ministry of
Defence — Ms. Mursal Afshar was promoted from
the rank of first lieutenant to that of captain. I was
impressed with her professionalism, dedication and
patriotism. I feel emboldened to know that we have
young soldiers like Captain Afshar fighting the war for
Afghanistan and the world.
We must remember that peace with the Taliban in
Afghanistan will not mean an end to the threat of global
terrorism. Afghan forces will remain defiant in the face
of terrorism, but that responsibility does not belong
solely to Afghanistan — it is a long-term global threat
that requires a sustained global response.
A zero-tolerance approach, based on genuine and
sincere cooperation by all States, is key to success.
Strict enforcement of Security Council sanctions
measures set out in resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1267
(1999) should no longer be compromised. Any failure in
that regard would translate into a failure in the Security
Council’s response to combat terrorist and extremist
groups effectively, and would also render those groups
capable of continuing their destructive activities.
Afghanistan will continue to pursue a sequential,
thoughtful peace process, which will lead to dialogue
between the Afghan Government and people and
the Taliban. We will continue to pursue military and
counter-terrorism objectives, and we remain absolutely
committed to holding presidential elections this year.
We ask our international partners to see Afghanistan
as a platform for regional and global cooperation, not
just for mutual economic benefit but also for the shared
objectives of peace and stability.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Afghanistan’s
gratitude for the role that the Council has played in
galvanizing international partnership for Afghanistan,
dating back to 2001, when we opened a new chapter in
our modern history. The Council has been consistent in
its support over the years, helping us to make progress
towards self-reliance and peace. We are clear-eyed
about the challenges that remain, which still demand
the support of the Council and the international
community. Afghanistan remains a trusted partner

19-066567/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

that is committed to our international obligations to
promote global peace, solidarity and stability.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now give
the floor to those members of the Council who wish to
make statements.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, we would like
to offer our deepest condolences for the many United
Nations officials that perished in the tragic incident of
Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. We are also sad, as we
lost an Indonesian national who worked for the World
Food Programme, Ms. Harina Hafitz. We would like to
convey our condolences to her family. I see Ambassador
Taye Atskeselassie Amde in the Chamber, whom I ask
to please convey our deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Ethiopia for that tragic accident.
We also would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ambassador Yamamoto, and
welcome the National Security Adviser of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mohib, as well as our dear colleague Ambassador
Adela Raz to the Security Council. We would also like
to thank Ms. Storai Tapesh for her briefing.
The work of UNAMA has been and will remain
indispensable to reinforcing peacebuilding in
Afghanistan for the foreseeable future. We commend
the whole of the UNAMA team for its vital efforts, under
the leadership of Ambassador Yamamoto. Indonesia
also thanks all States Members of the United Nations
on their constructive engagement on the UNAMA
mandate renewal, and hopes for a smooth adoption of
the draft resolution later this week. As a co-penholder
with Germany, we hope for a united resolution, in which
a united Council, with its full support, intensifies the
momentum on a collective trajectory for peace, which
the people of Afghanistan so much deserve. We are
fully committed to helping the country succeed, in line
with the aspirations of all Afghans, and we reaffirm
our full support for its sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity.
Over the course of the years, the national authorities
and people of Afghanistan have achieved progress in
their nation-building efforts. Indonesia commends
their efforts towards realizing a nationally united,
peaceful, prosperous and democratic Afghanistan, in
full consonance with the wishes of its citizens. But as
we heard today, much more needs to be accomplished.
8/24

11/03/2019

Listening to the various briefers, I am reminded
once again of the words of the wondrous Afghan author
Khaled Hosseini, who said:
“we are waiting, all of us, against insurmountable
odds, for something extraordinary to happen”.
We in the Security Council must make sure that
happens and perform our duty unfailingly. Other
United Nations system entities, as well as partners
outside, must also do their utmost to enable peace to
prevail in Afghanistan.
On its part, Indonesia has had long-standing
engagement with Afghanistan. We have provided
capacity-building and technical assistance in many
areas, such as education and health care. People-topeople contacts have also been instituted. We began our
engagement in the Afghan peace process in 2017. As
our Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi reiterated at the
Geneva conference last November, Indonesia is playing
its role in meaningfully promoting peace and well-being
in Afghanistan. That effort has included the hosting of
a trilateral Ulema conference in Bogor last year, where
prominent ulemas from Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Indonesia undertook to spread the message loudly and
clearly that violence and extremism have no place in
the religion.
In response to today’s briefing, we would like to
underline the following points.
First, I will address national reconciliation and
democracy. An Afghan-led and Afghan- owned peace
process, underpinned by a comprehensive intra-Afghan
dialogue, is fundamental. To that end, we welcome
the plan to hold the grand jirga, which we hope will
consolidate the different opinions among Afghans.
Indonesia concurs with the Secretary-General’s
observation that
“[t]he current moment represents perhaps the
most significant chance to date for a negotiated
settlement” (S/2019/193, para. 56).
A successful dialogue with all parties without exception
and adherence to the democratic process, including
mainstreaming of acceptance and honouring due rights
for all segments of society, including women, are
critical. There should be no reversals, only progress
in the areas of human rights, rule of law and inclusive
democracy. We call on all the parties to play a positive
role in that regard. It is also important to learn from
past shortcomings in parliamentary elections and to
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

ensure that adequate preparations are made so that
presidential elections can be held freely, fairly and on
time. We support Ambassador Yamamoto’s call for the
successful holding of presidential elections.
Secondly, security must improve. Indonesia is
deeply saddened and shocked by the record number of
civilian casualties for 2018. As Mr. Yamamoto said in
his briefing this morning, UNAMA’s data shows an
11 per cent increase in the number of deaths, with a
staggering number of casualties, almost 11,000, nearly
half of them women and children. We also condemn the
increasing attacks on children. Such wanton targeting,
as well as that of essential civilian infrastructure,
is deplorable, as is the number of displaced persons,
which in 2018 reached almost 360,000, half of whom are
children. While we call on the Afghan Government to
use the capacity it has to protect its people, we also urge
anyone who has any influence with the insurgents and
terrorists to thwart their vile attacks. We acknowledge
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant also remains
a serious danger. No effort must be spared to deal with
and eradicate terrorist groups. The Secretary-General’s
report also describes the various parties whose actions
have resulted in civilian casualties. Indonesia implores
everyone to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and humanitarian law.
Thirdly, effective State institutions are imperative.
Indonesia hopes that the reforms pursued by the current
Government continue after the election this year. Wellfunctioning and accountable governance structures,
justice, transparency and effective anti-corruption
mechanisms also help to build the people’s sense of
ownership of the Government’s national vision, which
is crucial.
Fourthly, broad-based socioeconomic development
is essential. The Government must increase its focus
on enabling livelihoods for ordinary Afghans across
the country. Nevertheless, we recognize that the recent
drought, and the concomitant increase in the numbers
of displaced people, has added to the strain. This is
another instance where climate change is affecting
livelihoods, peace and security, and the international
community should come up with a fitting response.
Human lives — Afghan lives — are at stake.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize Indonesia’s full
support for all measures that hasten Afghanistan’s march
towards the dawn of a new era of peace and prosperity.
We must stand united in our sustained efforts to enable

S/PV. 8481

it to emerge from its challenges, rebuild robustly and
care for its people.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I too would
like to express my condolences and those of my country
to the Ambassador of Ethiopia for the terrible human
suffering resulting from yesterday’s plane crash, and to
echo my Indonesian colleague’s words about our own
nationals who were among the United Nations personnel
killed. So many people died, including members of the
United Nations family, who gave their lives for what we
all stand for.
I would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto for his
briefing. We fully support him and his work. Today I
want to focus on the fate of the Afghan people. The
figures that Mr. Yamamoto gave are truly alarming,
especially with regard to the number of civilian deaths,
the situation of children who have died or been injured,
the ongoing recruitment of children and the overall
poverty level, which is nightmarish. As my Indonesian
colleague just said, this is another example where
climate change has an effect on wealth and on peace
and security. The suffering of the people should move
us to act collectively and responsibly so that this pain
can end. Germany continues to be very engaged. We
are the second largest donor of humanitarian aid and
contributor of troops. Our Foreign Minister, Heiko
Maas, is actually in Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif, where
our German troops are stationed, as we speak, in proof
of Germany’s commitment to the Afghan people.
In his briefing Mr. Yamamoto said that while 2018
was the deadliest year of the past two decades — in
other words, since the United Nations has been engaged
there — at the same time, 2019 will be a year of
unprecedented opportunities, and we must do
everything we can to take advantage of them. In that
regard, I would refer to the convincing briefing by
Afghanistan’s National Security Adviser, Mr. Mohib,
on the country’s reform process, particularly with
regard to good governance, the fight against corruption,
gender parity, improving the business environment
and the availability of business opportunities. In the
context of gender parity, I would also like to welcome
the appointment of our colleague Mrs. Adela Raz as
Afghanistan’s first female ambassador. I have to admit
that in the entire time that Germany has been a State
Member of the United Nations, it has not progressed
that far, but I am sure it will one day. I should
emphasize, however, that while it is one thing to have
laws and a Constitution on paper, implementing them is

19-066569/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

something else. The proof of the pudding in the eating,
and therefore with regard to what Mr. Mohib said about
the fight against corruption, it is imperative that more
progress be made. With regard to the elections, I can
only echo Mr. Yamamoto’s words.
Turning to the peace talks, we would like to applaud
all the efforts undertaken. I would also like to mention
the talks in Doha. Once again, let me repeat what
Mr. Yamamoto said, which is that it is crucial to ensure
that the Taliban talks to the Afghan Government. Only
Afghans can make peace with one another, and it has to
be an inclusive process and an Afghan-led operation. In
that context, I would like to commend Ms. Tapesh for her
briefing. Women must be included in the peace process
in a meaningful way. I would be interested to know how
many women are actually sitting around the table in the
talks in Doha or Moscow. I would be surprised if we get
anywhere close to parity. As Ms. Tapesh said, women’s
human rights must not be compromised in the effort to
get to a peace agreement. While this is not an aim in
itself, if women and civil society are not included in
peace talks, if women’s rights are not covered, we are
already laying the ground for the next conflict, because
the marginalization of parts of civil society, including
women, becomes a driver of new conflict. It is very
important that the Constitution of Afghanistan, as set
up, remains in place, supporting equal rights for women
and young people, as well as freedom of the media and
civil society, and of religion, including for ulemas.
Lastly, Mr. Yamamoto mentioned the importance
of transitional justice. Accountability for crimes is key.
Again, that is not merely an end in itself, it is also a
warning that people who commit crimes will always
have to be looking over their shoulders, because one
day justice is going to catch up with them.
So, as my colleague from Indonesia said, we in the
Council have to do our job. We have an important role
to play in clearly communicating our expectations for
the peace process and the future of Afghanistan.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too would like to start by expressing
our deepest condolences to our Ethiopian friends in
connection with the tragic crash of an Ethiopian Airlines
plane and the resulting death toll of many people from a
number of countries, including personnel from various
entities in the United Nations system.
We thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
10/24

11/03/2019

the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his analysis of the processes ongoing
in Afghanistan. We listened carefully to the briefings
by Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, National Security Adviser
to the President of Afghanistan, and Ms. Tapesh. We
share many of the views in the quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/193), and would like to add
the following points.
We believe that through its coordination of
international assistance, UNAMA has an important
role to play in the stabilization of Afghanistan. But we
are concerned about the situation there. It is deplorable
that the number of civilian victims is at a record high, as
the Secretary-General’s report notes. We are also very
worried about the continuing presence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan.
In spite of isolated successes for the Afghan security
forces, the militants continue to strengthen their
position and influence in the country, filling their ranks
by recruiting foreign terrorist fighters, among others,
who have moved there after fighting for ISIL in Syria
and Iraq. Apart from anything else, that creates a real
threat to the security of our Central Asian friends and
the southern regions of Russia. We cannot help being
alarmed by the major terrorist attacks, some using
suicide bombers, that have been occurring regularly in
various cities in Afghanistan, including Kabul. Their
victims are primarily civilians, including women and
children. Members of the Afghan military and police
forces are dying at the hands of the terrorists, and the
reports of serious losses are more and more frequent.
Today we pay tribute to their memory and courage.
The situation with regard to the fight against drug
trafficking in Afghanistan continues to be a focus of our
attention. The drug threat remains a serious problem
for the region, the world and the country itself, while
narco dollars are a serious source of financial support
for terrorism, and we believe it is vital to continue
intensifying international efforts to combat this evil.
We remain committed to meeting our obligations to
provide assistance to the collective effort to counter the
drug threat, including with the active participation of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We have
taken our own practical steps in that regard, including
through the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. We
will continue to contribute to the training of narcotics
police from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the countries of
Central Asia.
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Russia has consistently supported the Afghan
people’s aspirations for a stable peace. Our countries
are linked by historic bonds of friendship based on both
countries’ interests. Advancing a peace process led by
the Afghans themselves is especially important. We are
sincerely interested in promoting national reconciliation
and the resulting stabilization of the country’s situation
as quickly as possible. We emphasize our willingness
to provide comprehensive assistance to that end, and
that purpose is what guides us in implementing our
own efforts in that area. On 9 November 2018, with that
in mind, Russia held a second meeting of the Moscow
consultations format with major participation by
interested parties. We support the policy of making the
upcoming peace process in Afghanistan as inclusive as
possible, involving all the country’s social and political
forces, including the opposition. The inter-Afghan
meeting organized in Moscow on 5 and 6 February by
the Afghan diaspora, in which leading Afghan political
parties and Taliban representatives participated,
embodied the broadly accepted international principle
of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned dialogue for
settling the conflict.
We have noted the world’s growing understanding
of the importance of the regional context of an Afghan
settlement as well, and the need to harness the potential
in that regard of bodies that have been shown to be
effective, particularly the SCO, and in that context, we
want to highlight the revived mechanism of the SCOAfghanistan Contact Group. We believe firmly that
all the current peace initiatives and negotiation efforts
should be aimed at uniting the whole country and all
Afghans, without exception. That is the key to achieving
our common goal in Afghanistan of a genuine peace
and to transforming Afghanistan into an independent,
self-sufficient, thriving State that will no longer breed
terrorist threats.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): The United
States expresses its deepest sympathies to all affected
by the crash of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. We offer
our condolences in solidarity with the people and the
Government of Ethiopia responding to the crash. Our
Embassies in Addis Ababa and Nairobi are working
tirelessly to offer all possible assistance. The tragedy
was especially difficult for members of the United
Nations community, with at least 19 United Nations
workers from various agencies and offices among those
dead. We mourn the lives of all 157 victims, alongside

S/PV. 8481

the people and Governments of the more than 35
countries from which they came.
I thank Special Representative Yamamoto for his
briefing and the continuing hard work that he and
his team have been doing in support of economic
development in Afghanistan. I also thank Ms. Tapesh
for her briefing today and for the important and
courageous work she is doing in support of human rights,
women’s empowerment and women’s participation in
Afghanistan’s political process. And I thank Mr. Mohib
for joining us in the Council today.
We share the concerns expressed today about the
many challenges facing Afghanistan, including the
very difficult humanitarian situation. We recognize
that more than 6.3 million people are in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. That number has nearly
doubled from last year, as severe drought in 2018
affected more than 10 million Afghans. Moreover,
Afghanistan remains one of the most dangerous places
for humanitarian workers to deliver assistance. The
United States continues to step up to provide assistance
to vulnerable populations in Afghanistan in response
to this emergency. We continue to be the largest
humanitarian donor in Afghanistan and have contributed
more than $232 million in life-saving assistance in the
past year. We encourage our colleagues to continue to
rise to the challenge alongside us.
We also recognize the very difficult security
situation in Afghanistan. At the same time, we
believe that 2019 promises to be a year for peace.
The United States is committed to using its influence
with all interested parties to make 2019 that year, in
close consultation with the Afghan Government. We
are not seeking a withdrawal agreement but rather a
comprehensive peace agreement that can guarantee
that Afghanistan never again becomes a platform
for transnational terrorism and that can codify an
intra-Afghan consensus on a political road map for the
future of the country.
In January, we agreed in principle to a framework
addressing the interconnected issues of counterterrorism and withdrawal, including agreement on
enforcement mechanisms to guarantee implementation.
The recently concluded round of talks in Doha
clarified a more detailed understanding of those
topics. We have also consulted extensively with the
Afghan Government and our international partners on
the issues. In mid-February, the Taliban took a step

19-0665611/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

towards the type of intra-Afghan dialogue that we
believe is necessary, by appointing and empowering a
negotiating team led by Mullah Baradar. We have asked
President Ghani to work across broader Afghan society
to build an inclusive national team. All sides agree that
there can be no military solution. Consequently, we
are also pressing for an end to Afghans killing other
Afghans, and specifically for the Taliban to implement
a ceasefire or a major reduction in violence that would
create an enabling environment for an intra-Afghan
dialogue to proceed.
As we heard from Special Representative
Yamamoto and his team over the past week, a peace
agreement will enjoy broad Afghan and international
support only if it preserves and strengthens the social
and economic gains achieved since 2001. Afghanistan’s
State institutions must survive and develop. Human
rights must be respected, there must be a free press and
women and girls must be empowered. We would prefer
to see a peace agreement that brings the Taliban into the
political process and facilitates a political framework
for the future of Afghanistan. However, even if there
is no progress on the peace track, elections need to
take place.
The United States is doing what it can to support
the preparations for a credible election and encourage
the Afghan Government to move forward with
preparations for presidential elections. Building on
lessons learned from the parliamentary elections and
previous cycles, electoral reforms must have a realistic
and firm timeline and be carried out in consultation
with election stakeholders, including the presidential
candidates. Also, we have called on Afghanistan’s
neighbours to lend their cooperation, participation and
facilitation to assist Afghans to come to the peace table
and make an honourable, just peace with each other.
We look forward to coming to an understanding
on the shape of a regional mechanism that could
facilitate the finalization of the peace agreement.
Afghans deserve to live in peace, and the United States
welcomes the strong international support for efforts
that we believe have a real chance to bring peace to
Afghanistan after 17 years of war.
Finally, we look forward to the renewal for another
year of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). The next 12 months
will be a pivotal period for Afghanistan, and UNAMA
will have a critical role to play in strengthening the
12/24

11/03/2019

legitimacy of Afghanistan’s election process and
supporting the Afghanistan peace process and in
donor coordination.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, like the other delegations,
Equatorial Guinea would like to express its deepest
condolences to the Government of Ethiopia and to
the families and the Governments of the States of the
victims of the Ethiopian Airlines crash that took place
yesterday, Sunday, 10 March, who included a group of
people who were travelling to participate in the fourth
United Nations Environment Assembly.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for the comprehensive
report presented at this meeting (S/2019/193) and
also for his tireless efforts to achieve lasting peace
in Afghanistan. We also thank the National Security
Adviser of Afghanistan, Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, and
the Deputy Executive Director of the Afghan Women’s
Network, Ms. Storai Tapesh, for their contributions,
which enrich and complement the information available
to us so far.
We welcome the intensified measures implemented
by the Afghan Government, through the National
Defence and Security Forces, to address security
threats in various cities, as a result of which a small
decrease in such incidents has been noted. However, the
reality is that security, unfortunately, remains the main
challenge for Afghanistan. We continue to observe with
extreme concern the high number of civilian deaths
caused by anti-Government elements and by the use of
improvised explosive devices, as reported by UNAMA.
In that regard, we strongly condemn all heinous,
deliberate attacks carried out during the reporting
period against civilians, especially against women
and children and civilian targets. We urge the parties
to the conflict to strictly comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law to take all
possible measures to avoid attacks against the civilian
population and civilian infrastructure, as well as
with their obligations concerning the limitation of
humanitarian access.
We note the launching of a three-year public
administration reform programme by the Independent
Administrative Reform and Civil Service Commission,
in particular the increase in the representation of
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

women in civil service. As we have reiterated in the
past, meaningful participation by women in all stages
of the peace process is a guarantee for ensuring the
protection and promotion of Afghan women’s rights in
any resulting peace agreement.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, we share
the deep concern of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and other delegations that spoke
previously. The 5 per cent increase in the total number
of civilian casualties and the 11 per cent increase in
civilian deaths as compared to 2017, according to the
published report of UNAMA and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
in addition to the approximately 13.5 million people
facing high levels of food insecurity owing to the severe
drought, among other factors, are cause for great alarm.
That is why, once again, we must all echo the call of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
all parties to reduce the level of violence and protect
civilians, especially women and children.
In conclusion, we would like to encourage the
Government of Afghanistan to continue its efforts to
achieve a comprehensive peace process through direct
conversations among the parties involved — inclusive
and comprehensive talks among Afghans — with the
participation of the countries of the region. It must also
join forces with other political actors to prepare the
presidential elections scheduled for 20 July to ensure
their credibility and legitimacy.
We would also like to express well-deserved praise
and support for the important role that UNAMA is
playing in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow
me to add my voice to the expressions of condolences
following yesterday’s Ethiopian Airlines crash, which
left many victims. We would also like to express
our condolences and support to the Government of
Ethiopia, as well as the countries of the region home
to the victims and to the United Nations, which lost
several staff members in that sad event.
My delegation thanks Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan, for his briefing on the developments
in that country. I also thank Mr. Hamdullah Mohib,
National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, and
Ms. Storai Tapesh, Deputy Executive Director of the
Afghan Women’s Network, for their relevant briefings

S/PV. 8481

on bringing peace to the country and the inclusion of
women in the reconciliation process.
Côte d’Ivoire takes note of the recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/193), which, among
other recommendations, calls on the United Nations
to continue its efforts in the framework of a forwardlooking vision, based in particular on an understanding
of Afghans’ long-term aspirations and on development
scenarios that take into account the country’s
socioeconomic and security environment.
My country believes that conducting a peaceful,
transparent, inclusive and credible electoral process
remains essential to restoring peace, stability and
sustainable development in Afghanistan. We therefore
deplore the shortcomings observed in the parliamentary
elections of 20 October 2018. In that regard, we
encourage the Independent Electoral Commission and
all Afghan stakeholders to take the necessary corrective
measures to ensure that the presidential election of
20 July is held under the best possible conditions.
Appropriate measures must therefore be taken to ensure
the protection of voters and to secure polling places
given the low rate of participation in the parliamentary
elections largely due to threats and deadly attacks by
the Taliban and the local branch of the Islamic State.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the negotiations
between the United States Special Representative for
Afghanistan Reconciliation, Mr. Zalmay Khalilzad,
and the Taliban, which offer hope for the restoration of
peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We also welcome the multifaceted efforts to
promote dialogue among Afghan political actors, as well
as with regional State actors. In that regard, it is worth
highlighting the second meeting of Afghan, Chinese
and Pakistani Foreign Ministers on 15 December
2018 in Kabul; the visit by Pakistan’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs to Kabul on 24 December 2018, which
should contribute to the effective implementation of
the Afghanistan-Pakistan Action Plan for Peace and
Solidarity towards helping to resolve the security
problem in the region; the visits of the National Security
Adviser of Afghanistan to India, China, Saudi Arabia
and the United Arab Emirates in January; and the
meeting between the Afghan political stakeholders and
a Taliban delegation on 5 and б February in Moscow.
While the initiatives I have mentioned above are
encouraging, they cannot ensure lasting peace and

19-0665613/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

stability in Afghanistan without national ownership
and the participation of all political and social actors.
In that context, my delegation remains convinced
that it is crucial to work to promote the role of women
in accordance with the outcomes of the national
conference on women’s participation in the peace
process, held in Kabul on 12 December 2018. It is also
important to strengthen Government action to combat
violence against women and girls, in particular by
amending the 2009 law that limits women’s rights.
My country remains concerned about the security
and humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, where the
widespread use of explosive devices as well as the
systematic obstruction of humanitarian assistance in
Taliban-controlled provinces represent a real challenge.
In that regard, my delegation would like to commend
the assistance that the United Nations and its partners
are providing to more than 3.5 million people in need.
We urge the international community to continue its
financial support to the humanitarian response plan
for Afghanistan.
The complex multifaceted challenges facing
Afghanistan, in particular the fight against corruption,
terrorism and drug trafficking, require the ongoing
attention of the international community and the
substantial support of the Afghan Government.
That is at the heart of Côte d’Ivoire’s call to support
the troops of the Resolute Support Mission and to fulfil
the funding pledges for the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces until 2024. It encourages all the
forces engaged in Afghanistan to further strengthen
their joint operations with the country’s National
Defence and Security Forces in the provinces most
affected by a lack of security.
The most recent developments in the situation in
Afghanistan give us reason to believe that political
and security instability is not irreversible. Peace
in the country is possible and will be achieved as
a result of the will of the Afghans themselves to
write a new page in their history in harmony and
prosperity, with international support driven by the
regional stakeholders.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
10 March, the crash of an Ethiopian Airlines plane
resulted in the tragic deaths of more than 100 passengers
and crew members, including Ethiopian and Chinese
nationals and citizens of more than 30 countries,
14/24

11/03/2019

among them United Nations staff. China mourns the
death of the victims and expresses deep condolences to
their families.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing and I appreciate
his efforts. I have listened carefully to the statements of
the Afghan National Security Adviser, Mr. Hamdullah
Mohib, and the civil society representative, Ms. Tapesh.
The situation in Afghanistan is now at a critical
juncture, as the country has many important issues on
its political agenda. At the same time, the country’s
security situation is a cause for concern and its
humanitarian situation remains challenging. We
hope that the country will achieve lasting peace and
development, which are not only in the best interest
of the Afghan people but also of regional security,
stability, peace and prosperity.
The international community should fulfil its
commitment by continuing its strong support for
Afghanistan.
First, we should promote political dialogue in the
country. We call on all parties in Afghanistan to act for
the country’s greater benefit and to seize this significant
opportunity for political reconciliation to embark on
the path of development. The international community
should support an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led and
inclusive political process and assist the Government
in developing a comprehensive, inclusive and realistic
road map for political reconciliation, back the
Government’s efforts to promote political dialogue and
encourage the Taliban to return to the negotiating table
as soon as possible. It should also support international
mechanisms such as the Kabul process and the Moscow
format to that end.
Secondly, we should facilitate the successful
holding of elections. Since the presidential election will
be held this year, we hope that the new Independent
Election Commission will scale up its preparation for
that election. We also hope that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will
provide technical support to the Commission. In
addition, in the light of the developments on the ground,
UNAMA should adjust its mandate. The Mission and
other mechanisms should undertake a comprehensive
and in-depth assessment of the country’s reconstruction
in the new conditions. All stakeholders across the
political spectrum in Afghanistan should strengthen
their unity, consider the maintenance of national
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

political stability a shared responsibility and resolve
their differences through dialogue.
Thirdly, the international community must help
Afghanistan to improve its security environment.
In 2018, fighting inside Afghanistan resulted in a
record number of civilian casualties. Statistics from
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime also
show that drug production in the country remains
high. The international community should strengthen
cooperation so as to help the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces to build capacity. It should also
assist the country in promoting alternative development
activities, combating Afghan terrorists harboured
by the Eastern Turkestan Islamic Movement terrorist
organization and effectively overcoming such threats
as terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking.
Fourthly, we must effectively help to improve
the livelihoods of the Afghan people. In the past five
years, there has been a significant increase in the
number of people living in poverty in the country.
The international community should continue to help
the Government and the people of Afghanistan to
improve their lives by honouring its assistance pledges,
helping the country to fulfil its development potential
and supporting its integration into regional economic
cooperation. It should also assist the millions of
drought-affected Afghans, improve the humanitarian
situation of the Afghan refugees in the neighbouring
countries and support their return to their homeland at
an early date.
China has always supported the political process in
Afghanistan and the early achievement of an inclusive
political reconciliation. Through the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group,
the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Foreign Ministers’
dialogue and other multilateral mechanisms, China
has always supported the political process and other
areas of Afghanistan. Ambassador Deng Xijun,
Special Envoy for Afghanistan of the Chinese Foreign
Ministry, has participated in all relevant international
conferences on Afghanistan, actively engaged with all
sides and provided good offices, thereby contributing
to the political process on China’s behalf. China will
continue its efforts and support the early resumption
of the quadrilateral coordination group, comprising
China, Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United States, to
facilitate the Afghan peace and reconciliation process.

S/PV. 8481

China
actively
supports
Afghanistan’s
reconstruction and integration into regional economic
development. Within the framework of the Belt
and Road Initiative, China and Afghanistan have
strengthened cooperation in all fields, including trade.
The road transport corridors between the countries have
been launched, with freight trains regularly travelling
to Afghanistan. Direct flights and trains between the
two countries have been operating steadily. China has
provided humanitarian assistance in the amount of more
than 60 million yuan renminbi to the drought-affected
people in Afghanistan. The Red Cross Society of China
launched an assistance programme for children with
serious illnesses in Afghanistan. By the end of 2018,
it had arranged for 100 children with congenital heart
disease in Afghanistan to receive treatment in China,
all of whom were cured and returned to the country.
China will continue to work with Afghanistan to
actively implement the memorandum of understanding
between the two countries on the joint promotion of
the Belt and Road initiative and to promote strong
cooperation in the areas of trade, energy, health care,
fibre-optic cable communication, tax supervision,
intellectual property rights, think tanks and other fields.
China is ready to work with the international
community to contribute to security, stability,
development and prosperity in Afghanistan.
Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): Let me take this
opportunity to express South Africa’s condolences
to our Ethiopian friends and colleagues as well as to
the countries affected by the tragedy of flight ET302, which has also affected members of our United
Nations family.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, for having
convened this briefing on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) this morning.
We also thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
and Ms. Storai Tapesh, Deputy Executive Director of
the Afghan Women’s Network, for their informative
briefings. We also appreciate the participation of
Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, National Security Adviser of
Afghanistan, and appreciate his presence here today.
South Africa would like to welcome the holding
of parliamentary elections in Afghanistan under
Afghan auspices in 2018 and looks forward to the
presidential elections that are expected to take place

19-0665615/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

later this year, on 20 July. We would like to reiterate
our support for the progress made on electoral reform
in Afghanistan, which we hope will ensure that the
upcoming elections are credible, timely, inclusive, free
and fair, safe and transparent and meet the hopes of
all the people of Afghanistan. We need to support the
people of Afghanistan as they rebuild trust and work
towards reconciliation.
South Africa would also like to commend the
efforts of UNAMA, whose work has been invaluable
in strengthening the capacity, capabilities and
professionalism of Afghanistan’s electoral assistance
and monitoring bodies. In this regard, South Africa
will support the renewal of the mandate of UNAMA.
We are confident that this will bring positive gains
for the people of Afghanistan during the election and
post-election period in July. We also welcome the
positive role of civil society and women’s organizations
in contributing to the peace process and preparations
towards the elections. We welcome the reported positive
developments in Afghanistan, especially the resurgent
role of Afghan women, the nationwide dialogue
among women there and the increased participation
in decision-making structures of Afghanistan. This
inclusive approach towards the consolidation of peace
in Afghanistan will play an important role in long-term
sustainable peace and development in the country as
well as in the region.
The recent escalating levels of violence in
Afghanistan, particularly the indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, remain of concern. The continued
violence could undermine the progress that has been
made in the security and political environments,
especially in the lead-up to the elections. This could also
exacerbate the already serious humanitarian situation,
which would leave many with the choice of migrating
or turning to acts of violence in their communities.
The human cost of conflict further weakens the
society in which it takes place and has devastating
effects on the most vulnerable groups, in particular
children, women, people living with disabilities and
the elderly. Their hopes for a secure future deteriorate
with each day that passes and we do not act effectively
in their interest.
South Africa calls on all parties to protect Afghan
women, children and those that have been displaced
from attacks and particularly from sexual and genderbased violence. We also wish to condemn the unlawful
16/24

11/03/2019

recruitment and use of children by armed forces and
call for the protection, release and reintegration of
all children associated with armed forces and armed
groups. We also wish to express our deep concern
about the growing links between drug production and
trafficking in Afghanistan and terrorism.
We strongly condemn the violent and terrorist attacks
in the country, including attacks using improvised
explosive devices, suicide attacks and assassinations.
This could weaken the progress made by the Afghan
authorities and the parties and stakeholders involved in
bringing about peace and stability in Afghanistan.
We urge all parties to engage in direct talks and
continue with their efforts to preserve the gains made
over the years, including on issues such as human
rights, in particular women and children’s rights. In
this regard, South Africa believes that a comprehensive
and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political
process that provides for the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and a comprehensive political settlement is the
only long-term solution to the situation in Afghanistan.
We welcome all forms of international engagement
and appreciate the efforts of all stakeholders in
encouraging Afghanistan to find solutions aimed at
achieving a long-lasting, durable peace.
Mr. Singer (Dominican Republic) (spoke in
Spanish): Before turning to the topic under discussion
today, we wish to echo the expressions of deep sorrow
in connection with the events that took place in Ethiopia
yesterday. Our deep condolences go to all nations and
United Nations agencies affected and to the colleagues,
family members and friends of the victims.
I wish to thank Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Tapesh
for their informative briefings on the situation in
Afghanistan and to welcome the presence of Mr. Mohib,
who is representing the Government of Afghanistan.
There is a consensus today that the time has come
for peace in Afghanistan. Several key events have
given promising signs of this reality: the holding of
the parliamentary elections in October, the upcoming
presidential elections in July and the efforts of the
Afghan Government and the Taliban movement to reach
a political agreement. We cannot allow this window of
opportunity to close. A commitment must be made to
conduct a constructive dialogue between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban.
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

Furthermore, initiatives such as the Geneva
Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan, which laid
the groundwork for an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
process; the convening this month by President Ghani
of the Loya Jirga, to be attended by a grand assembly of
prominent Afghans and all of the elite and influential
figures of the country; the recent Moscow-format
dialogues; and the talks between the United States
Special Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation,
Zalmay Khalilzad, and the Taliban delegation in Qatar
are vital to the process of achieving a sustainable peace.
The path to be followed involves the strengthening
of alliances within Afghanistan, which eventually will
lead to stronger institutions, an environment of respect
for the rule of law and human rights, economic growth
and a reduction in poverty. These conditions will make
it possible above all for the Afghan people to return to
their places of origin.
Regarding the results of the legislative elections,
we call for confidence-building and for the Electoral
Complaints Commission to take the necessary
measures and enact the legal and technical reforms
necessary to ensure that it can fulfil its mandate of
holding transparent and credible elections, with the
least disturbance possible. We call on the international
community and the United Nations to continue to
assist the Afghan electoral system in order to achieve
credible, acceptable presidential elections.
With regard to security, we are alarmed at the fact
that the conflict is continuing to affect the civilian
population and result in numerous civilian casualties.
Clashes between ethnic groups, as well as between
Government forces and insurgents, and high-profile
attacks are ongoing in the conflict. It is vital that
initiatives such as the mutual ceasefire observed in
June between the Taliban and the Government become
the standard, not the exception.
Another element of concern for the Dominican
Republic is the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan,
where more than 6 million people are currently in need
of humanitarian assistance. This is directly linked to
the prevailing level of conflict, the severe drought
and natural disasters. More than 13 million Afghans
are facing significant levels of food insecurity, and
more than 3 million are facing emergency levels of
food insecurity. This requires a plan that will make
it possible to overcome these conditions. We call on
the Government of Afghanistan and the agencies of

S/PV. 8481

the United Nations system to continue to cooperate to
overcome this serious humanitarian situation.
On the other hand, despite the progress made,
women continue to face violence and violations of their
rights, especially those living in rural and Talibancontrolled areas. We cannot achieve peace at the
expense of the rights and freedom of Afghan women,
who fought for many years to get where they are
today — a quota system ensures that 28 per cent of the
representatives of the Parliament are women; women
occupy prominent and leadership positions, such as Her
Excellency Ms. Adela Raz, first woman Ambassador of
Afghanistan to the United Nations; and a large number
of women work in both the public and private sectors.
That progress must be continued and efforts
redoubled to implement initiatives such as the
national priority programme on women’s economic
empowerment. In that regard, we are concerned that
Afghan women have not been participating meaningfully
in the talks with the Taliban and decision-making peace
bodies. It is key for Afghan women to be included in
the negotiations, as well as young people and civil
society representatives. Any peace agreement between
the parties must be centred on the human rights of all
people, including those of women and children. As
First Lady Rula Ghani has said, women can be agents
of change and should be integrated into all projects.
Similarly, it is important for parties to the negotiation
process to support the independence and effectiveness
of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
to prioritize support for, and allocation of, resources
to women human rights defenders and to assist in the
effective implementation of legal frameworks for the
protection of women from violence.
We also call on all parties to take measures to
prevent and end all grave violations against children.
In that regard, we ask the Government to take concrete
actions to ensure accountability and end impunity for
such violations, secure the necessary resources for the
implementation of the national action plan on women
and peace and security and the criminalization of
sexual violence based on gender, and adopt legislation
to prohibit the practice of bacha bazi.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that we are
likely at a decisive moment in reaching a negotiated
settlement to end the long and devastating conflict in
Afghanistan. We encourage the parties to continue their
efforts, create conditions that are conducive to lasting

19-0665617/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

peace and lay the foundations for the safe and dignified
return of the Afghans who had to abandon their roots.
The time has come to build confidence in a future of
peace and guaranteed rights for the Afghan people.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we would like to join others in expressing
our condolences to the countries and families affected
by the recent tragic aeroplane crash in Ethiopia.
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his frank
briefing on the latest developments on the ground. We
also express our appreciation to the Deputy Executive
Director of the Afghan Women’s Network, Ms. Storai
Tapesh, for sharing with the Security Council her
valuable remarks on the situation of women in
Afghanistan, as well as to the National Security Adviser
of Afghanistan, Mr. Hamdullah Mohib.
Peru is closely following the latest advances in the
peace process in the country. That is why we welcome
the actions taken by the Government of President
Ashraf Ghani to strengthen democracy, such as the
implementation of the law on access to information
on the anti-corruption strategy. We also welcome the
initiatives undertaken by various countries, which
together are creating the conditions to build sustainable
peace. The ultimate aim of that community of visions
and efforts must be to provide the Afghan people with
adequate spaces for internal dialogue that will allow
them to define the type of society and State they wish to
build with a view to putting an end to the violence and
overcoming the difficult humanitarian situation.
In that regard, it is important for the Government
and the Taliban to engage in direct conversations with
each other and with all relevant representative actors,
supported by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and with the help of the
international community. That process must include the
participation of partners in the region if it is to ensure
the sustainability of a potential agreement and lead to
greater stability in the region.
We also believe that, with the cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
support of the international community, it is critical to
continue to combat the threat of illicit drug trafficking,
whose enormous resources in that territory contribute
to both the financing of terrorism and the generation of
a vicious circle of violence and destruction. Suffice it to
18/24

11/03/2019

say that the number of civilian casualties recorded in the
past year is the highest figure since UNAMA and the
United Nations human rights office began documenting
that information, which reaffirms our conviction that
there is no military solution as an option for peace.
In all those efforts, as I have already suggested,
the active participation of women and young people
must be ensured. At the same time, measures must be
taken to guarantee the human rights of those groups
in accordance with the Afghan Constitution and
accepted international commitments, particularly
given the prevalence of violence against women
and girls. In that regard, we welcome the increased
participation of women in political life, such as the
presence of three women running mates in the future
presidential elections and the occupation by women of
public administration positions, including the Afghan
Permanent Representative to the United Nations,
Ms. Adela Raz.
On the other hand, we note with concern the
existing difficulties, including in logistical terms, with
regard to holding presidential, provincial and district
elections next July, in particular the lack of credibility
and confidence in the electoral commissions and their
members, which has been creating political instability.
We believe that it is urgent to promptly appoint new
members of the electoral commissions and adopt
the necessary measures and reforms to restore the
confidence of civilians in the electoral process. That
will also contribute to strengthening the commitment
and the necessary adequate and inclusive participation
of the various political factions. We believe that it is
necessary to identify good practices and confront
the difficulties and shortcomings that arose in the
parliamentary elections last October in order to take
the appropriate preventive measures to guarantee a
transparent, free and inclusive process.
We conclude by underscoring the need to implement
the Geneva communiqué, the goal of which is to
strengthen the international community’s commitments,
and to expeditiously promote development in
Afghanistan. In that regard, we recognize the crucial
and dedicated work towards the achievement of the
desired sustainable peace in the territory on the part
of Mr. Yamamoto and UNAMA, whose extension of
mandate we fully support.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Allow me, at the outset, to also express my sincerest
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

condolences for the recent tragic accident in Ethiopia
that led to numerous deaths, including those of many
members of the United Nations family.
I would like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his insightful briefing and admirable
commitment to lasting peace in Afghanistan. I also
warmly thank Ms. Tapesh for her remarks and efforts to
promote women’s rights in Afghanistan. Lastly, I would
like to thank Mr. Mohib for his briefing and presence
here today.
I would like to underscore three points today: the
peace process, the elections and the importance of
promoting and protecting human rights in Afghanistan.
First, with regard to consultations aimed at
establishing a peace process, Belgium hopes that
this year will mark a decisive step towards reaching
a negotiated settlement of what has been a long and
devastating conflict in Afghanistan. We believe that a
lasting peace agreement can be reached only through a
comprehensive and inclusive intra-Afghan dialogue. I
reiterate our support for the Kabul process, which must
form the basis of an Afghan-led and-controlled peace
process, and, in its second phase, must be able rely on the
support of the entire international community. Belgium
also calls on all parties to encourage the meaningful
and equal participation of women at all stages of
the peace process. Any agreement reached should
guarantee the protection and promotion of women’s
rights in accordance with the Afghan Constitution. As
Ms. Tapesh also stated earlier, it would be extremely
unfair for women to have to pay such a price for peace.
Secondly, 2019 is also a crucial year for the
consolidation of democracy in Afghanistan. To meet
the challenges ahead, Afghanistan is in need of a
representative legislature. In that regard, it is necessary
that the results of the parliamentary elections be
finalized. Belgium underlines the need to learn from
last year’s elections and to implement the necessary
electoral reforms. In addition, we call on all political
actors to act responsibly and ensure that the upcoming
presidential and other elections are free, transparent
and credible.
That brings me to my third point, which is the
human rights situation in Afghanistan. Belgium is
deeply concerned about the impact of the armed
conflict on the civilian population. The 2018 report
(S/2019/193) on United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), released in February 2019, on

S/PV. 8481

the protection of civilians in armed conflict, indicates
a record number of civilian deaths, many of them
women and children. Belgium calls on all parties to
take effective measures to prevent and end all serious
violations against children, including those resulting
from aerial bombardments and the use of explosive
weapons in populated areas. Of particular concern
has been the observation of an increasing number
of anti-Government elements targeting civilians,
often using improvised explosive devices. The trend
involving increasingly violent and deliberate attacks
on health-care facilities and schools continues and is
unacceptable. International humanitarian law must be
respected by all parties.
As members are aware, Belgium attaches great
importance to the role of women in peacebuilding. In
line with its contribution of €2 million to support the
work of UN-WOMEN in the implementation of the
Afghan action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) at the Geneva conference held in November
2018, Belgium welcomes the measures taken by the
Government to protect and promote women’s rights.
Those measures have resulted in women’s increased
participation in public service and decision-making at
the local level. In that regard, we listened carefully to
Ms. Tapesh’s recommendations. We encourage further
efforts to protect women human rights defenders and
expand access to education for women and girls to
allow them to participate fully in social, economic and
political life.
In conclusion, allow me to pay tribute to the victims
of violence in Afghanistan and to the resilience of the
Afghan people and security forces. The goal of peace
is achievable in Afghanistan. Belgium supports an
Afghan-led and -controlled peaceful settlement.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I express our sincere condolences to the
Government of Ethiopia and to all the Governments
and the families of the victims of the tragic accident
involving Ethiopian Airlines.
We thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his briefing today. We take this
opportunity to reaffirm our appreciation for UNAMA’s
efforts in supporting and helping the Afghan people in
difficult circumstances. I also thank Mr. Hamdullah
Mohib, National Security Adviser of Afghanistan, and

19-0665619/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

Ms. Storai Tapesh for their participation in our meeting
and for their valuable briefings.
We fully realize that Afghanistan is going through
a delicate transition stage following the parliamentary
elections in October 2018 and the upcoming presidential
elections in July. We hope that the preparations for
the presidential elections will lead to more political
consultations that help de-escalate the tensions among
the various parties and prioritize the national interests
over personal ones, thus selecting the proper candidate
for the presidency of Afghanistan in the upcoming stage.
The preparations for the presidential elections also call
for redoubled efforts using the lessons learned from the
parliamentary elections in October 2018. In that regard,
we welcome the contents of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/193) and what Mr. Yamamoto noted
in his briefing about the efforts to prepare for the
presidential elections and how the various challenges
posed by the parliamentary elections were addressed,
as well as the imperative need to hold the presidential
elections as scheduled on 20 July 2019.
Discussing presidential elections leads us also to
talk about national reconciliation as an essential element
in the political process in Afghanistan. We noted with
satisfaction the intensified efforts in the second half
of 2018 towards political reconciliation, whereby the
Government of Afghanistan continued its preparations
to conduct a peaceful dialogue among the Afghan
people. In addition, a presidential decree was issued on
12 December 2018 on establishing the High Consultative
Council to strengthen the national dialogue.
We have also followed with satisfaction the
international and regional efforts to advance the peace
process in Afghanistan, including the important role
of the United States Special Representative Zalmay
Khalilzad in the current negotiations. The State of
Kuwait supports all international efforts that would help
bring together the Afghan people and establish national
reconciliation among all parties in Afghanistan.
Kuwait stresses its continued support for the
security, sovereignty and stability of Afghanistan.
However, we are concerned about the instability in the
security situation, as mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General. The conflict between the Afghan
Government and anti-Government forces continues in
most parts of the country. The United Nations reported
more than 22,000 security incidents in Afghanistan in
2018. That serves to underscore the difficulty faced
20/24

11/03/2019

by the Afghan Government and the international
community, especially given that the Taliban continue
their expansion to many villages and centres in the
country, while the Da’esh group continues its terrorist
attacks against unarmed civilians. We are all aware of
the toll of those terrorist attacks in terms of civilian
lives, with UNAMA recording 10,993 dead or injured
civilian victims as a result of acts of violence committed
during 2018 alone — the highest recorded number since
UNAMA started reporting victims in 2009.
The State of Kuwait believes that there is an
important opportunity now to reach a political
settlement in Afghanistan. We reiterate that any peace
process must include all the parties concerned in order
to reach consensus among them. In addition, it is also
important that any peace process must include the
neighbouring States so as to reach a regional consensus
and achieve stability in Afghanistan. History has
taught us that there cannot be a lasting comprehensive
solution without all levels of Afghan society and all
States in the region participating in the efforts to that
end. We hope that Afghanistan will be able to emerge
from this historic stage and enjoy the benefits of peace
and stability.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to join other
members of the Security Council in expressing our
deep sorrow and conveying our sincere condolences to
the families and friends of those who lost their lives in
the tragic accident involving the Ethiopian airplane.
I thank all the briefers for having shared their
insightful and comprehensive analyses on the current
situation in Afghanistan. Let me also express my
gratitude to Special Representative Yamamoto
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/193), as well as for all the work of the
team of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), which is helping to promote
political dialogue, enhance good governance and
foster economic development. In my intervention I
will touch upon three major points, namely, the peace
process, the preparations for the upcoming presidential
elections and the challenges presented by the current
humanitarian situation.
Poland welcomes all the efforts of the Afghan
Government and other initiatives undertaken to
advance the peace process. All the initiatives in that
regard should promote an inclusive, Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned dialogue on reconciliation and
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

political participation. The process has to include the
effective and meaningful participation of women and
lay a foundation for all those who want to declare that
they renounce violence and respect the Constitution
with a view to building a peaceful Afghanistan. The
peace process, which is crucial for the future of the
whole region, cannot be based on an agreement that
compromises unquestionable gains achieved on human
rights, the rule of law, the freedom of speech and
women’s rights.
Afghanistan managed to conduct parliamentary and
district council elections in 2018 within the accepted
time frame. All the experience garnered and the lessons
learned should now be used in the holding of peaceful,
transparent and credible presidential elections in 2019.
We urge UNAMA to provide assistance to the electoral
bodies and support inclusiveness in the electoral
process, including measures to enable the full and safe
participation of women. Poland wishes to underline the
importance of protecting schools and other places used
as polling and voter-registration centres.
In the latest report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict in Afghanistan, the statistics provided
show a very dire picture. Overall civilian deaths reached
a record-high level in 2018, with more than 3,000 killed
and over 7,000 people injured. Nine hundred and twentyseven children lost their lives as a result of military
and terrorist activities during the year. This has to
stop. The situation is unacceptable to the international
community; it cannot be allowed to continue. We urge
all parties to the conflict to show genuine commitment
and respect for humanitarian principles, human rights
and international humanitarian law. Poland calls upon
anti-Government elements to stop using improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks, which remained
the leading cause of civilian casualties in 2018.
Climate change not only poses a threat to some
countries in Africa but also has an impact on the
security situation of other regions, including the region
where Afghanistan is situated. Extreme weather events,
droughts, desertification and water scarcity strongly
affect the humanitarian situation and can lead to the
escalation of local and regional conflicts. Therefore,
we must emphasize prevention and mitigation and
strengthen country resilience. Better climate-related
risk-assessment and management strategies are needed
to effectively address these threats.

S/PV. 8481

In conclusion, let me express our full support for the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to bring about
lasting peace and stability in the country. We stand with
Afghanistan in its war against terrorism and support its
unrelenting efforts to spread its authority over its entire
territory. We encourage all parties engaged in internal
and regional dialogue to reinforce their commitments
in order to achieve peace and stability by enhancing
connectivity and cooperation.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by expressing our condolences with regard to all of
those killed or affected by the tragic aeroplane crash
in Ethiopia.
Let me also thank our briefers today: first, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto,
given that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to do vital work in
very difficult circumstances; next, National Security
Adviser Mohib, whose personal commitment to reform,
women’s empowerment and credible elections taking
place later this year are very encouraging to us; and,
finally, Ms. Tapesh, whose words on the importance of
involving women in all aspects of the political process
and in safeguarding women’s rights in Afghanistan
were very powerful.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
condemn the recent attack on those Afghans attending
the commemoration of Abdul Ali Mazari’s death and
express our deepest sympathy for those affected.
That recent attack was a very tangible demonstration
of the challenges we face collectively in ensuring the
protection of civilians and politicians of all ethnicities
and space for peaceful dialogue in Afghanistan.
We join the representative of the Dominican
Republic and other speakers today in being deeply
concerned by the 10,993 recorded civilian casualties of
the armed conflict in 2018 and the 11 per cent increase in
civilian deaths registered by UNAMA in the past year.
As the Security Council, we must remind old parties
that any targeting or killing of civilians is a serious
violation of international humanitarian law. We support
UNAMA’s efforts to ensure that protection remains at
the core of the humanitarian response in Afghanistan.
We often sit in this Chamber and talk about what
a crucial time we are entering in terms of defining
Afghanistan’s future. This is especially true today
as we approach important elections that underpin
political stability in the country. As my Indonesian and

19-0665621/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

Belgian colleagues already recognized today, it is very
important that lessons from October’s parliamentary
elections be learned and rapidly addressed to ensure
that this year’s presidential vote is transparent, credible
and inclusive.
We recognize the efforts by Afghanistan’s electoral
management bodies to address many of these issues.
But the new election commissioners face a formidable
task. There is a great deal still to be done to deliver
a credible vote on 20 July. We urge UNAMA to work
closely and urgently with the new commissioners to
identify priorities, highlight where key milestones are
not being met and lead the international community’s
response. We would also welcome a clear and pragmatic
plan for the voter-registration and verification systems
that will be used for July’s vote.
Once again, we would ask the Mission to consider
what more UNAMA can do and what additional
resources it needs to strengthen support ahead of the
forthcoming elections. We would welcome the detailed
updates from the United Nations on this priority issue
in the coming months.
The forthcoming elections are crucial for
Afghanistan. Both the international community and
the Afghan Government can and should focus on this
even while we continue to support and drive progress
towards a long-term political settlement to the conflict.
We are therefore strongly supportive of all efforts aimed
at starting a credible and sustainable Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace process to resolve the conflict.
As the representative of Germany already noted today,
the current opportunity for peace is unprecedented, and
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the wider international
community should do everything possible to seize it.
The forthcoming Kabul process meeting will provide
a good opportunity for the international community
and the region to take stock and work out how best
to support Afghan peace efforts. We are particularly
supportive of the efforts being led by United States
Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, including
to kick-start the intra-Afghan dialogue, which must lie
at the heart of any effort towards an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned political settlement.
I would like to turn now to the points made by
Ms. Tapesh earlier today. As progress is being made on
the path towards women’s meaningful participation in
all levels of decision-making, from the local community
to the negotiations table, it is essential that we maintain
22/24

11/03/2019

momentum. That is not just because it is the right
thing to do. It is also because analysis suggests that
the sustained and empowered involvement of women
makes any peace process much more likely to succeed.
It is positive that there are an increasing number of
women on the High Peace Council, but more can be
done to ensure that women’s voices are represented.
Any political settlement should protect the progress
achieved on human rights and gender equality in
Afghanistan over the past 18 years.
That will require patience, given the distrust
between the parties and the history of the conflict. It
will also require the international community to be
united in its demand for the Taliban to sit down with
other Afghans and, in particular, representatives of the
internationally recognized Government. The Taliban
claims that it is serious about peace. It must realize
that peace requires compromise and dialogue. All other
parties are ready to engage in such dialogue with an
open mind. We should all call upon the Taliban to do
the same.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
I would like to begin by reiterating France’s sincere
condolences to the relatives of the victims of the tragic
crash of Ethiopian Airlines Flight ET-302. I would
like to express our solidarity with the families of the
victims; with Ethiopia, Kenya and all other countries
of those who died; and with the United Nations family.
Allow me to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his insightful briefing on
the peace efforts and electoral process. I also thank
National Security Adviser of Afghanistan Hamdullah
Mohib for travelling to be with us at today’s debate
and for his very comprehensive briefing. Lastly, I
would like to warmly thank Ms. Storai Tapesh for her
briefing, in particular on the crucial issue of women’s
political participation — a very important subject on
which we intend to focus during the French and German
presidencies of the Security Council.
I shall make four points.
First, while 2018 was one of the deadliest years
for civilians, our priority, more than ever, must be
to achieve lasting negotiated peace in Afghanistan.
19-06656

11/03/2019

The situation in Afghanistan

I commend the United States, through the work of
its Special Representative Zalmay Khalilzad, for
engaging in discussions with the Taliban with a view
to bringing its members into peace talks with the
Afghan Government and all Afghan political forces.
France calls on the Taliban to accept direct talks with
the Afghan Government. As the Special Representative
underscored, it is essential that the peace process be
inclusive and led by Afghans for Afghans. In that
regard, as has been said, it is particularly important
that women and young people participate directly and
meaningfully in the peace process and at all levels of
decision-making.
In addition, France recalls the need to unify
the various regional and international initiatives to
achieve lasting peace so that international efforts are
coordinated and non-competing. The Kabul process
provides an appropriate framework in that regard. As
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy said in Geneva,
we are also convinced that the European Union can
play a facilitating role in peace talks. Others before me
have stressed that we must not forget how far Afghans
have come in the past 18 years. As talks continue,
the preservation and strengthening of achievements
in the areas of justice, the rule of law, human rights,
including women’s rights, and respect for fundamental
freedoms — in particular the freedoms of expression,
opinion and the press — must remain an absolute
priority. Sacrificing those elements could jeopardize
the international community’s support, including
financial support from international donors, for the
ongoing process.
Secondly, it is important to ensure the smooth
conduct of presidential elections. To be credible, the
presidential elections to be held on 20 July must be free,
transparent and inclusive. The shortcomings identified
in the parliamentary elections and in previous elections
must be rectified and efforts to prepare for the electoral
process must be intensified to prevent further delays.
That will require all candidates to act constructively.
The reform of the electoral law and the renewal of the
terms of the members of the electoral commissions must
help rebuild the trust of the Afghan people because
credible institutions and legitimate representatives are
also an indicator of peace. The Independent Election
Commission must continue to work to ensure the widest
possible participation of the population in elections, in
particular women, as candidates and voters. Security

S/PV. 8481

for the elections will also be a key element, and we
reiterate our full support for the Afghan security forces,
whose efforts were recognized during the last elections.
Thirdly, it is urgent that we redouble our efforts to
protect civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel, and meet humanitarian needs. In addition to
the unprecedented increase in the number of civilian
casualties in 2018, including 900 children killed,
caused in particular to attacks by Da’esh, the number
of attacks on humanitarian workers has also increased
by more than 150 per cent in one year. Hospitals and
schools continue to be targeted. The World Health
Organization database lists 87 attacks on medical
personnel and health infrastructure since January 2018.
It is imperative that all parties to the conflict respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.
France welcomes the efforts of UNAMA in
support of the Afghan authorities to curb the number
of civilian casualties, in particular among children.
It is also imperative that laws to eliminate violence
against women, as well as the articles of the penal code
amended in 2018 to protect women and children from
sexual violence and to combat the recruitment and
use of children, be fully implemented. To that end, it
is important that justice capacities be strengthened.
The voices of victims must be taken into account. It is
therefore essential that all measures be taken to limit
their marginalization and stigmatization. In particular,
UNAMA could include in its reports additional
information on early and forced child marriages
organized by Da’esh in Khorasan. Finally, we must
do all in our power to meet the growing humanitarian
needs of 6.5 million Afghans in need and ensure safe
and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
the country.
Fourthly and lastly, with regard to the essential
role of the United Nations in continuing to support
Afghanistan at this pivotal time, I acknowledge the
outstanding work done by UNAMA and the various
United Nations agencies in Afghanistan, both in
support of peace efforts and the electoral process, as
well as development and humanitarian assistance. As
we prepare to renew the Mission’s mandate in a few
days, we must not lose sight of the essential work it
does every day. In that regard, I recall the importance
that France attaches to the unity of international
partners and of the Council in support of Afghanistan.
We must remain more united than ever in support of

19-0665623/24

S/PV.8481

The situation in Afghanistan

11/03/2019

Afghanistan’s path to peace, stability, democracy and
economic and social development.

Inclusiveness, coherence and representativeness in
negotiations are critical to success.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

We understand that the Government is consulting
widely to forge the negotiating structure, including a
negotiating team, that will enable such inclusiveness
with coherence. The establishment of such a negotiating
team will be critical to moving the process of peace
further along. We have learned that a presidential decree
was issued yesterday for the holding of a consultative
peace jirga — a traditional assembly of leaders — in
late April. We hope that this will help create a national
consensus on peace through an inclusive process.

I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto to respond to
observations made.
Mr. Yamamoto: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to supplement the briefing I made earlier.
I would like to talk about Afghanistan’s central role in
the peace process.
The peace process is about determining the future
of the country and its people. Therefore, the centrality
of Afghanistan in the peace process is imperative and
the process must be owned by its people, including
women. It is necessary that substantive talks on peace
take place between the Government, representing
a cross-section of the population, and the Taliban.

24/24

The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council Members to informal
consultations to continue our discussions on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

19-06656
