S/PV.9033

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9033rd meeting

Friday, 13 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mills. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Moran
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Eckersley

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-34843 (E)
*2234843*

S/PV.9033

Threats to international peace and security

appropriate international procedures, including on a
bilateral basis between the concerned States parties.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Markram.
Mr. Markram: I would like to extend my
appreciation to Council members for the opportunity to
brief them this morning.
I am aware that the Russian Federation has
submitted new information regarding allegations of
biological weapons programmes in Ukraine.
I wish to note that Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu informed the Council in her respective
briefings on 11 and 18 March (see S/PV.8991 and
S/PV.8999) that the United Nations was not aware of
any biological weapons programmes in Ukraine. That
remains the case today. I would like to note that the
United Nations currently has neither the mandate nor
the technical or operational capacity to investigate
that information.
I recall that the relevant instrument of international
law is the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention, which
prohibits the development, production, acquisition,
transfer, stockpiling and use of biological and toxin
weapons. The Russian Federation, the United States
and Ukraine are all States parties to the Biological
Weapons Convention.
The Biological Weapons Convention does contain
several measures to which concerned States parties can
have recourse in order to address situations in which
they have concerns or suspicions about the activities
of their peers. For example, pursuant to article V of
the Convention, its States parties undertake to consult
one another and to cooperate in solving any problems
which may arise in relation to the objective of, or in the
application of the provisions of, the Convention. Such
consultation and cooperation can take place through
2/13

13/05/2022

One such international procedure that has been
elaborated within the framework of the Biological
Weapons Convention is the convening of a consultative
meeting. Other possibilities for addressing concerns
between States parties also exist under article V of the
Convention, as well as under article VI. I would therefore
encourage any States parties with compliance concerns
to use the procedures available under the Convention.
The United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs stands ready to support any procedures under
the Biological Weapons Convention that States parties
may decide to use.
As Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu had
mentioned in her previous statements to the Council,
the Biological Weapons Convention needs to be
operationalized and institutionalized to ensure that
it is properly equipped and resourced to face future
challenges. The Convention’s upcoming Ninth Review
Conference in November and December presents an
ideal opportunity for its States parties to strengthen
the Convention.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Mr.

Markram

for

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia has requested a meeting on the military
and biological activities of Ukraine for the third time.
Let me explain why.
We continue to receive very disturbing documentary
evidence that the United States Department of Defense
is directly involved in carrying out dangerous biological
projects in that country that appear to be a secret
biological-military programme. Those activities are
being conducted in the centre of Eastern Europe and
near Russia’s western borders, posing a real threat to
the biosecurity of our country, the region and, given the
cross-border nature of those biothreats, the entire world.
As was confirmed by Mr. Markram, neither Ukraine
nor the United States has provided any information
about this to the United Nations, as is required under
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention. Only
our special military operation is able to prevent that
dangerous activity.
22-34843

13/05/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Since the previous meeting (see S/PV.8999) on
this topic two months ago, we have received much new
evidence. We have circulated all that material within
the Security Council. I would like to draw Council
members’ attention to the most striking evidence.
As follows from the documentation on project
3007, on monitoring the epidemiological and ecological
situation regarding dangerous waterborne diseases in
Ukraine, Ukrainian specialists, under the supervision
of their American colleagues, have regularly collected
water samples from the rivers flowing through Ukraine,
including the Dnieper, the Danube and the Dniester as
well as the North Crimean Canal. The objective is to
determine the presence therein of specific dangerous
pathogens, including cholera, typhoid and hepatitis A
and E, and to evaluate the way in which they spread
through water in order to draw conclusions about the
abilities of those pathogens to incapacitate. A collection
of those strains was then sent to the United States of
America. It is reasonable to ask to what end. Why
would the United States of America need a collection
of dangerous pathogens that could spread into the
rivers of that region? Even a cursory glance at the map
of Ukrainian water resources is enough to understand
that the results of such so-called scientific research
could be used to create a biological disaster, not only
in Russia, but in the entire area of the Azov and Black
Seas and Eastern Europe, including Belarus, Moldova
and Poland.
Documents suggest that the Kyiv regime has tried
to gain access to the technical means for delivering
dangerous bioagents by air. Last year, the Ukrainian
side asked the Turkish drone manufacturer Baykar
Makina about the possibility of equipping the
Bayraktar unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) with aerosol
attachments that allow it to spray more than 20 litres of
aerosol materials with a flight range of 300 kilometres.
A copy of that letter can be found in the body of
documents that we circulated in the Security Council
on 19 April. A drone equipped with such a system at
that range poses a real threat of the large-scale use
of hazardous bioaerosols over the territory of the
Russian Federation.
There is information that, in January this year,
Ukraine purchased through intermediaries more than
50 such devices, equipped with biological and chemical
dispersion systems. On 9 March this year, three
such UAVs, equipped with 30-litre containers and a
spraying system, were detected by our military in the

S/PV.9033

Kherson region. Another 10 were spotted in late April
near Kakhovka.
Our Ministry of Defence has received shocking
evidence that a number of projects that the Pentagon
was implementing in Ukraine were putting the lives
and the health of volunteer Ukrainian citizens at risk.
The UP-8 project documentation stipulated that socalled minor incidents involving test subjects had to
be reported to the United States Bioethics Committee
within 72 hours and major incidents, including the
death of volunteers, within 24 hours. In other words,
those experiments were originally designed to be fatal,
even though official project documents referred only
to standard blood sampling procedures. What kind of
blood sampling was it that could result in the death of
those tested?
There is evidence of the direct involvement of the
United States political establishment in the funding
of bioweapons activities in Ukraine through Pentagon
contractors, such as Black & Veatch and Metabiota.
The aims were far from scientific. A letter from
Metabiota’s Vice-President, in particular, stated that
its goal in Ukraine was “to ensure Ukraine’s cultural
and economic independence from Russia” — an
unconventional objective for a biotechnology company,
to put it mildly.
We informed the Council at previous meetings
that, with the funding and direct supervision of the
United States Department of Defense Defense Threat
Reduction Agency, a network of biolaboratories
was formed in Ukraine to conduct various military
and biological-oriented research. According to
previous data, it included Kyiv, Odesa, Lviv, Kharkiv,
Dnipropetrovsk,
Kherson,
Ternopil,
Uzhgorod
and Vinnytsya.
Mariupol has now been added to that list. Evidence
of the urgent destruction of documents confirming
work with the United States defence agency was found
in two biolaboratories in that city.
A preliminary analysis of the remaining
documentation indicates that Mariupol was used as a
regional centre for cholera-pathogen collection and
certification. Selected strains were sent to the Public
Health Centre in Kyiv, which was tasked with the
further shipment of biomaterials to the United States.
Such activity has been carried out since 2014, as
evidenced by strain transfer certificates.

22-348433/13

S/PV.9033

Threats to international peace and security

An official document of the destruction of the
pathogen collection, dated 25 February, was found in
the Mariupol sanitary and epidemiological laboratory,
according to which cholera, tularaemia and anthrax
pathogens, that is, potential bioweapons agents, were
handled there.
In the rush, part of the veterinary laboratory
collection was not destroyed. Among its contents, our
experts found pathogens of diseases uncharacteristic
of veterinary medicine — typhoid, paratyphoid and
gas gangrene.
Previously, we spoke about the sharp increase
in the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s Republics in
recent years in cases of tuberculosis caused by a new
multidrug-resistant strain. There are reasons to believe
that that is not an accident.
An investigation was conducted into a biological
incident that took place in 2020 in the Slavyanoserbsk
district of the Luhansk People’s Republic. It turned
out that counterfeit banknotes, infected with the
tuberculosis pathogen, had been distributed to children
in Stepove village. The assumption was that children,
having touched the money, often pick up food with
unwashed hands.
Testing showed that the banknotes were
contaminated with a live, highly active tuberculosis
pathogen resistant to most anti-tuberculosis drugs.
The theory that the bacteria got onto the banknotes
naturally, from a tuberculosis patient, does not stand up.
The concentration of the pathogen is too high to survive
in natural conditions where there is sunlight, which has
a bactericidal effect. In other words, everything points
to human laboratory contamination of the notes with a
biomaterial of high pathogenicity. Fortunately, no one
was directly harmed by those banknotes in Stepove.
However, all those facts can collectively be considered
confirmation of an extremely worrisome trend.
I would like to highlight another story, which is
a further clear demonstration of how the Kyiv regime
and its Western handlers really treat the people of
Ukraine. There are reports that United States scientists
at the Merefa laboratory tested potentially dangerous
biological drugs on patients at the Kharkiv Regional
Clinical Psychiatry Hospital No. 3. Similar inhumane
experiments were conducted at Psychiatric Hospital
No. 1 in Streleche village, Kharkiv region. The main
category of subjects was a group of male patients, aged
between 40 and 60 years and with a high stage of physical
4/13

13/05/2022

exhaustion. All those studies were conducted secretly,
with Ukrainian staff undertaking non-disclosure.
In order to conceal their nationality, the American
experts who carried out the research travelled through
third countries.
As information about the activities of the
biolaboratories in Ukraine becomes available,
questions are also being raised about United States
NATO allies. New documents reveal that, between
2016 and 2019 alone, 3,500 serum samples of citizens
living in 25 regions of Ukraine were taken by military
epidemiologists from the Bundeswehr Institute of
Microbiology. One wonders why the armed forces
of the Federal Republic of Germany are collecting
biomaterials from Ukrainian citizens.
There are documents confirming Poland’s
involvement in joint biological research in Ukraine with
key Pentagon contractors, in particular the American
Battelle institute.
I believe that today we will again hear accusations
of propaganda and lack of evidence from our Western
colleagues. That is why we pay great attention to
documentation. We regularly distribute the original
documents made available to our Ministry of Defence
to the Security Council and the General Assembly.
They are available to anyone who wants to see them.
There are hundreds of pages of documents, signed by
specific Ukrainian and United States officials. They
give an idea of exactly what the Kyiv regime and its
Western handlers would like to conceal from the
international community.
The United States representatives refuse time and
again to give explanations as to the nature and real aims
of their biological activities in Ukraine and in the world
as a whole. At the session of the Preparatory Committee
of the ninth Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), held in
Geneva in early April, the American side again gave
no intelligible answer except for the excuse that United
States biological activities are, by definition, peaceful
and so-called beneficial to the international community.
At the Arria Formula meeting on 6 April,
independent journalists asked the United States to
provide explanations, including why documents on
United States-Ukrainian cooperation on biological
research contradicted statements made by United States
officials. But the United States and United Kingdom
delegations simply did not come to the meeting.
22-34843

13/05/2022

Threats to international peace and security

There is another telling fact. During the
above-mentioned Preparatory Committee session,
the United States delegation once again rejected the
proposal to establish an effective mechanism to verify
BWC implementation. It refused to resume work on the
relevant legally binding protocol to the Convention,
which the United States has blocked since 2001. Our
initiative to add to the BWC confidence-building
measures with a protocol for reporting military
biological activities outside the national territory was
also rejected by the United States representatives. In
other words, the United States is deliberately blocking
efforts to strengthen the BWC regime so that violations
of the Convention can effectively be identified.
Those are all extremely worrisome signals,
especially given the fact that United States law permits
military biological activities and the national legislation
in that area takes precedence over international law in
the United States.
Today I would once again like to ask the
representative of the United States why, if its activities
in biological laboratories around the world and in
Ukraine in particular really are, as it claims, of an
exclusively peaceful nature, does it refuse to place
them under international controls and prevent the
international community, in every possible way, from
accessing the necessary instruments to that end? That
would be the easiest way to dispel all doubts and
accusations once and for all, if they are indeed totally
groundless. Unfortunately, the only explanation so far
is that the United States has something to hide.
We have already accumulated a significant number
of materials directly indicating violations by the
United States and Ukraine of the Biological Weapons
Convention. We continue to collect and analyse those
materials. Given the fact that the American side refuses
to engage in any constructive discussion on the topic,
we plan to use the mechanisms provided for in articles
V and VI of the Biological Weapons Convention. As
soon as the collection of materials is completed, we
will submit them to the Council for investigation. We
hope that will make it possible to permanently put
an end to military biological activities threatening
international peace and security and to hold the
perpetrators accountable.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I wish I could thank the
Department of Disarmament Affairs for its updated
information, but I am afraid that falls short given

S/PV.9033

that we have heard nothing new. That is not the
Department’s fault. I will nonetheless thank it for its
patience in coming here and repeating once again — for
the third time in a few months — what we already have
heard at the two previous meetings (see S/PV.8991
and S/PV.8999), namely, that the United Nations is not
aware of any biological weapons programme in Ukraine
and that it has not been possible to give any credit to
Russia’s claims.
The Department must be surprised that we keep
asking it the same question, on the same issue, hoping
to receive a different answer. Therefore, I am seriously
wondering whether we need to continue spending time
on such nothingness. I say so with all due respect, since
it is difficult to take such persistence seriously. With
the world in turmoil, we should be able to devote our
time to other pressing issues that need the Council’s
attention and action.
The Council relies on United Nations reports on
all the issues that we discuss here. We listen carefully
to the information provided by briefers from the
Secretariat. We trust them because they do what we
have asked them to do. Here we are, for the third time,
presented with the same unverified, uncorroborated,
unsubstantiated, non-factual claims of a non-existent
biological programme in Ukraine.
It is therefore hard not to conclude that we are yet
again witnessing a persistent attempt to spread a false
narrative, to use the Security Council for propaganda
purposes and divert attention from the terrible reality
of the crimes committed in Ukraine. That must stop. It
affects the Council’s credibility and relevance. Let me
recall the famous saying that one can fool some of the
people all the time and all the people some of the time,
but one cannot fool all the people all of the time.
We have no doubts that Russia knows better
regarding chemical weapons and their use. Its protégé,
the Syrian regime, used them against rebel forces.
Chemical weapons played a decisive role in the
campaign of the Syrian regime to suppress resistance
in rebel-held cities, killing and incapacitating fighters
and civilians alike. Let us not forget that the sarin
gas attack in 2013 in the eastern Ghouta region, near
Damascus, may have caused the deaths of some 1,400
people. Credible reports indicate that the regime has
not abandoned such despicable behaviour.
The Syrian experience reveals the troubling truth
that in a protracted war, when the attacking forces are

22-348435/13

S/PV.9033

Threats to international peace and security

trying to break the will of those defending, chemical
weapons are one hideously terrorizing weapon to
achieve that. We hope that no one — not Russia, nor
any other country — will ever reach that point.
Issues related to chemical and biological weapons
should never be taken lightly, and we never do.
We listened to our Russian colleague but remain
unconvinced — with good reason. There is a solid
international normative framework, and we know how
it works. The Biological Weapons Convention and
the Chemical Weapons Convention contain precise
measures and protocols to which concerned States
parties can have recourse in order to address situations
regarding any suspicious or problematic activity.
Therefore, if there were reasonable doubts
with regard to any allegations about any biological
programmes in Ukraine, we have a path and should
make use of it rather than come here with illconceived stories. As a State party to the Biological
Weapons Convention, Russia may take the issue to
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, addressing it properly and professionally by
providing international and independent experts with
the opportunity to investigate. Mr. Markram reminded
us of that once again today.
There is no smoke without fire. But, in this case,
there is no smoke because there is no fire. Nothing here
is true. Documents were distributed earlier, but no one
from the scientific community has substantiated any of
them. There is only a smokescreen and, as we all know,
smokescreens are fake and do not last.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to take this opportunity to express
my condolences and sympathies to our colleagues from
the United Arab Emirates, Ambassadors Nusseibeh
and Abushahab, following the passing of His Highness
Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan. May his soul rest
in peace.
The Council met on 11 March (see S/PV.8991) to
discuss the risk of the use of chemical weapons in the
context of the war in Ukraine. Our meeting very quickly
turned into an exchange between several delegations
making serious mutual accusations regarding
allegations that evoke the greatest fear for humankind.
We fear that the same will happen today.
It is absolutely awful to be adding the spectre of the
use of biological weapons to the terrifying scenery of
6/13

13/05/2022

war, as though the bombings, countless deaths, civilian
distress and the destruction of essential infrastructure
were not enough. Surely humankind should not be
made even more afraid than it already is in the face of
our inability, that is, the Council’s inability to stop the
war in Ukraine and contain all the other wars ravaging
the world.
It is quite deplorable that the Council’s examination
of substantive questions relating to the security
and dignity of the peoples of the world is very often
bogged down in endless cycles of intimidation
and even propaganda, where information is hardly
distinguishable from disinformation. The Council
cannot be the epicentre of fear for the world, much less
a place for invectives between Powers. It must be higher
ground where peace can take root; where the spectre of
war is exorcised; and where the furrows of the security
and dignity of the peoples of the planet are sown.
In the course of our meetings on the war in
Ukraine, my country has observed with great concern
the hardening of positions, the radicalization of rhetoric
and the rise of verbal escalation. The prevarications
and procrastination of the various parties involved
are not only delaying the outcome of the war but are
also contributing to the worsening, day by day, of the
situation of millions of innocent civilians who continue
to pay the highest price.
As a State party to the United Nations Biological
Weapons Convention, we reaffirm our opposition to
the use of all forms of bacteriological weapons and
call upon the parties to the conflict to refrain from the
use of such weapons and to comply strictly with the
relevant provisions, in particular articles V and X of the
Biological Weapons Convention and its regime.
We emphasize the desirability of activating
the mechanism established by General Assembly
resolution 42/37, reinforced by Council resolution 620
(1988), tasking the Secretary-General with the carrying
out of urgent investigations into the possible use of
bacteriological weapons that may constitute violations
of the Geneva Protocol. Now more than ever, we need
an impartial and independent investigation of the
allegations made.
Gabon reiterates its commitment to the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States Members of the
United Nations and continues to call on the parties to
de-escalate and to seize every diplomatic opportunity
22-34843

13/05/2022

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9033

to engage in negotiations in good faith in order to end
the war.

Mr. Thomas Markram, for his briefing. We have taken
due note of the information provided.

In conclusion, we once again call on the warring
parties to put an end to the fighting. We call on all
parties to work to silence the guns and to give peace
and peaceful coexistence a chance.

Like others, Ghana is deeply concerned that
the conflict in Ukraine continues unabated and the
cessation of hostilities remains elusive, despite the
ongoing human suffering and the loss of precious lives,
including those of women and children.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Markram for his briefing.
We deplore the fact that Russia is once again using
the Security Council as a propaganda platform. To
justify its unjustifiable war against Ukraine, Russia is
making unfounded accusations. It repeats that there are
offensive biological programmes in Ukraine. Let us be
serious and get back to the facts. The United Nations
has made it clear on several occasions. including today,
that it has no information on this subject — none. The
repeated dissemination of false information about
biological weapons will not turn those allegations
into reality.
This is not the first time that Russia has spread lies
to stir up confusion, sow fear and, above all, cover up
its own responsibility. In 2011, it accused Georgia of
developing a biological weapons programme, without
any proof. For years, it has been conducting a smear
campaign against the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons. It has done so primarily to protect
its Syrian ally but also to cover up its own chemical
attacks on European soil. France is very concerned that
this disinformation campaign may be a prelude to the
use of a chemical or biological weapon in Ukraine.
No one should be fooled about Russia’s objective
today. The Russian rhetoric is dangerous and
particularly worrisome because it comes from a State
party to the Biological Weapons Convention, which
provides for a consultation procedure for States parties.
We must focus all our efforts on safeguarding and
implementing the Convention so that these shocking
weapons are never used in future.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for giving me the floor. I would like
to start by conveying my delegation’s — and indeed
Ghana’s — sincere condolences to the Government and
the people of the United Arab Emirates on the demise
of Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
I also join previous speakers in thanking the Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,

We also take seriously every report of the threat
of use or the potential use of biological or chemical
weapons and note that in all instances of chemical
or biological activities the independent and impartial
investigations conducted by the internationally
recognized and mandated bodies should be the only
way to establish the facts. The cruelty associated with
the use of biological agents and toxins as instruments
of war and the fact that the resulting diseases would
not confine themselves to national borders justify the
prohibition of States parties to the Biological Weapons
Convention from the use of biological agents and toxins
as instruments of war.
Ghana reiterates its call on both parties to exercise
restraint and avoid the deliberate or accidental release
of chemical or biological agents or other weapons of
mass destruction given the immeasurable risk that
those weapons pose to the lives of civilians and the
environment. Historical events such as the Chornobyl
nuclear disaster and its lasting impact present enough
evidence that averting the chances of a nuclear war in
Ukraine and beyond would be in the interest of not only
both parties but also of the global community. The risk
of a nuclear exchange is real and would be catastrophic
for the whole planet. Its effects would be felt not only
in Europe but around the whole world. We therefore
call on all actors to uphold their obligations and
commitments under international law and international
humanitarian law.
Ghana believes that the cessation of hostilities in
Ukraine would not only be beneficial to both parties
but would also bring much-needed respite to the global
economy, especially to developing countries and small
economies, which have borne the disproportionate
impact of the ripple effects of this war while struggling
with the socioeconomic consequences of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that a sustainable
solution to the conflict can be arrived at only through
diplomacy and constructive dialogue among the parties
and stakeholders.

22-348437/13

S/PV.9033

Threats to international peace and security

Ms. Heimerback (Norway): First, let me express
our deepest condolences to the people and the
Government of the United Arab Emirates on the passing
of their President.
I would like to thank Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy
to the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
for his briefing.
Unsurprisingly, Mr. Markram repeated what we had
previously heard from the High Representative — that
the United Nations is not aware of any biological
weapons programme in Ukraine.
We are once more witnessing the Russian
Federation using the Security Council as a platform
for disinformation and seeking to divert attention from
its unprovoked, unjustified and irresponsible warfare
in Ukraine.
Norway is a firm supporter of the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC), and we are determined — together
with international partners — to uphold the total ban
against biological weapons.
Therefore, let me be clear: allegations of violations
of the BWC are extremely serious and merit scrutiny.
Yet once again Russia has failed to offer any credible
evidence for its accusations, providing us instead with
unsubstantiated claims and mere insinuations. If Russia
is serious about these accusations, they should use the
proper procedure under the BWC and provide factbased evidence.
In the meantime, we urge Russia to stop
wasting the Council’s time and resources on these
meaningless meetings.
Let me end by reiterating Norway’s condemnation
of Russia’s war against Ukraine. It is a blatant violation
of international law and the very principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We demand that Russia
immediately end its aggression, withdraw its troops
and stop causing death, suffering and destruction.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): I thank Mr. Markram for
his briefing this morning. We would like to join others
in expressing our deepest condolences to our United
Arab Emirates colleagues and the Government and the
people of that country on the passing of their President.
I reaffirm Kenya’s firm belief that the use or threat
of use of weapons of mass destruction by anyone, at any
time, is appalling and can never be justified under any
circumstance whatsoever.
8/13

13/05/2022

The indiscriminate scope and nature of the
deployment of such weapons would inevitably lead
to immediate and long-term catastrophic effects on
people, societies and the environment. Indeed, even the
users of such weapons of mass destruction may not be
spared their reach and devastating effects.
The Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and
on Their Destruction remains the global norm against
biological weapons and a fundamental pillar of the
international community’s efforts to prevent the use of
such weapons.
As a State party to that Convention, Kenya believes
that any allegation of a breach thereof must not be
taken lightly. We also reiterate the need for all State
parties to make the efforts necessary to strengthen
the biological weapons regime and the norms that
safeguard humankind from the threat of use of those
repulsive weapons.
Kenya further reiterates its call on all State parties
to the Convention to make use of the established
mechanisms to ensure that there is no ambiguity as to
the presence of those extremely dangerous weapons.
Without downplaying the importance of the matter
under consideration, we all acknowledge that the
issue of immediate concern to the Security Council is
the armed conflict in Ukraine. That war is unfolding
dangerously, with an unthinkable cost to the people
of Ukraine and, increasingly, to the entire region and
the world.
We therefore reiterate our call on the Council and
all its members to focus its efforts on finding a path to
negotiating peace for Ukraine and its people, who are
bearing the brunt of the conflict.
Once again, we implore for its cessation and for
meaningfully safe humanitarian passages for trapped
civilians, particularly in eastern Ukraine.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to state that Mexico
extends its deepest condolences to the Government and
the people of the United Arab Emirates on the passing
of its President. May he rest in peace.
I wish to thank Mr. Markram for his briefing.
We take note of the fact that the United Nations has
22-34843

13/05/2022

Threats to international peace and security

reiterated that it has no knowledge of the existence of
any biological weapons programmes in Ukraine.
In keeping with my country’s long-standing
conviction against all weapons of mass destruction,
Mexico categorically opposes any activity related to
biological weapons. As rightly stated in the Biological
Weapons Convention, the use of such weapons would
be repugnant to the conscience of humankind. The
Convention is a treaty that is key to the disarmament
regime. Its article V clearly establishes that all States
parties undertake to consult one another and to cooperate
in solving any problems which may arise and that such
consultations and cooperation may also be undertaken
through appropriate international procedures within
the framework of the United Nations and in accordance
with its Charter. We should therefore avail ourselves of
those provisions.
The submission of annual reports is also an important
confidence-building measure that can provide certainty
as to activities in the area of biological materials.
Unfortunately, the Convention does not yet have
a verification mechanism, as is the case with the
Chemical Weapons Convention. We hope that at the
next Review Conference it can be used as a framework
for promoting effective means of strengthening the
prohibition regime for biological weapons and that in
the near future we will be able to provide the Convention
with a verification mechanism.
Mexico firmly believes in safeguarding the peaceful
uses of bioresearch while also preventing the risks of
proliferation stemming from dual-use materials. That
is why we firmly believe in promoting every possible
synergy among the Biological Weapons Convention,
export-control regimes such as the Australia Group, the
World Health Organization, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World
Organization for Animal Health in order to develop
comprehensive and coherent public policies.
Given that that attention to new risks related to
biological weapons has grown since the beginning of
the pandemic and given the allegations that we have
repeatedly heard, on which the United Nations has
reiterated several times that it has no information, it
is important that all international mechanisms aimed
at preventing the proliferation of such weapons by
non-State actors should definitely be strengthened.

S/PV.9033

We hope that as a result of the extensive review
of resolution 1540 (2004) that is currently under way,
we will be able to agree on measures to strengthen
controls, especially with regard to dual-use materials,
equipment and technology.
I will conclude my remarks by calling on the
Council to prioritize putting an end to the hostilities in
Ukraine and the suffering of its people. We hope that
the next time the Council meets, it will be with that goal
in mind.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): We deeply mourn the
passing of His Highness Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed
Al Nahyan, President of the United Arab Emirates. His
Highness will be remembered as a great statesman and
a visionary leader who modernized and empowered the
United Arab Emirates. He laid the foundation for the
transformation of the relationship between India and
the United Arab Emirates. The people of India convey
their heartfelt condolences to the people of the United
Arab Emirates. May his soul rest in peace.
Turning to today’s subject, I would like to
thank Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
his briefing.
India attaches high importance to the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) as a key global and
non-discriminatory disarmament convention prohibiting
an entire category of weapons of mass destruction.
The convention contains binding obligations on States
parties to never develop, acquire, stockpile or transfer
biological agents for purposes other than peaceful ones.
We support the full and effective implementation of the
Convention in letter and spirit.
We also believe that any matter relating to obligations
under the Convention should be addressed as per the
provisions of the Convention and through consultations
and cooperation between the parties concerned.
India has been underscoring the need for the
negotiation of a comprehensive and legally binding
protocol providing for an effective, universal and
non-discriminatory
verification
mechanism
to
strengthen the implementation of the Convention by
States parties.
We remain deeply concerned at the worsening
situation in Ukraine. We have been consistent in calling
for a cessation of hostilities and pursuing the path of
diplomacy and dialogue to address the situation. In

22-348439/13

S/PV.9033

Threats to international peace and security

that regard, we support the good-offices efforts of the
Secretary-General. It is important to undertake those
efforts keeping in mind the need to respect the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, international law
and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.
Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I should
like to start by offering the United Kingdom’s deep
condolences on the death of the President of the United
Arab Emirates.
I should like to thank Mr. Markram for his briefing.
As we have heard from the United Nations today,
there is still no independent evidence whatsoever for
any of these bizarre conspiracy theories. In the United
Kingdom’s view, this meeting is a complete waste of
the Council’s time. It does tell us one thing, though:
the fact that Russia is trying to distract us with this
information suggests that it knows as well as we do that
none of its other excuses for invading Ukraine has any
solid foundation whatsoever.
The simple truth is that Russia is responsible
for this horrific war in breach of the Charter and
for the needless deaths of thousands of men, women
and children.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): First, let me express our
deepest condolences to the Government and the people
of the United Arab Emirates on the passing of President
Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan. Our sympathies
are with them.
I thank Mr. Markram for his very useful briefing.
I would begin by stating that the use of biological
agents or toxins, or indeed chemicals, as instruments
of war is abhorrent. They are rightly prohibited under
international law, and there can be no impunity for
those who use them.
It is essential that we collectively uphold the
international legal norm against such weapons. Ireland
looks forward to the Review Conference of the Biological
Weapons Convention and will work with States parties
to further strengthen that key international instrument.
It is deeply worrying that Russia is continuing
to use this important issue in an attempt to justify
unprovoked aggression against Ukraine. Despite
the large amount of material Russia has shared, no
substantive or credible evidence has been presented
to support Russia’s allegations. Rather, what we see
are baseless and unfounded claims against Ukraine
10/13

13/05/2022

and others, including the United States, from Russia
to paint itself as the victim in the face of its horrific
actions in Ukraine.
Quite simply, Russia must stop seeking to use the
Security Council as a platform for its disinformation.
Its actions risk undermining the essential multilateral
disarmament and non-proliferation instruments upon
which all our security depends, as well as peaceful,
legitimate cooperation and research supporting
public health.
Biological threats do not discriminate between
their victims, nor do they respect borders, carrying
considerable human, social and economic costs. We
must do all that we can, as global partners, to ensure
effective disease monitoring, detection, control
and prevention.
Efforts to misrepresent or undermine legitimate
biosafety and biosecurity research in Ukraine and
elsewhere are deeply regrettable and can only weaken
efforts to prevent and control future outbreaks.
We again call on Russia to immediately end its
hostilities, unconditionally withdraw from the entire
territory of Ukraine and refrain from further threat
or use of force of any kind against Ukraine or any
other State.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to start by expressing our deepest condolences to the
people and the Government of the United Arab Emirates
and to our colleagues from that country on the passing
of President Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
I listened carefully to the briefing by Mr. Markram,
Deputy to the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, on the question of weapons of mass destruction
and biosecurity. China’s position has been consistent.
We advocate the complete prohibition and thorough
destruction of all weapons of mass destruction,
including biological and chemical weapons; firmly
oppose the development, stockpiling or use of
biological or chemical weapons by any country under
any circumstances; and urge the one particular country
that has not yet destroyed its stockpiles of chemical
weapons to do so as soon as possible.
All States parties should scrupulously abide by the
objectives and principles of the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC). An impartial, independent and
professional multilateral verification system is an
effective means to implement the Convention. The
22-34843

13/05/2022

Threats to international peace and security

BWC will hold its Ninth Review Conference at the end
of this year. We expect the States parties to take the
conference as an opportunity to restart negotiations on
the verification protocol to the Convention, promote
the early establishment of a multilateral verification
mechanism and effectively enhance global biosecurity.
China notes with concern the new material released
by the Russian side. Biomilitary activities jeopardize
international peace and security, and information and
leads about biomilitary activities, including the Russian
material, should be of great concern to the international
community. China once again calls on the relevant party
to adopt a responsible attitude by providing timely
responses to and comprehensive clarifications on the
relevant queries in order to dispel the doubts of the
international community. We welcome an assessment
of the documents disclosed by the Russian side by
the international community in the framework of the
Convention and the United Nations.
Lastly, I wish to reiterate that the conflict in
Ukraine has been going on for more than two months.
The priority for the international community is to step
up efforts to stop the hostilities and urge both countries
to revert to the track of negotiations with a view to
establishing the political conditions for negotiations.
China supports the Secretary-General’s efforts to bring
about peace. We urge all parties of the international
community to try to establish positive conditions for
peace between the two camps.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Before I start, I
join other delegations in expressing my condolences
to the people and the Government of the United Arab
Emirates on the passing of President Sheikh Khalifa
Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
We have taken due note of the information
provided by the delegation of Russia and of the fact that
documentation has been made available. I also thank
the briefer for the information that he presented.
My delegation takes very seriously allegations of
the existence of biological weapons. Such allegations,
with the gravity that they carry, must be thoroughly
substantiated by solid evidence, which must be
presented and confirmed by an independent and
impartial authority, as foreseen in article VI of the
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC).
In 1972, the Biological Weapons Convention finally
established clear obligations binding all States parties

S/PV.9033

to never, under any circumstances, develop, produce,
stockpile or otherwise acquire such weapons. The
principle behind those prohibitions is simple: the right
of parties to an armed conflict to choose the methods
and means of warfare is not unlimited and certainly
cannot encompass weapons with indiscriminate
effects or of a nature to cause superfluous injury or
unnecessary suffering.
Unfortunately, 50 years after having adopted the
Biological Weapons Convention, we still have not been
able to agree on a multilateral mechanism to verify
compliance with the provisions of the Convention. The
absence of such a mechanism hobbles the transparency
of international biosafety and biosecurity research
initiatives, as the international community has no
effective means of discerning between legitimate
scientific and technological cooperation and possible
violations of the prohibition against the development
and production of biological weapons.
Brazil favours the resumption of negotiations with
a view to the adoption of a binding verification protocol
that strengthens the implementation of the Convention
and contributes to building trust among State parties
regarding the exclusively peaceful use of knowledge
and technology in the field of life sciences.
The next BWC Review Conference represents
a unique opportunity for us to re-engage in such
discussions without delay. While such protocol is
not adopted, we invite State parties to strengthen the
confidence-building measures system established at
the second Review Conference of the States Parties
to the Biological Weapons Convention by sharing
the widest possible range of information regarding
research projects on topics related to the objective of
the Convention within and outside their territories.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Let me begin as well by joining colleagues in
expressing my deepest condolences to the United Arab
Emirates on the death of its President, His Highness
Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
I thank Mr. Markram for his appearance at this
morning’s meeting and for the always credible, objective
and sober contributions of the Office for Disarmament
Affairs to the Security Council’s discussions. But I also
regret that he was asked to join us today as part of this
truly farcical conversation.

22-3484311/13

S/PV.9033

Threats to international peace and security

As other speakers said, Russia is once again
using the Security Council as a platform to spout
disinformation and conspiracy theories about Ukraine,
even as Russia continues its brutal and inhumane
assault on the Ukrainian people. Russia repeatedly
debases the Council through these absurd meetings and
endless claims about chemical and biological weapons
programmes in Ukraine, which are categorically false
and ludicrous. They follow a well-worn pattern in
which the Russian authorities accuse others of the very
violations that Russia either has perpetrated or intends
to perpetrate.
We should not lend Russia’s outlandish claims any
credence beyond watching closely for the possibility
of a false-flag chemical or biological attack by
Russia’s forces as the Kremlin continues to perpetrate
its premeditated, unjustified and unprovoked war
against Ukraine.
We heard this morning fanciful claims about
poisoned banknotes, secret treatments on psychiatric
prisoners and non-disclosure agreements. It is as if the
Russian representative’s talking points came from a bad
spy novel. But what is not fiction, and what we must not
forget, is that Russia has a long and well-documented
track record of using chemical weapons, including in
attempted assassinations and the poisoning of Putin’s
political enemies, such as Alexei Navalny. It is Russia
that continues to support the Al-Assad regime in Syria,
a regime that has repeatedly used chemical weapons. It
is Russia that has long maintained a well-documented
biological weapons programme in violation of
international law, including the Biological Weapons
Convention. Those actions are unacceptable, and we
will not stand for them.
I reiterate the position of the United States that any
use of chemical or biological weapons by Russia will
result in severe consequences. We expect the Russian
Government to publicly and unequivocally state that
Russian forces and its proxies will not use chemical or
biological weapons in Ukraine or anywhere, ever, in
accordance with Russia’s international legal obligations.
What we are seeing today from the Russian
Federation is not the behaviour of a responsible country
seeking to address serious concerns in this organ. Even
the documents that Moscow circulates do not support
their allegations. That is merely an attempt to distract
us from the awful violence that Russia is perpetrating
in Ukraine. It is an effort to make us turn away from the
12/13

13/05/2022

suffering inflicted by Putin’s war, the horrors of Bucha,
the brutal siege of Mariupol and the bombardments
killing civilians across the country.
But the United States is not fooled, neither are
Council members, and we are not going to look away.
Instead, we will continue to hold Russia accountable,
and we join others in continuing to call on Putin to end
his war of choice.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): There are once again attempts to divert the
discussion, move the focus away from the topic that
we initially put forward and mix together chemical and
biological weapons. Those are different things. You,
Mr. President, talked about both, but we are talking
about specific facts that we have uncovered about
specific documents that indicate that the United States
is carrying out military biological programmes at
biological laboratories in Ukraine. We have distributed
several hundred documents. There are specific data,
cases, companies and people in them. If it is thought
to be insufficient evidence, then what is sufficient
evidence? Our questions are not answered, not only
within the Security Council.
In our statement, we already said that the United
States had not provided any information or clarifications
about the nature and the real aims of its biological
activities in Ukraine, including within the Preparatory
Committee of the ninth Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Biological Weapons Convention
in Geneva, which is a specialized forum. The United
States tries to pretend that nothing serious is happening,
but, unfortunately, it is. We want clarifications from
the United States. We mentioned the mechanisms that
we may utilize. We will not leave this subject. The
United States attempts to turn our specific objections
and questions into empty talk by talking about Russian
propaganda will not work. The United States will have
to provide specific clarifications about the criminal
activity in which it is involved in Ukraine.
The President: The representative of the United
Arab Emirates has asked for the floor to make a
further statement.
22-34843

13/05/2022

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I take the
floor to thank colleagues for their words of condolence
to my country over the passing away of our President,
His Highness⁠ Sheikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al Nahyan.
May he rest in peace. We thank Member States for such

S/PV.9033

expressions, both here at the Council and bilaterally.
We have already requested the United States presidency
to schedule a moment of silence sometime next week.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

22-3484313/13
