NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY COUN<SIL
OFFICIAL RECORDS
"

SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 16
10geme seance
19 fevrier 1947

109th meeting
19 February 1947

Lake Success

New York

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Hundred and ninth meeting

Cent-neuvieme seance
Pag,s

Page

65. Provisional agenda

:. 325

65. Ordre du jour provisoire

, 325

66. Adoption of the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 325

66. Adoption de l'ordre du jour. . . . . . . . . .. 325

67. Continuation ./0f the discussion of the
United Kingdom complaint against
Albania ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 325

67. Suite de la discussion de la plainte du
Royaume-U ni contre l' Albanie. . . . . • . .. 325

Documents

Documents
Annex

Ann,x,s

The following documents relevant to the
hundred and ninth meeting, appear in
Supplement No. 3, Second Year:

Les documents suivants, se rapportant a la
cent-neuvieme seance, figurent au Supplement No 3, Deuxieme Annee: .

Letter of 10 January 1947 from the representative of the United Kingdom on the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and enclosures (document
S/247)

Lettre en date du 10 janvier 1947 adressee
au Secretaire general par le representant
du Royaume-Uni au Conseil de securite
et pieces jointes (document S/ 247) , . . . .

8

Communications du Gouvernement albanais
relatives aux incidents survenus dans le
detroit de CorEou (document S/250) . .. .

9

/ Communications from the Albanian Government concerning incidents in the Corfu
Channel (document S/250)

8

9

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES-VERBAUX OFFICIELS

SECOND YEAR

No. 16

DEUXIEME ANNEE

No 16

HUNDRED AND NIN'rH MEE1'ING

CENT-NEUVIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Wednesday, 19 February 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le mercredi 19 fevrier 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgium).

President: M. F. VAN LANGENHOVE
(Belgique) .

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-U nis
d'Amerique. .

65. Provisional agenda

65. Ordre du jour provisoire

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter of 10 January 1947 from the representative of the United Kingdom on the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General
and enclosures (document S/247) /

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre en date du 10 janvier 1947 adressee
au Secretaire general par le representant du
Royaume-Uni au Conseil de securite, et
pieces jointes (document S/247) "

66, Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted,

66. Adoption del'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

67, Continuation of the discussion of the
United Kingdom complaint against
Albania

67. Suite de la discussion de la plalnte du
Royaume-Uni contre l'Albanie

(At the invitation of the President, the representative of Albania, Mr. Hysni Kapo, took a
seat at the Council table. )

(Sur l'invitation du President) M. Hysni Kapo,
representant de l'Albanie, prend place a la table
du Conseil. )

Mr. HYSNI KAPO (Albania) (tronslated from
French): The Security Council, in response to
a request from the British Government, has
placed on its agenda the question of the incidents which occurred in the Corfu Channel.
The Government of the Albanian People's
Republic, on receiving the invitation from the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, hastened to accept, and sent a delegation as soon
as possible.
It is for this reason that I should like to dispel
the rumours and the various interpretations current in connexion with our belated arrival, since

M. HYSNI KApo (Albanie): Le Conseil de
securite, donnant suite a la demande du Gouvernement britannique, a inscrit a son ordre du
jour la question des incidents survenusdans le
detroit de Corfou.
Des qu'il a re~u l'invitation du Secr~taire
general des Nations Unies, le Gouvernement de
la Republique populaire d'Albanie s'est empre.sse
de donner une reponse affirmative et d' envoyer
ici une delegation aussit6t que possible.
C'estpourquoi je voudrais bien que les broits
repandus et les interpretations diverses donoees
en ce qui concerne notre arrivee tardive soient

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8.

I Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du ConJlil de sicurill,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe B.

326
the only reason for our delay was the lack of
regular means of transport, and bad weather
conditions in Europe.
Before embarking on a detailed discussion of
this question, I should like to remind you that
the Albanian Government approached the Secretary-General of the United Nations as long
ago as 29 October 1946, and asked him to submit the question to the General Assembly, which
was then jn session (document S/250).1 The
Albanian Government regarded these incidents
as acts of provocation and as flagrant violation
of Albania's sovereignty and national integrity
by British warships. It therefore requested the
intervention of the United Nations, so that an
end might be put, once and for all, to these
repeated incidents.
In reply to its urgent request, the Albanian
Government was notified that its demand had
been communicated to the Members of ilie General Assembly, but that it had not been placcd
on the agenda either of the Assembly or of the
Security Council, and that consequently no steps
had been taken.
In making its request under Article 35 of the
Charter, the Albanian Government gave proof
of its great confidence in this august Organization. It would now like to know why the British request, submitted on 10 January 1947, was
immediately placed on the Security Council's
agenda, whereas the Albanian request, made on
29 October 1946, has not yet been considered.
The Security Council is doubtless aware of
the facts. I shall therefore only mention them
briefly.
On 15 May 1946, two unknown warships were
sailing in Albanian territorial waters in the direction of the port of Saranda. The Albanian
coastal forces, after having vainly signalled to
the ships to withdraw, fired some warning shots
in their direction, without the least intention of
hitting them. It was only then that the unknown
ships hoisted their flag and were identified as
belonging to the British Navy.
On 22 October 1946, four ships of the British Navy made their way into our territorial
waters. One of them, bearing the number R.62,
was followed by another bearing the number
R.41; both of them entered the Bay of Saranda
up to a point 1,500 metres from the harbour.
The other two ships also sailed inside our territorial waters, off Kakome and Borshi.
Early on 12 November 1946, a large number
of warships flying the British flag cruised in all
directions near the coast of southern Albania ,
between Butrinto and Karaburun. Again on
13 November, beginning at 10 o'clock in the
morning and throughout the day, some British
warships, the number of which varied between
eleven and twenty-three, entered Saranda waters
at distances of 500, 1,000 and 1,500 metres respectively from the port, on the pretext of
sweeping mines.
.
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 9.

dissipes, etant donne que la seule raison de notre
retard a ete l'absence de moyens de transpOlt
regulier et les conditions atmospheriques defavorables en Europe.
Avant d'entamer une discussion detaillee de
cettc question, je tiens a rappe1er que le Gouvernement albanais, des le 29 octobre 1946,
s'etait adresse au Secretaire general des Nations
Unies en le priant de soumettre la question a
l'AssembIee generale qui etait alors en session
(document S/250) 1. Le Gouvernement albanais
considerait ces incidents comme des actes dc
provocation et de violation flagrante de la souverainete et de l'integrite nationales de l'Albanic,
de la part de navires de guerre britanniques. C'est
pourquoi il sollidtait l'intervention des Nations
Unies afin qu'il £Ut mis un terme, une fois pour
toutes, a ces incidents reiteres.
En reponse a sa pressante sollicitation, le
Gouvernement albanais fut avise que sa demande
avait ete communiquee aux Membres de l'Assemblee generale, mais qu'elle n'avait ete inscrite
ni a l'ordre du jour de cette Assemblee ni a celui
du Conseil de securite et qu'aucune mesure
n'avait, en consequence, ete prise.
En adressant sa demande, en vertu de l' Article 35 de la Charte, le Gouvernement albanais
temoignait de sa grande confiance en cette haute
Organisation. Il voudrait maintenant savoir
pourquoi la demande britannique, presentee le
10 janvier 1947, a ete inscrite immcdiatement a
l'ordre du jour du Conseil de securite, alors que
la demande albanaise, presentee le 29 octobre
1946, n'a pas encore ete prise en consideration.
Le Conseil de securite est assurement au courant des faits. Aussi ne les mentionnerai-je que
brievement.
Le 15 mai 1946, deux navires de guerre inconnus naviguaient dans les caux territoriales
albanaises en direction du port de Saranda. Les
forces cotieres a1banaises, apres avail' vainement
signaIe aux navires de s'eloigner, tirerent quelques coups de semonce dans leur direction, sans
la moindre intention de les atteindre. A ce moment seulement, les navires inconnus· hisscrent
leur pavilIon et fm"ent identifies comme apparte·
nant ala ftotte britannique.
Le 22 octobre 1946, quatre navires de la
flotte britannique penetraient dans nos eaux territoriales. L'un d'eux, portant le numero R.62,
etait suivi d'un autre portant le numero R.41;
taus deux entrerent dans la baie de Saranda
jusqu'a une distance de 1.500 metres du port.
Les deux autres batiments naviguerent egalement
dans nos caux territoriales en face de Kakome
et de Borshi.
Le 12 novembre 1946, de bonne heurc, un
grand nombre de navires de guerre, battant pavillon bfitannique, croishent en tous sens prCs
de la cote de l'Albanie meridionale, entre Butrinto et Karaburun. Le 13 novembre, de nouveau, des 10 heures du matin et durant la
journee entiere, des naviresde guerre britanniques dont le nombre variait entre onze et
vingt-trois, penetrerent dans les eaux de Saranda
a des distances de 500, 1.000 et 1.500 metres du
port, sous le prctexte de draguer des mines.
1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitJ,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 9.

327
After these incidents, the Albanian and British Governments exchanged several notes in
which they put forward their respective points
of view.
In its notes, the Albanian Government clearly
explained the facts. The British notes on the
other hand evade the truth, and attempt to
place the responsibility for these incidents on the
Albanian Government. The Government of the
United Kingdom denies the fact that on 15 May
its ships had been warned by the Albanian
guards, and claims, moreover, that they were
flying the British flag. It thus attempts to represent the passage of British ships through our
territorial waters as innocent passage. It attempts
to accuse the Albanian Government of not respecting the principle of innocent passage
through the straits and inside territorial waters,
and represents the shots fired by the Albanian
coastal batteries as a transgression of internationallaw.
In reality, the Albanian Government had
already, in its first note of 21 May 1946, declared that it respected innocent passage in principle.:l However, it could never tolerate the use
of the waters of Saranda harbour as an international waterway. Moreover, can it be regarded
as innocent passage when a warship enters the
territorial waters of a State without previous
warning, and without flying its flag, when it does
not reply to a warning signal, although it is
proceeding towards a port? That is not innocent
passage; it is a violation of sovereignty, and no
State, anxious to maintain its sovereignty and to
safeguard peace and security in the world, could
accept such an interpretation.

2. On 17 July 1945, three Greek ships entered Albanian waters and directed machinegun fire at the defence installations of the port
of Saranda.
3. On 21 July 1945, at 10 p.m., a Greek
motor vessel entered Albanian waters off Rimara,
and opened machine-gun fire on the Albanian
coastal batteries.
4. On 1 September 1945, at 9 a.m., a Greek
ship which had entered Albanian territorial
waters fired three shots from a gun. The shells

A la suite de ces incidents, les Gouvernements
albanais et britannique echangerent plusieurs
notes dans lesquelles ils expriment leurs points de
vue respectifs.
Dans ses notes, le Gouvernement albanais a
explique clairernent les faits. Par contre, les notes
britanniques evitent de reconnaitre la verite et
Hichent de faire peser sur le Gouvernement albanais la responsabilite de ces incidents. Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni nie le fait que, le
15 mai, ses navires aient ete avertis par les
gardes albanais; en outre, il pretend qu'ils battaient pavillon britannique. Il essaie de presenter
ainsi le passage des navires britanniques dans nos
eaux territoriales comme un passage inoffensif.
11 essaie d'accuser le Gouvernement albanais en
pretendant que celui-ci n'aurait pas respecte le
principe du passage inoffensif dans les detroits
et dans les eaux territoriales et en considerant le
tir des batteries cotieres albanaises cornme une
transgression du droit international.
En realite, le Gouvernement albanais avait
deja declare, dans sa premiere note du 21 mai
1946, qu'il respectait, en principe, le passage
inoffensifl; que, cependant, il ne pourrait jamais
tolerer que les eaux du port de Saranda fussent
prises pour voie de navigation internationale. En
outre, peut-on considerer comme passage inoHensif celui d'un navire de guerre qui penetre dans
les eaux territoriales d'un Etat sans avertissement
prealable et sans arborer son pavillon, qui ne
repond pas au signal de semonce bien qu'il se
dirige vel'S un port? Ce n'est pas HI. un passage
inofIensif, c'est une violation de la souverainete
et il n'y a pas d'Etat, tenant a sa souverainete
et a la sauvegarde de la paix et de la securite dans
le monde, qui puisse accepter une opinion de ce
genre.
L'incident du 15 mai n'est pas le premier cas
ou des navires de guerre etrangers, sans avertisse~
rnent prealable et sans arborer leur pavillon, ont
pcnetre dans les eaux territoriales albanaises et
ont accompli des actes divers portant atteinte ala souverainete et a la securite de l'Etat et du
peuple albanais. Des cas typiques sont les provocations suivantes, commisesa dessein par des
navires grecs:
""""'T'Le 16 juillet 1945, a 21 heures, deux navires venant de Corfou penetrerent dans nos eaux
territoriales; ils ne battaient aucun pavillon. Oes
deux bfttiments tirerent des salves de mitrailleuse
et deux coups de canon en direction du cap
Kefalo. lIs emmenerent avec eux a Oarfou une
barque et son proprietaire albanais, nomme
Xhemal Sadik.
2. Le 17 juillet 1945, trois navires grecs penetrerent dans les eaux albanaises et tirerent a la
mitrailleuse contre les ouvrage de defense du port
de Saranda.
3. Le 21 juillet 1945, a 22 heures, une barque
amateur grecque penetra dans les eaux albanaises de Rimara et tira a la mitrailleuse contre
les batteries ctltieres albanaises.
4. Le 1er septembre 1945, a 9 heures, un
navire grec, qui avait penetre dans les eaux terntoriales albanaises, tira trois coups de canon. Les

1 See Official Records 0/ the Security Council, Second
'fear, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 37.

Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, page 37.

The incident of 15 May was not the first case
of foreign warships entering Albanian territorial
waters without previous warning, without flying
a flag, while committing various acts endangering the sovereignty and security of the Albanian
State and people. The following provocative actions deliberately committed by Greek ships are
typical.
1. On 16 July 1945, at 9 p.m., two ships, on
their way from Corfu, entered our territorial
waters; they flew no flag. They fired machinegun bursts and two gun shots in the direction of
Cape Kefalo. They took back to Corfu with
them a boat and its Albanian owner, a man
named Xhemal Sadik.
.

1

Voir Proces-v~rbaux officiels du Conseil de sJcurittJ,

328
fell in the village of Mursi in the Konispoli plain.
5. On 2 September 1945, a Greek motor boat
entered the waters off Vivar, and fired machineguns for fifteen minutes.
6. On 27 October 1945, a flotilla of six Greek
ships entered Albanian waters.
7. On 2 March 1946, two Greek warships,
one bearing the number KAO and the other
without a number, armed with guns and ma~
chine-guns, entered our waters and fired on the
Albanian coast. l
8. On 30 April 1946, at 4 a.m., a foreign torpedo boat was observed sailing in Albanian
waters.
The Albanian Government brought all these
repeated provocations to the knowledge of the
foreign representatives at Tirana. The Government of the United Kingdom alleges that there
was a delay before it learnt of these incidents;
the fact is that it was informed of these acts
of provocation at the same time as the Governments represented at Tirana. Moreover, the
Government of the United Kingdom surely knew
of the hostile attitude of the Greek Government
towards Albania, and of Greek acts of provocation against our country on land, on sea and in
the air.
In the circumstances, in order to avoid any
regrettable incident, the British ships should
have flown their flag and answered the signals
of the Albanian coastal forces, particularly when
the ships, as the Government of the United
Kingdom itself states in respect of the case of
15 May, had no hostile or provocative intentions.
After successive acts of provocation by Greek
ships, the Albanian Government, fully within its
rights and without breach of international rules,
had adopted measures of vigilance against any
fresh violation of the sovereignty of the Albanian
State. The coastal State's right of sovereignty
over its territorial waters is not invalidated by
the right of innocent passage, which is recognized
and respected by our Government.

obus tomberent sur le village de Mursi, situe dans
la plaine de KoniSpoli.
5. Le 2 septembre 1945, un canot a moteur
grec penetra ,dans les eaux de Vivar et tira a la
mitrailleuse pendant quinze minutes.
6. Le 27 octobre 1945, une flottille de six na·
vires grecs penetra dans 1es eaux albanaises.
7. Le 2 mars 1946, deux navires de guerre
grecs, l'un portant le numero K.40 et l'autrc
n'en portant pas, armes de canons et de rnitrail.
leuses, penetrerent dans nos eaux et tirerent sur
la cote albanaisel •
8. Le 30 avril 1946, a 4 heures, un torpilleur
etranger fut aper~u naviguant dans les eaux
albanaises.
Le Gouvernement albanais a parte a la
connaissance des representants etrangers aTirana
ces provocations reiterces. Le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni pretend en avoir pris connaissance avec retard; le fait est qu'il a ete mis au
courant de ((es provocations en meme temps que
les Gouvernements representes a Tirana. En
outre, le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni etait
so.rement au courant de l'attitude hostile du
Gouvemement grec envers l'Albanie e~ des provocations grecques dirigees contre notre pays par
terre, par mer ou dans les airs.

The entry of British warships into territorial
waters without warning and in battle formation,
followed by a flight of British aircraft over the
coastal zone a leaves no doubt at all that such
action was a provocation and an infringement
of the sovereignty of the Albanian State. A posteriori, we are obliged to conclude that the two
incidents are not unrelated. The incident of
22 October refutes the assertion of the Government of the United Kingdom that the British

Dans ces circonstances, afin d'eviter tout incident regrettable, les navires britanniques devaient
arborer leur pavillon et repondre aux signaux des
forces cotieres albanaises, en particulier lorsque
ces navires, comme le declare le Gouvernement
du Royaume-Uni lui-meme, pour le Ca.'! du
15 mai, n'avaient pas d'intentions hostiles ou
provocatrices.
A la suite des provocations successives des navires grecs, le Gouvernement albanais, pleinement
dans son droit et sans deroger aux reglements
internationaux, avait pris des mesures de vigilance contre de nouvelles violations de la souvcrainetc de l'Etat albanais. Le droit de souverainete de l'Etat riverain sur ses eaux territoriales
n'est pas cxclu par le droit de passage inoffensif qui est reconnu et respecte par notre Gouvernement.
Apres l'incident du 15 mai, qui est survenu
dans les circonstances precitees et qui a cte considere par le Gouvernement albanais comme regrettable, quatre navires de guerre britanniques
en formation de bataille entrerent le 22 octobre
1946 dans nos eaux territoriales; le lendemain,
trois avions britanniques survolerent, a plusieurs
reprises et a faible altitude, Saranda et meme
l'interieur du territoire albanais.
L'entree de navires de guerre britanniques
dans les eaux territoriales, sans avertissement et
en formation de combat, suivie du survol de la
zone cotiere par un groupe d'avions anglais, ne
laisse aucun doute sur le fait qu'il s'agit la d'une
provocation et d'une atteinte a la souverainete
de l'Etat albanais. A posteriori, nous sommes obliges de conclure que les deux incidents sont
inseparables. L'incident du 22 octobre constitue
une refutation de la simple affirmation du Gou-

1 The Greek reply, dated 10 March 1947, to Albanian
charges made under Nos. 1-7 will be found in the Official
Records of the Security Council, Second Year, Supplement No. 10, Annex 24.

1 La reponse grccque, en date du 10 mars 1947, nux
accusations albanaises portant les Nos 1 a 7, figure clans
les Proc~s-verbau:c officiels du Cons~il de sicurilA,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 10, Annexe 24.

After the incident of 15 May, which took
place in the aforementioned circumstances, and
which was regarded by the Albanian Government as regrettable, four British warships entered our territorial waters in battle formation
on 22 October 1946; the next day three British
aircraft flew several times at a low altitude over
Saranda and even inside Albanian territory.

329
ships had no hostile or provocative intentions in
entering Albanian waters.
The Albanian Government had informed the
Government of the· United Kingdom that the
latter should warn it of any passage of ships
through Albanian territorial waters. Even if we
accept for a moment, contrary to the facts, the
British allegation that the passage of the ships
was innocent, even in that case, since the Albanian Government had asked to be warned of
the entry of foreign ships into its territorial
waters, that request did not constitute the least
limitation of the principle of innocent passage;
on the contrary, a warning would have helped to
prevent any other regrettable incident. In taking the course it took, the Albanian Government
was fully within its rights in accordance with the
recognized principle of a State's sovereignty over
its territorial waters.
The coastal States' right of sovereignty over
their territorial waters is a recognized international principle. That right is closely bound up
with the security and independence of such
States. Respect for this principle is of special
importance to small States. The Albanian Government was absolutely right in appealing to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on
29 October 1946 1 to see that the principle was
respected, in defending it itself, and in invoking
it again today before the Security Council. This
attitude of the Albanian Government in no way
infringes the right of innocent passage.

vernement du Royaume-Uni que les navires
britanniques, en penetrant dans les eaux albanaises, n'avaient pas d'intentions hostiles ou
provocatrices.
Le Gouvemement albanaisavait fait connaitre
au Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni qu'il devait
l'avertir de tout passage de navires dans les eaux
territoriales albanaises. Meme si l'on acceptait
pour un moment, contrairement ala realite, l'allegation britannique que le passage des navires
etait inoffensif, meme dans ce cas, puisque le Gouvernement albanais avait demande a etre averti
de l'entree de navires etrangers dans sea eaux
territoriales (ce qui ne constituait pas la moindre
limitation au principe du passage inoffensif), un
avertissement aurait, au contraire, contribue a
eviter tout autre incident regrettable. Ce faisant,
le Gouvernement albanais etait pleinement dans
son droit, en vertu du principe recounu de la
souverainete de l'Etat sur ses eaux territoriales.

There is no need to mention numerous authorities and their points of view on the subject of
the right of innocent passage (a right which
arises from the needs of international maritime
traffic), on the extent of that right, or on the
limitation of the principle of the sovereignty of
the coastal State over its territorial waters. It is
enough to mention articles 4. and 3 of the Final
Act of the Hague Conference of 1930.

Le droit de souverainete des Etats riverains sur
leurs eaux territoriales est un principe international reconnu. Ce droit est intimement lie a la .
securite et a l'independance de ces Etats. Les petits Etats ont plus d'interet que les autres a ce
que ce principe soit respecte. Le Gouvernement
albanais avait parfaitement raison d'en appeler,
le 29 octobre 1946\ au Secretaire general de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies pour que ce
principe £O.t respecte, de le defendre lui·meme et
de l'invoquer aujourd'hui encore devant le
Conseil de securite. Cette attitude du Gouvemement albanais ne porte nullement atteinte au
droit de passage inoffensif.
La sauvegarde et le respect des principes du
droit international dans les relations entre 'les
Etats, petits ou grands, sont une garantie fondamentale de la paix et de la securite collective dans
le monde. Mais il ne suffit pas d'invoquer seulement le droit de passage inoffensif pour demontrer que 1'on respecte le droit international quand
on viole le principe de la souverainete.
Non seulement des auteurs connus dans le domaine du droit international, tels que Hall,
Hautefeuille, Kluber, Philimore, Wheaton, etc.,
reconnaissent le principe de souverainete, mais
encore la Cour de cassation de FranceJ le 13 avril
1923, ainsi que la Cour supreme des Etats-Unis,
le 26 novembre 1918, se sont prononcees en
faveur de ce principe. En 1930, la Conference de
La Haye pour la codification du droit international a decide d'inclure, a toutes fins utiles, dans
I'article 2 de l' Acte final, les eaux territoriales
dans le territoire national. Ainsi, l'Etat riverain
a le droit d'exercer le pouvoir politique sur les
eaux territoriales.
Point n'est besoin de mentionner un grand
nombre d'auteurs et leurs points de vue au sujet
du droit de passage inoffensif (droit qui est ne
des besoins du trafic maritime international) J au
sujet de l'etendue.de ce d.roit et de, la lim,itati~n
du principe de la souveramete de I Etat flveram
sur ses eaux territoriales; il suffit de mentionner
les articles 4 et 3 de l' Acte final de la Conference
de La Haye de 1930.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 9, page 46.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux offidels du Conseil de securitJ,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 9, page 46.

The maintenance and respect of principles of
international law in relations between States,
small or large, are a fundamental guarantee of·
peace and collective security in the world. It is
not enough, however, to invoke the right of innocent passage to show respect for international
law if the right of sovereignty is violated.
Not only do well-known authorities on international law, like Hall, Hautefeuille, Kluber,
PhilimoreJ Wheaton, etc. recognize the principle
of sovereignty; but also the Court of Cassation
of France, on 13 April 1923, and the Supreme
Court of the United States, on 26 November
1918, recognized that principle. In 1930, the
Hague Conference for the Codification of International Law, in article 2 of the Final Act, decided that for all practical purposes territorial
waters were part of national territory. Thus, the
coastal State has the right of exercising political
power over its territorial waters.

330
Article 4- says: "The coastal State may not
hamper the innocent passage of foreign vessels
in its territorial waters". Article 3 defines the
meaning and extent of innocent passage. According to that article, "innocent passage" means
passage (including anchorage owing to the ordinary hazards of navigation or the forced abandonment of a ship, or because of danger)
through territorial waters without entering internal waters either on arrival or departure, and
without committing any act which may endanger security and public order or the fiscal interests of the State.
In the concrete case with which we are dealing, we must consider the principle of the right
of innocent passage in relation to the facts. The
incident of 22 October, in all its aspects, shows
the we are not considering a case of innocent
passage, as is claimed by the Government of the
United Kingdom, but a case of the violation of
the sovereignty of the Albanian State within its
territorial waters. The distance between the port
of Saranda and the coast of Corlu is 7.2 miles,
and the shipping channel is about 1,500 metres
from the port of Saranda; hence that was not
the channel used by the British warships.
The Albanian Government wishes to make it
clear in this connexion that before the war the
Corfu Channel was always reserved for the
coastal trade of the neighbouring countries, and
was not used as an international shipping route.
Since the end of the war, however, Great Britain
has been using this route which it is trying to
have accepted as an international route.
. In accordance with international law and its
own rights, the Albanian Government has never
desired, and does not desire to hinder the passage,
either on the high seas or in the straits of Corfu,
of any ship of any nationality, provided that ship
respects the rights and laws of our country and
does not threaten the sovereignty of the State.
In 1910, before the Hague Court of Arbitration, the Government of the United Kingdom
itself upheld the thesis t~at the sovereignty of
the coastal State extends over the whole width
of the straits as far as its coastal batteries are
i~ a position to control them, contrary to the
VIew that the coastal State's sovereignty should
not extend beyond three miles. In accordance
with its thesis, the Government of the United
Kingdom stated before the Hague Court, in
1910, that passage through the Straits of Dover
which are seventeen to eighteen miles wide wa~
. Iy a concession on its part. This thesis
' is
slmp
upheld by other British authorities on international law, such as Hall, Hcrshey, G. F. de
Martens and Philimore.
Similarly, on the subject of the passage of
warships through straits connecting two open
seas, authorities such as DUdley-Field, Hall and
G. F. de Martens say that the States concerned
may take security measures, or even completely
prevent the passage of such ships in the area
under their sovereignty. Other authorities, such
as Blumtschli, Bonfils, Lawrence, Oppenheim,
Pradier-Fodere, Rivier, Westlake, etc. hold the
view that the coastal States may not pr~vent the

L'article 4- dit: "L'Etat riverain ne peut entraver le passage inoffensif des navires etrangers
dans la mer territoriale." L'artide 3 definit le
sens et la portee du "passage inoffensif". D'apres
cet article, par "passage inoffensif" on entend le
passage (y compris le mouillage cause par des
incidents ordinaires de navigation, l'abandon
force ou le danger) a travers les eaux territoriales sans penetration dans les eaux interieures, soit
a l'entree, soit a la sortie, et sans aucun acte qui
porte atteinte a la securite, a l'ordre public ou
aux interets fiscaux de l'Etat souverain.
Dans le cas concret qui nous occupe, nous devons placer le principc du droit de passage inoffensif en presence des faits. L'incident du 22 octobre, sous tous ses aspects, demontre que nous
ne sommes pas devant un cas de passage inoffensif, comme le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni le
pretend, mais devant un cas de violation de la
souverainete de l'Etat albanais sur ses eaux territoriales. On sait que la distance separant le port
de Saranda de la cote de Corfou est de 7,2 milles
et que le chenal de navigation passe a 1.500
metres environ du port de Saranda; ce n'est done
pas la le chenal qu'emprunterent les navires de
guerre britanniques.
Le Gouvernement albanais tient a preciser, a
cette occasion, que le detroit de Corlou a toujours
ete limite, avant la guerre, aux navires de cabotage des pays avoisinants et n'etait pas utilise
comme voie de trafic intemationale. Cependant,
depuis la fin de la guerre, la Grande-Bretagne
utilise cette voie, qu'elle tente de presenter
comme voie de trafic mternationale.
En vertu des regles internationales et de ses
propres droits, le Gouvernement albanais n'a jamais voulu ni ne desire entraver la navigation
en haute mer, ou dans le detroit de Corlou, de
quelque navire, de que1que nationalite qu'il soit,
pourvu que ce navire respecte les droits et la
legislation de notre pays et ne porte pas atteinte
a la souverainete de l'Etat.
Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni lui-meme
a soutenu, en 1910, devant la Cour d'arbitragc
de La Haye, la these que lasouverainete de l'Etat
riverain s'etend sur toute la largeur des dctroits
pour autant que ses batteries cotieres peuvent Ies
controler, contrairement a la these suivant
laquelle la souverainete de l'Etat riverain ne devrait pas s'etendre au dela de trois milles. Dans
l'esprit de sa these, le Gouvernement du
Royaume-U ni a declare devant la Cour de La
Haye, en 1910, que le passage dans le Pas-deCalais, detroit d'une largeur de 17 a 18 milles l
n' etait q u'une concession de sa part. Cette these
est soutenue par d'autres Anglais, auteurs connus
dans le domaine du droit international, tels que
Hall, Hershey, G. F. de Martens et Philimore.
C'est egalement au sujet du passage des navires de guerre dans les detroits reliant deux mers
ouvertes que des auteurs comme Dudley-Field l
Hall et G. F. de Martens dec1arent queles Etats
interesses peuvent prendre des mesures de securite ou meme empecher completement le passage
desdits navires dans la partie se trouvant SOIlS
leur souverainete. D'autres auteurs, tels que
Blumtschli, Bonfils, Lawrence, Oppenheim, Pradier-Fodere, Rivier, Westlake, etc., sont d'avis

331
passage of warships through the straits, but have
the right to take the necessary steps to ensure
that such passage is not injurious to them.
It was surely not in application of the principle of free passage through straits connecting
two open seas that British batteries sank the
Spanish cruiser Bayo, which had approached to
within two miles of Gibraltar, in pursuit of a
sm uggling vessel.
We have mentioned these facts and authorities
because they fully support the thesis upheld by
the Government of the United Kingdom on various occasions. Today, in an identical case, that
Government argues that passage through straits
formed solely by territorial waters does not constitute passage through territorial waters. Conseq uently, it maintains that passage of merchant
ships or warships through the Corfu Channel is
not subject to restriction in any circumstances.
And then it claims that the Albanian Government
disregards the international rules I
Thus, in similar cases, the Government of the
United Kingdom puts forward two different
arguments. This proves how relative international
rules are considered by the Government of the
United Kingdom and shows that it invokes the
principles of international law to suit its interests of the moment.
The brutal act of provocation of 12 and 13
November 1946 against Albania is a logical
consequence of such interpretation of international rules by the Government of the United
Kingdom. All the British warships which had
entered Albanian waters in battle formation fired
continual machine-gun bursts into the air and
into the water with the intention of creating incidents; they cruised in all directions inside our
waters and outside them, as a sign of intimidation and provocation.
By sending a large number of warships into
Albanian waters, in spite of the Albanian Government's formal warning, warships which entered territorial waters, and even the internal
waters of the port of Saranda in battle formation and fired shots to create incidents, the Government of the United Kingdom flagrantly violated the sovereignty of the Albanian State and
all the rules of international law. The Albanian
Government, giving proof of its sang-froid and
good will in the interests of peace, approached the
Secretary-General of the United Nations the very
same day.l
To justify its arbitrary act, the Government of
the United Kingdom invoked a whole series of
pretexts. It put forward as its main pretext the
necessity of clearing the mines in the Corfu Channel, in view of the fact that on 22 October two
British warships had been damaged by striking
ITlines which had been laid there. With the intention of confronting the Albanian Government
with a fait accomplt~ the Government of the
United Kingdom sent a note on IONovember2
• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 9, pages 48 and 49.
~

• Ibid., Second Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8,

page 39.

que les Etats riverains ne peuvent pas empecher
le passage des navires de guerre dans les detroits,
mais qu'ils ont le droit de prendre les mesurcs
necessaires pour que le passage soit inoffensif a
leur egard.
Ce n'est so.rement pas en application du principe de libre passage dans les detroits reliant deux
mers ouvertes que les batteries anglaises coulerent
le croiseur espagnol Bayo, qui s'etait approche a
deux milles des cotes de Gibraltar durant la
poursuite d'un navire de contrebande.
Nous avons mentionne ces faits et ces auteurs
parce qu'ils abondent dans le sens de la these
soutenue en diverses occasions par le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni. Aujourd'hui, dans un
cas identique, ce Gouvernement soutient la these
que le passage des detroits constitues uniquement
d'eaux territoriales n~ signifie pas un passage dans
des eaux territoriales. En consequence, il soutient
que le passage des navires de commerce ou de
guerre dans le detroit de Corfou n'est soumis a
aucune restriction dans aucune circonstance. Et
d'affirmer que le Gouvernement albanais ignore
les regles internationales!
Ainsi, dans des cas analogues, le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni soutient deux theses differentes. Ceci prouve combien relatives sont pour
ce Gouvernement les regles internationales, comment ce Gouvernement invoque les principes du
droit international selon les interets du moment.
La provocation brutale du 12 et du 13 novembre 1946, dirigee contre l'Albanie, est une consequence logique d'un tel usage des regles internationales par le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni.
Tous les navires de guerrc britanniques qui etaient
entres dans les eaux albanaises, en formation de
combat, tiraient continuellement des rafales de
mitrailleuse en I'air et dans l'eau en vue de ereer
des incidents; ils croisaient dans tous les sens dans
nos eaux et en dehors d'elles, en signe d'intimidation et de provocation.
En envoyant dans les eaux albanaises, malgre
}'avertissement formel du Gouvernement albanais, un grand nombre de navires de guerre qui
penetrerent en formation de combat dans les eaux
territoriales, et meme dans les eaux interieures
du port de Saranda, et tirerent des coups de
feu pour creer des incidents, le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni a viole d'une maniere flagrante la
souverainete de l'Etat albanais et toutes les regles
du droit international. Le Gouvernement albanais, faisant preuve de sang-froid et de bonne
volontc dans l'interet de la paix, s'adressa le jour
meme au Secretaire general des Nations Unies'.
Pour justifier son acte arbitraire, le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni invoqua toute une serie
de pretextes. I1 presenta comme principal pretexte la necessite de deminer le detroit de Conou,
etant donne que, le 22 octobre, deux navires de
guerre britanniques avaient ete endommages en
heurtant des mines qui y etaient mouillees. VDUlant mettre le Gouvernement albanais devant un
fait accompli, le Gouvemement du RoyaumeUni lui remit, le 10 novembre 2, une note dans
1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil dB securiti,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 9, pages 4-8
et 49.
2 Ibid., Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8,
page 39.

332
informing that Government that on 12 November 1946, the Corfu Channel would be cleared
of mines. According to the British note, that
clearance would take place "in virtue of a unani~
mous decision taken on 1 November by the Central Mine Clearance Board".
In its note of 12 November, the Albanian
Government made a strong protest against the
arbitrary decision to sweep the mines of Albanian
territorial waters in the straits of Corfu. The
Albanian Government asserted that it would
never agree to being confronted with a fait
accompli. It prQPosed that a mixed international
commission be established, on which Albania
would be represented, to decide finally on the
area which should constitute the free shipping
channel. The Albanian Government had no objection to clearing this channel of mines, but it
insisted that only when a commission had determined which area should be open to international traffic, would the question of mine-sweeping be discussed. The Albanian Government
drew the attention of the United Kingdom Government to the fact that the latter should then
issue clear orders to its mine-sweepers to confine
themselves to the channel designated by the
mixed commission. If the British ships violated
Albanian territorial waters, that act would be
considered for the third time by the Albanian
Government as a flagrant violation of Albanian
sovereignty.

laquelle illui faisait connaltre que, le 12 novembre. 1946, le detroit de Corfou serait drague.
Selon la note britannique, ce draguage devait
s'effectuer "en vertu d'une decision unanlme
prise le 1er novembre par le Comite central de
deminage".
.

The Government of the United Kingdom, as
usual, did not condescend to take Albania's rights
into consideration; on 12 and 13 November
1946, warships and mine-sweepers anned with
guns trained on the port of Saranda and the
other Albanian ports proceeded to sweep the
mines.
As for the Central Mine Clearance Board, the
Albanian Government has never been officially
infonned of its existence or its decisions. Only
through notes recently received from the Government of the United Kingdom has Albania been
infonned that it had not been invited to be a
member of the Board because it did not possess
any mine-sweepers.! Albania should have been
invited to the Board because States were invited
not on the basis of whether they possessed minesweepers or not, but on the basis of whether or
not they were coastal States. In fact, the Board
was t6 decide to undertake certain operations
which, by their nature, would require the approval of the States concerned in order to be
carried out without infringing the principle of
sovereignty. The Albanian Government has even
learned that the Board decided that the clearance of mines in the Corfu Channel should take
place only with the Albanian Government's
approval, and that there was no unanimous decision in favour of sweeping the mines in Albanian waters, as alleged by the Government of
the United Kingdom in its note of 10 November
1946. At the conclusion of its meeting of 14
November 1946, the Central Mine Clearance
Board published the following denial:

Dans sa note du 12 novembre, le Gouvemement albanais protesta de fa~on energique contre
la decision arbitraire de draguer les eaux territoriales albanaises dans le detroit de Corfou. Le
Gouvernement albanais affirmait qu'il ne pourrait jamais admettre d'etre mis devant un fait
accompli. Il proposait la constitution d'une commission mixte internationale avec la participation
de l'Albanie, pour determiner de fa~on definitive les eaux dans lesqueUes devrait passer la voie
de navigation libre. Le Gouvernement albanais
n'avait aucune objection a presenter au sujet du
draguage de ce chenal; cependant, il insistait
pour que l'on ajourne toute discussion de cette
question jusqu'au moment ou une commission aurait determine queUe zone serait ouverte au trafic
international. Le Gouvernement albanais attirait
l'attention du Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
sur le fait que ce dernier devrait donner l'ordre
precis aux navires qui s'occuperaient du draguage de se limiter uniquement au chenal fixe par
la commission mixte. Si les navires britanniques
venaient a violer les eaux territoriales albanaises,
cet acte serait considere pour la troisiemc fois
par le Gouvernement albanais comme une violation flagrante de la souverainete de l'Albanie.
Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni, comme
toujours, ne daigna meme pas prendre en comideration les droits de l'Albanie. Les 12 et 13
novembre 1946, Ies navires de guerre et les dragueurs de mines armes de canons diriges contre
le port de Saranda et contre les autres ports de
l' Albanie procederent au draguage des mines.
Quant au Cornite central de deminage, le
Gouvernement albanais n'a jamais ete officiellement informe de son existence ni de ses deci·
sions. C'est uniquement par des notes recentcs,
emanant du Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni,
que l'Albanie a ete informce qu'eUe n'etait pas
invitee a participer a ce Comite parce qu'elle ne
possedait pas de dragueursde mines!. On aurait
dO. inviter l'Albanie a ce Comite parce que le
critere servant pour inviter les Etats etait Ilon
pas de savoir si un Etat avait ou non des dragueurs de mines, mais s'il etait un Etat riverain.
En effet, le Comite serait appele a decider d'clltreprendre certains travaux qui, etant donne km
nature, auraient besoin de l'approbation des
Etats interesses pour pouvoir etre executes san."
enfreindre le principe de souverainete. Le GOllvernement albanais a meme appris que le Comite
avait decide que le nettoyage des mines dans le
detroit de Corfou s'effectuerait apres approbation
du Gouvernement albanais, et qu'il n'existait pas
de decision unanime en vue du draguage dt's
mines dans les eaux albanaises, comme le pretend
le Gouvernement du Royaume-Dni dans sa note
du 10 novembre 1946. A l'issue de sa reunion
du 14 novembre 1946, le Comite central de
deminage publiait le dementi suivant:

J See Official Retords of the Security Coundl, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 37.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de sitllriti,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 9, page 31.

333
"In connexion with the statements recently
appearing in the press on the mine-sweeping
operations carried out by British ships in Albanian territorial waters in the north part of
the Corfu Channel, the Central Mines Clearance Board states that this clearance was not
carried out on its order nor with its consent."

In its policy towards Albania, the Government
of the United Kingdom follows the method of
the fait accompli. Just as it presented as a fait
~c~ompli the sweeping of mines in the channel,
It 18 attempting to represent as a fait accompli
the guilt of the Albanian Government, .by claiming that the latter should have warned other
countries of the mining of its waters, in pursuance
o,f articles 3 and 4 of the Eighth Hague Convent1On.
Before invoking the Hague Convention, the
Government of the United Kingdom should
prove that its accusations against Albania are

"A propos des informations publiees recernment dans la presse sur les operations de draguage que les navires britanniques ont effectuees dans les eam, territoriales de l'Albanie,
dans la partie nord du detroit de Corfou, le
Comite central de deminage declare que le
draguage n'a pas ete effectue sur son ordre et
n'a pas eu son assentiment."
En contradiction avec le principe de souverainete et la decision du Comite qu'il invoque,
le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni, se bornant
a un simple avis prealable, a procede au draguage des mines comme il entendait le faire en
signe de provocation.
Le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni a declare qu'il avait decouvert vingt-deux mines
dans le detroit et i1 accuse le Gouvernement
albanais de les avoir mouillees, ou de savoir qui
les avait mouillees, et de conna.itre leur presence.
11 n'avance aucun argument convaincant pour
prouver ses accusations; il se borne seulement a
dire que personne ne pouvait mouiller les mines
si pres des batteries albanaises sans la connaissauce des autorites albanaises. C'est la un argument simpliste. Tout le monde sait que, dans
toutes les mers, il y a eu et i1 y a encore des
mines qui ne sont pas draguees. Dans une note
adressee a l'etat-major general de l'armee nationale albanaise, le 25 janvier 1945, le general
de brigade Hodgson, chef de la Mission militaire britannique en Albanie, affirmait que
meme les chenaux navigables declares ouverts
n'etaient pas surs et que les navires naviguaient
a leurs risques et perilsl •
Il n'y a pas longtemps, on a annonce que le
bateau grec Chimarra avait heurte une mine et
coule dans la partie orientale de la Mediterranee, pres de la cote turque. Qui devait ctre au
courant de la presence d'une mine dans ces
parages? En outre, comment peut-on concilier le
fait que l'Albanie n'a pas ete appelee a partidper au Comite de deminage parce qu'elle n'avait
pas de dragueurs de mines, avec l'accusation
britannique qu'elle a mouille des mines dans le
chenal?
Le Gouvernement de la Republique populaire
d'Albanie a toujours cherche et cherche encore
a entretenir des relations amicales avec son alliee
de la guerre, la Grande-Bretagne; c'est pourquoi
il n'avait aucune raison de mouiller ou de permettre le mouillage de mines. En outre, s'il avait
ete au courant de l'existence d'un champ de
mines, il n'avait aucune raison pour ne pas avertir de sa presence.
Dans sa politique a l'egard de l'Albanie, le
Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni suit la methode du fait accompli. De la meme fas;on qu'il
a presente comme un fait accompli le draguage
des mines dans le detroit, il essaie de presenter
comme un fait accompli la culpabilite du Gouvernement albanais en pretendant que ce dernier .
aurait dfl. avertir les autres pays du minage de
ses eaux, en vertu des articles 3 et 4 de la Huitieme Convention de La Haye.
Avant d'en appeler a la Convention de La
Haye, le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
devrait demontrer l'exactitude de ses accusa-

• See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Supplement No. 3, Annex 8, page 44.

1 Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du ConSilii de securitl,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 3, Annexe 8, page 44.

Confining itself to a mere preliminary notice
and contrary to the principle of sovereignty and
to the decision of the Board whose authority it
invokes, the Government of the United King"dom proceeded to sweep the mines as a gesture
of provocation, as it had intended.
The Government of the United Kingdom has
stated that it found twenty-two mines in the
Channel, and it accuses the Albanian Government of having laid them, or of having known
who laid them and of being aware of their presence. It does not advance any convincing argument to prove its accusations; it merely says that"
no one could have laid the mines so close to the
Albanian batteries without the knowledge of the
Albanian·authorities. That argument is an oversimplification. Everybody knows that there were
and stilI are unswept mines in all seas. Brigadier
Hodgson, head of the British Military Mission
in Albania, in a note to the General Staff of
the Albanian National Army, dated 25 January
1945, stated that even the navigable channels
declared open were not safe, and that ships sailed
"
at their own risk and peri1. l
Not long ago, it was announced that the Greek
vessel Chimarra had struck a mine and had sunk
in the eastern Mediterranean, near the Turkish
coast. Who should have been aware of the presence of a mine at that particular spot? Furthermore, how can one reconcile the fact that
Albania was not invited to participate in the
Mine Clearance Board because she had no minesweepers with the British accusation that she
laid the mines in the channel?
The Government of the Albanian People's
Republic has always endeavoured, and still endeavours, to maintain friendly relations with its
war-time ally, Great Britain, and had no reason
for laying mines or allowing them to be laid.
Moreover, if it were aware of the presence of a
mine-field, it had no reason for not giving warning of its existence.

334
well founded. The Albanian Government did not
lay the mines; it does not know who laid them,
nor whether there were any mines and it is not
responsible for the safety of shipping in its territorial waters or in the straits. In 1894, the Institute of International Law in Paris recognized the
principle that coastal States are. in. no .way r~­
sponsible for the safety of shIppmg m theIr
territorial waters.
The mine-sweeping. operations and the incidents of 15 May and 22 October, seen in their
true perspective and in the light of the principles
and rules of international law, clearly prove that
the whole responsibility falls on the Government
of the United Kingdom. In this case, we are
faced with a series of organized and repeated
acts of provocation on the part of the Government of the United Kingdom, which are closely
related to the general policy of Great Britain
towards Albania and which have a specific aim.
In his statement yesterday, the United Kingdom representative tried to make the Albanian
Government responsible for the losses suffered
by British ships in the Corfu Channel. He
attempted to deny the facts by invoking certain
arguments; he reproached the Albanian people
and the Albanian Government for their lack of
humanity, and accused them of criminal acts.
In the first place, I formally and categorically
repudiate the accusations mentioned; such accusations are incompatible with the feeling of solidarity which distinguishes the Albanian people.
It is traditional for them to hold out a hand to
help those who are suffering. That was the feeling which animated the Albanian sailors when
the British ships were in danger. Unfortunately,
this gesture was not appreciated, it was even
looked upon with scorn by the British crews.
In the same way, by an over-simplification, by
suppositions, by a biased interpretation of the
circumstances and without producing any concrete proof, the United Kingdom representative
is trying to hold Albania responsible for criminal
acts against humanity. This is an unmerited accusation. Albania does not and has never committed such acts, particularly against friendly
peoples. On the contrary, it can be said with a
clear conscience that unfriendly and hostile acts
have been committed against Albania.
Each proposal made by our Government with
a view to reaching a just and peaceful solution
has been misinterpreted by the Government of
the United Kingdom and today its representative
is drawing erroneous conclusions.
The United Kingdom representative misinterpreted Albania's proposal to appoint a mixed
commission. The Albanian Government, as a
coastal State, was absolutely right in making
such a suggestion; by this action it was certain
to make an effective contribution to the solution
of the problem.
The United Kingdom representative referred

tions contre l' Albanie. Le Gouvernement albanais n'a pas mouill6 les mines; il ne sait pas qui
les a mouillees, ni s'il y avait ou non des mines,
et il n'est pas responsable de la securite de la
navigation dans ses eaux territoriales, ou dans
le detroit. VInstitut ~e Droit international de
Paris a reconnu en 1894 le principe suivant
lequel les Etats riverains ne sont nullement responsables de la securite de la navigation dans
leurs eaux territoriales.
Les operations de draguage des mines, ainsi
que les faits survenus le 15 mai et le 22 octobre,
vus sous leur vrai jour et confrontes avec les
principes et les regles du droit international,
prouvent de fa~on evidente que toute la responsabilite incombe au Gouvernement du RoyaumeUni. Nous nous trouvons, dans le cas present,
devant une serie de provocations organisees et
consecutives de la part du Gouvemement du
Royaume-Uni, provocations qui sont en rapport
etroit avec la politique generale de la GrandeBretagne envers l'Albanie et qui visent un objectif determine.
Dans son expose d'hier, le representant du
Royaume-U ni a voulu rendre le Gouvernement
albanais responsable des pertes subies par les
navires britanniques dans le detroit de Corfou.
11 s'est efforce de nier les faits en invoquant
certains arguments; il a reproche au peuple albanais et au Gouvemement albanais leur absence
de sentiments humains et les a accuses d'actes
criminels.
Tout d'abord, je rejette fonnellement et categoriquement les accusations dont il a ete fait
mention; de telles accusations sont incompatibles
avec les sentiments de solidarite qui caracterisent
le peuple albanais. 11 est dans sa tradition de
venir en aide et de tendre la main a ceux qui
souffrent. C'est ce sentiment qui inspira les
marins albanais quand les navires britanniques
se trouverent en peril; malheureusement, ce
geste ne fut pas apprecie et meme il fut juge
avec mepris par les equipages britanniques.
De meme, par une argumentation simpliste,
par des suppositions, par une interpretation particuliere des circonstances et sans presenter aucune preuve concrete, le representant du
Royaume-Uni s'efforce de faire passer l'Albanie pour responsable d'actes criminels contre
l'humanite. U ne pareille accusation est indigne.
L'Albanie ne commet pas et n'a jamais commis
de tels actes, surtout envers des peuples amis. Au
contraire, chacun peut declarer, en toute conscience, que des actes inamicaux et hostiles ant
ete commis a l'encontre de l'Albanie.
Chaque proposition faite par notre Gouvernement en vue d'arriver a une solution juste et
pacifique a ete mal interpretee par le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni et aujourd'hui son representant en tire des conclusions erronees.
Le representant du Royaume-Dni s'est mepris
sur le sens de la proposition albanaise relative
a la constitution d'une commission mixte. Le
Gouvernement albanais, en tant qu'Etat riverain, avait toutes les raisons de faire une telle
proposition parce que, agissant de la sorte, il
etait certain d'apporter une contribution efficace
a la solution de ce probU:me.
Le representant du Royaume-Uni a qualifie

335
to the situation on the Albanian frontier as temporary, and refuses to attach any importance to
Greek acts of provocation.
But the civil war which rages in Greece, the
presence of British troops in the country and the
continual acts of provocation committed on our
southern frontier, have made this problem so
important that the Security Council has sent a
Commission of Inquiry to the area. This is no
temporary situation, nor can one regard as accidental, the act of capturing a motor boat and its
Albanian owner near the Albanian coast and
taking them off to Corfu. Under such circumstances, the Albanian Government could not fail
to be vigilant; but the United Kingdom representative, wishing to minimize these international problems, takes the liberty of interpreting
them in accordance with his own point of view.
To interpret facts in accordance with certain specific interests (as the United Kingdom representative did when he pointed out that Yugoslav
ships did not visit the port of Saranda) without
taking into consideration the amenities and
favourable conditions granted by the Albanian
State for transport facilities in other ports; to
talk of incidents which never took place, like
those of 6 June and 29 October, mentioned in
the United Kingdom representative's statement;l
to accuse the Albanian Government in connexion
with the laying of the mines, on the basis of
suppositions and innuendoes; to deny the flight
of British aircraft over Albanian territory and to
deny the hostile attitude of the British fleet in
our waters; those are not desirable methods of
~e1ping the Security Council to make just deci~

During the war, British offieers, as members
of military missions, came to support, with arms,
the Albanian people's struggle against the fascist
occupiers. The Allies provided a quantity of
weapons and clothing for the National Liberation

de passagere la situation a la frontiere albanaise
et refuse toute importance aux provoqtions
grecques.
Mais la guerre civile qui sevit en Grece, la
presence des troupes britanniques dans ce pays
et les provocations continuelles faites sur notre
frontiere meridionale ont donne a ce probleme
une telle importance que le Conseilde securite
a envoye une commission d'enquete dans cette
region. Une pareille situation n'est point passagere, de meme que ne peut etre considere comme
accidente1 le fait de capturer pres de la cote
albanaise un canot a moteur et son proprietaire
albanais et de les emmener a Corfou. Devant
une telle situation, le Gouvernement albanais ne
pouvait pas ne pas etre vigilant; mais le representant du Royaume-Uni, voulant minimiser ces
problemes de caractere international, se permet
de les interpreter selon son propre point de vue.
Interpreter les faits seIon certains interets determines (comme vient de le faire le representant
dll Royaume-Uni lorsqu'il signala que les navires yougoslaves ne frequentaient pas le port de
Saranda) sans prendre en consideration les
convenances et les conditions favorables accordees par l'Etat albanais pour les facllites de
transport dans les autres ports; parler d'incidents
qui n'ont jamais existe, comme ceux du 6 juin et
du 29 octobre, dont il a ete fait mention dans
l'expose du representant du Royaume-Uni1 ;
accuser le Gouvernement albanais apropos du
mouillage des mines, sur la base de suppositions
et d' allusions; nier le survol du territoire albanais par des avions britanniques et nier l'attitude
hostile de la flotte britannique .dans nos eaux;
ce ne sont pas la de bonnes methodes pour aider
le Conseil de securite a prendre de justes decisions.
Les buts du Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
sont tout a fait comprehensibles. 11s consistent a
faire obstacle aux relations amicales etablies
entre les peuples albanais et bntannique, a voller
et a combattre les effolts surhumains du peuple
albanais dans son ceuvre et ses progres vers une
vie meilleure et libre, a nier tous les droits gagnes au prix de tant de sacrifices par cette petite
nation pacifique et democratique, et enfin, a
menacer ouvertement la petite Albanie democratique et populaire.
Comme on le sait, le peuple albanais a pris
les armes des le 7 avril 1939; il a continue le
combat avec la plus grande aprete et en faisant
les plus grands sacrifices jusqu'a l'aneantissement
de l'Allemagne nazie.
Mais le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni s'est
constamment efforce d'ec1ipser les efforts du
peuple albanais et meme de les nier completement; c'est precisement de cette maniere qu'il a
agi dans le domaine de la politique internationale en refusant a ce peuple les droits les plus
eIementaires, droits que ce dernier a merites en
versant le sang de ses meilleurs fils.
Durant la guerre, des officiers britanniques appartenant a des missions militaires sont venus
appuyer par leurs armes la lutte du peuple albanais contre les occupants fascistes. Les Allies ont
fourni quantite d'armes et de vetements a l'armee

• See Official Records of the Semrity Council, Second
Year, No. 15, 107th meeting.

• Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securito,
Deuxieme Annee, No 15, 107eme seance.

SIOns.

The aims of the Government of the United
Kingdom are easy to understand; it is trying to
hinder friendly relations between the British and
Albanian peoples, to conceal and oppose the
superhuman efforts of the Albanian people in its
work and its progress toward a better and free
existence, to deny the rights won at the cost of
so many sacrifices by this small, peaceful and
democratic nation, and to threaten openly popular and democratic little Albania.
As is well known, the Albanian people took
up arms on 7 April 1939, and continued to fight
with the greatest tenacity, making the greatest
sacrifices, until nazi Germany was finally overthrown.
But the Government of the United Kingdom
has constantly tried to belittle the Albanian people's efforts, and even to deny them completely.
In the sphere of international politics, it is denying the Albanian people the most elementary
rights, rights which they have merited by shedding the blood of their best sons.

336
Army, but the British missions did not fail to
give assistance in weapons, munitions and food
to the Balli Kombetar (National Front), to the
Legality faction of Bazi Cani, as well as to the
factions of Muharen Bajraktari and Fiqri Dine,
which were all in open collusion and close collaboration with the Germans and Italians.
This is what Lieutenant Gary, a member of
the British Mission in Albania, said about the
attitude of Balli Kombetar, on the one hand, and
of the National Liberation Movement, on the
other, in a letter dated 8 November 1943 to the
13alli Kombetar Command:
cc• • • whether you know it or not, I wish to
inform you that all your leaders have publicly
exposed themselves and are compromised with
the enemy. I have myself collected documents
which were in the hands of the members of
the Balli Kombetar and which were given to
them by the Germans. When I had acquainted
myself with these documents, I took the irrevocable decision, with a full knowledge of
the facts, to infonn my headquarters that you
were in open collusion with the Germans. The
National Council of Liberation has carried on
a decisive war against the Gennans and Italians, and never in any circumstances has it
compromised itself with the enemy. For the
simple man in the street, the conclusion is
obvious and very clear. My last word is that
your leaders, and in particular, the members
of the Committee of Tirana, formed by the
Gennans, are the most vile and base instruments of the Gennans."
Unfortunately, with regard to the traitors and
their accomplices, Lieutenant Gary did not have
the last word. Up to the last day of the war,
there were British officers in Albania i consequently, all news about Albania was sent officially to London solely by the officers in question.
The news given out by the Government of the
United Kingdom to the press and wireless in
London about the war being waged by the Albanian people misrepresented the facts in a tendentious and, at times, in a criminal way. While
the Albanian people were sacrificing themselves
in the struggle against the Germans, Mid'hat
Frasheri, Mehdi Frasheri and their associates and
others who were quislings and whose military
collaboration with the Gennans was well known,
were referred to by the London wireless as "true
patriots". Such was the attitude openly adopted
towards the Albanian people and the war of liberation.
Here is what the British General Davis says
to excuse himself, in his letter to the National
Liberation Committee, written on his arrival in
Albania in 1943:
"... I am aware of the news given over the
radio, which does not represent the facts or
the truth about the situation in Albania. I am
in a position to explain that this is due to the
had organization of the information system.
The knowledge of these men regarding Albania is out of date, and they are not in a
position to understand, interpret and represent
the situation properly. I can affirm that there.

de liberation nationale, mais les missions britanniques n' ont pas manque de donner une aide en
armes, munitions et vivres au Balli Kombetar
(Front national), au groupe Legalite de Bazi
Cani, ainsi qu'aux groupes de Muharen Bajraktari et Fiqri Dine, tous en collusion manifeste
en en· collaboration etroite avec les Allemands et
les Italiens.
Void ce que dit le lieutenant Gary, membre
de la mission britannique en Albanie, sur l'attitude du Balli Kombetar, d'une part, et du Mouvement de liberation nationale, d'autre part,
dans une lettre en date du 8 novembre 1943,
adressee au commandement du Balli Kombetar:
". . . que vous soyez ou non au courant, je
tiens a vous informer que tous vos dirigeants
sont devoiles publiquement et sont en collusion avec J'ennemi. J'ai trouve moi-meme des
documents qui se trouvaient entre les mains
des membresdu Balli Kombetar et qui leur
avaient ete fournis par les Allemands. Lorsque
j'ai pris connaissance de ces documents; j'ai
pris la decision irrevocable, en pleine connaissance de cause, d'infonner mon quartier general que vous etes en collusion ouverte avec
les Allemands. Le Conseil de liberation natio. nale a pouTSuivi une guerre decisive contre
les Allemands et les Italiens et jamais, en aucun cas, il n'a ete en collusion avec l'ennemi.
Pour le simple homme de la rue, la fin est
connue et bien visible. Mon dernier mot est
que vos dirigeants, et plus particulierement les
membres du Comite de Tirana forme par le.s
Allemands, sont les plus vils et les plus bas instruments de ces derniers."
Malheureusement, en ce qui concerne les tra1tres et leurs complices, le lieutenant Gary n,avait
pas le dernier mot. Jusqu'au demier jour de la
guerre, il y a eu des officiers britanniques en
Albanie; par consequent, toutes les nouvelles sur
l'Albanie n'etaient fournies officiellement a Londres que par les officiers en question. Les nOllvelles concernant la guerre livree par le peuple
albanais et transmises par le Gouvenlement du
Royaume-Uni a la presse et a la radio de Londres alteraient les faits d'une maniere tendancieuse et quelquefois criminelle. Pendant que le
peuple albanais se sacrifiait dans la lutte livree
contre les Allemands, Mid'hat Frasheri, Mehdi
Frasheri et d,autres de leurs compagnons, qui
etaient des quislings et dont la collaboration militaire avec les Allemands etait publiquement
connue, etaient qualifies par la radio de Londres
de "vrais patriotes". Telle etait l'attitude prise
contre le peuple albanais et sa guerre de liberation.
Voici ce que dit, pour s'excuser, le general
britannique Davis, dans la lettre qu'il adressa
en 1943, lors de son arrivee en Albanie, au Comite de liberation nationale:
co• • • J'ai pris connaissance des infOlmations
diffusees par la radio, infonnations qui ne
representent pas les faits ou la verite sur la
situation en Albanie. .T e suis a meme d'expIiquer que cela tient a la mauvaise organisation
du systeme d'information. Les connaissances
de ces hommes sur l'Albanie sont demodees et
ils ne sont pas en etat de comprendre, d'interpreter et de presenter la situation d'une

337
is a group of Englishmen who distort the
facts in order to· make them suit their own
interests."
Another method of attempting to explain the
falsified reports of the London wireless was
adopted by the British Major Peter Kemp. He
naively wrote in a letter on 20 October 1943:
cc ••• when the BBC praised the Balli KombetarJ
it intended to praise the National Liberation
Movement ..."
The political attitude and practical work of
the British military missions in Albania were in
most cases in flagrant contradiction to the Albanian people's attitude and the fight to a finish
which they were waging against the fascist occupier and the quislings. The support which the
British missions gave to Balli KombetarJ to the
Legality group of the bandit Abas Kupi and to
the other groups of traitors and quislings is characteristic. Despite the fact that the Albanian
Government and the people's courts publicly
condemned those organizations and their leaders, who were war criminals, it is an indisputable
fact that the British military missions in Albania
collaborated with them right up to the end. At
the headquarters of the war criminal Abas Kupi,
there remained right up to the last few days a
British mission with the British Colonel McLean
at its head.
With the war criminals Muharen Bajraktari,
Cjon Marka Gjoni, Kol Bib Mirakaj, etc., there
was the British mission under Major Neal, who,
on the eve of the complete liberation of Albania,
and while our forces were fighting against the
Germans to free northern Albania and Scutari,
used to walk through the streets of that town in
the company of German Gestapo officers. At the
headquarters of the quislings Fiqri Dine, Xhem
Gostivari, and H ysni Dema, was the British
mission under Major Peter Kemp, Major Redell
and Captain Hends.
In addition to the above indisputable facts,
the Government of the People's Republic of
Albania is in possession of a series of important
official British documents which clearly show
how the General Staff of the National Liberation
Army was threatened to the effect that if it went
on fighting the quislings who were openly collaborating with the Germans, supplies of weapons
and food would be suspended.
This is what Air Vice-Marshal William Elliot
wrote on behalf of the Supreme Allied Commander in the Mediterranean1 to Colonel-General Enver Hoxha, on 14 July 1944:
"... I must ask you to do all that you possibly
can to prevent your forces from undertaking
hostile measures against the forces of Abas
Kupi. If you use arms to this end I shall be
compelled to suspend supplies."
Air Vice-Marshal Elliot's letter was accompanied by a verbal ultimatum from Colonel
Palmer, who, at the most critical moment, when
the whole of our First Division was engaged in
'General Sir Henry Maitland Wilson.

maniere juste. Je peux affirrner qu'il existe un
grollped'Anglais qui alterent les faits pour les
faire cadrer avec leurs interets."
Void l'attitude adoptee par le commandant
britannique Peter Kemp pour justifier les informations falsifiees par la radio de Londres. Peter
Kemp ecrit naivement, dans une lettre datee du
20 octobre 1943: "... lorsque la BBC faisait
l'eloge du Balli Kombetar, eUe avait l'intention
de faire celui du Mouvement de liberation nationale ..."
L'attitude politique adoptee par les missions
militaires britanniques en Albanie, de meme que
leurs travaux, etaient, dans la plupart des cas,
en contradiction flagrante avec l'attitude meme
du peuple albanais et la guerre a outrance qu'il
menait contre l'occupant fasciste et les quislings.
L'appui que les missions britanniques donnaient
au Balli Kombetar, au groupe Legalite du bandit
Abas Kupi et aux autres groupes de traitres et de
quislings est le fait le plus caracteristique. Malgre
la condamnation publique de ces organisations et
de leurs dirigeants, criminels de guerre, par le
Gouvernement albanais et les tribunaux populaires, il est incontestable que les missions militaires
britarilliques en Albanie ont collabore jusqu'a la
fin avec ces organisations et ces hommes. Vne
mission britannique, commandee par le colonel
britannique McLean, sejourna jusqu'aux derniers jours au quartier general du criminel de
guen"e Abas Kupi.
Aupres des criminels de guerre Muharen
Bajraktari, Cjon Marka Gjoni, Kol Bib Mirakaj,
etc., etait stationnee la mission britannique ayant
pour chef le commandant Neal, le meme qui, a
la veille de la liberation complete de l'Albanie et
au moment ou nos forces combattaient les Allemands pour liMrer l'Albanie septentrionale et
Scutari, se promenait dans les rues de cette ville
accompagne d'officiers allemands de la Gestapo.
Au quartier general des quislings Fiqri Dine,
Xhem Gostivari, Hysni Dema, sejournait la mission britannique ayant a. sa tete le commandant
Peter Kemp, le commandant Redell et le capitaine Hends.
Outre les faits incontestables precites, le Gou~
vernement de la Republique populaire d'Albanie
possede une sene d'importants documents officiels britanniques desquels ressort clairement la
menace faite a l'etat-major de l'armee de liberation nationale que, s'il continuait de combattre
les quislings qui collaboraient ouvertement avec
les Allemands, le ravitaillement en armes et .en
vivres serait suspendu.
Void ce qu'ecrivait, le 14 juillet 1944, au
colonel-general Enver Hoxha, le vice-marechal
de l'air William Elliot, au nom du commandant
supreme allie en Mediterranee1 :
". . . I1 me faut vous solliciter pour que vous
fassiez l'impossible, de vatre cote, afin d'empecher vos forces de prendre des mesures hostiles contre les forces d'Abas Kupi; si vous
employez les armes pour un tel but, je serai
contraint de suspendre tout ravitaillement."
La lettre du vice-marechal Elliot fut accompagnee d'un ultimatum verbal du colonel Palmer
qui, au moment le plus critique, alors que notre
1ere division se trouvait entierement engagee
, Le general Sir Henry Maitland Wilson.

338

action with the Germans, threatened to suspend .
its supplies of arms.
Colonel-General Enver Hoxha did not accept
Air Vice-Marshal Elliot's point of view, and rejected Colonel Palmer's ultimatum, thus placing
on the British officers in Albania the responsibility for any loss which might be suffered by the
Division as a result of such an arbitrary and
unjust act. Abas Kupi, the protege of Allied Force
Headquarters, l\1editerranean, was a traitor
whose mercenary forces were actually fighting on
the side of the Germans fighting against our
National Liberation Army. All Abas Kupi's
treacherous activity, in collaboration with the
Germans, has since been proved by German documents which are in the possession of the Government of the Albanian People's Republic.
While the forces of the National Liberation
Army were engaged at Peshkopija and Dibra
against the well-known quislings Fiqri Dine,
Xhem Gostivari, Hysni Dema and others, Major
Redell, in order to put an end to the fighting,
sent a letter to Colonel Haxhi Lle.shi, dated
3 February 1943, in which he said: "We have
obtained from the National Committee of Peshkopija (a quisling committee) permission to intervene with Xhem Gostivari and other forces,
with a view to putting an end to the struggle,
and they have written to us to this effect tonight ..." It has been proved that at the headquarters of Xhem Gostivari and Fiqri Dine there
were three German majors directing operations
against the partisans.
The Gestapo agents, Helmuth Muth and
Victor Pann, who were taken prisoners with their
papers by our forces, made the following statement before the People's Court: "Through
Major Neat: the German Eleventh Army Corps
which was operating in the Scutari area received
a proposal to collaborate with the British troops
who were to land in Albania." The detailed
plans for that collaboration, obtained from German agents, are at present in the hands of the
Government of the Albanian People's Republic.
It should be noted that in September 1944,
when the National Liberation Anny was not
only able to undertake isolated actions but was
waging a regular war against the Germans, Colonel Palmer, head of the British Military Mission in Albania, in a very confidential letter of
16 September 1944, asked the General Headquarters of the National Liberation Army for
authorization to land contingents of special forces
at various points in Albania. Colonel Palmer's
letter ended, as always, in the form of an ultimatum. As the arrival of those troops was not
necessary, Colonel Palmer was only authorized
to land eighteen men.

On 19 September 1944, General Wilson intervened again, with a view to landing special
troops in Albania.
All these facts and others in the Albanian
Government's possession show the way in which
British missions in Albania acted during the war.
Further, the unfriendly attitude of the Govern-

dans des combats contre les Allemands, mena~ait
de suspendre son ravitaillement en armes.
Le colonel-general Enver Hoxha n'accepta
pas le point de vue du vice-marechal Elliot et
rejeta l'ultimatum du colonel Palmer; il rejetait ainsi la responsabilite Sur tous les officiers
britanniques se trouvant en Albanie pour toute
perte qu'un tel actearbitraire et injuste pourrait
entrainer pour la division. Abas Kupi, protege
par le quartier general allie de la Mediterranee,
etait un traitre dont les forces mercenaires, rangees avec celles des Allemands, combattaient notre armee de liberation nationale. D'ailleurs toute
l'activite traitresse d'Abas Kupi, en collaboration avec les Allemands, a ete prouvee par des
documents allemands qui sont en possession du
Gouvemement de la Republique populaire d'Albanie.
Pendant que les forces de l'.armee de liberation nationale etaient engagees a Peshkopija et
a Dibra contre les quislings bien connus Fiqri
Dine, Xhem Gostivari, Hysni Dema et autres,
le commandant Redell, dans le but de mettre
fin au combat, adressa le 3 £evrier 1943 une lettre au colonel Haxhi Lleshi, lettre dans laquelle
il est dit: "Nous avons obtenu de la part du
Comite national de Peshkopija (comite quisling) l'autorisation d'intervenir aupres de Xhem
Gostivari et des autres forces pour cesser le combat et ils nous ont envoye cc soir des lettres a
ce sujet ..." 11 est prouve qu'au quartier general de Xhem Gostivari et Fiqri Dine, se trouvaient trois commandants allemands qui dirigeaient les operations contre les partisans.
Les agents de la Gestapo, He1muth Muth et
Victor Pann, faits prisonniers par nos forces avec
leurs documents, ont affirme devant le tribunal
populaire ce qui suit: "Par l'intermediaire du
commandant Neal, le XIeme Corps d'armee allemand qui operait dans la zone de Scutari a re<;u
une proposition de collaboration avec les troupes
britanniques qui devaient debarquer en Albanie." Les plans detailles de cette collaboration,
remis par des agents allemands, se trouvent
actuellement entre les mains du Gouvemement
de la Republique populaire d'Albanie.
11 est opportun de noter qu'au mois de septembre 1944, alors que l'armee de liberation
nationale non seulement etait en etat d'entreprendre des actions isolees, mais menait une
guerre de front contre les Allemands, le colonel
Palmer, chef de la Mission militaire britannique
en Albanie, dans une lettre tres confidentielle du
16 septembre 1944, sollicitait de l'etat.major
general de l'armee de liberation nationale l'autorisation de faire debatquer des contingents de
troupes specialisees sur certains points de l'Albanie. La lettre du colonel Pa1mer se terminait,
comme toujours, sous forme d'ultimatum. L'arrivee de ces troupes n'etant pas necessaire, le
colonel Palmer fut autorise a debarquer dix-huit
hommes seulement.
Le 19 septembre 1944, le general Wilson intervint de nouveau en vue du debarquement en
Albanie de ces troupes specialisees.
Tous ces faits et d'autres, qui sont entre les
mains du Gouvernement albanais, demontrent
la maniere d'agir des missions britanniques en
Albanie pendant la guerre. D'autre part, l'atti-

339

ment of the United Kingdom towards the
Albanian people was clearly shown by the fact
that all those war criminals, quislings, agents of
the SIM and the Gestapo, got together and were
housed under the protection of the British authorities in the finest buildings in Rome, Cairo,
etc. The just and repeated demands of the Albanian Government for the extradition of those
criminals, who had killed and burned in Albania
with incredible cynicism and impudence, were
ignored. Today those Albanian war criminals,
under the protection of the British authorities,
are living peacefully in Rome, Cairo and elsewhere. They are receiving assistance so that they
may be organized and used, if necessary, against
the Albanian people; they carry on propaganda
against the Albanian people, and do it under thfl
benevolent protection of the Government of the
United Kingdom.
In spite of the attitude of the British missions,
the National Liberation Movement, thanks to the
friendship existing between our people and the
British people, and thanks to the anti-fascist
alliance and the common cause which bound us
in the struggle against the common enemy, has
never informed the Albanian people of such
sombre facts; on the contrary, the National Liberation Movement made every effort to
strengthen the friendship between our peoples
and to preserve the anti-fascist alliance which
was essential for our great victory.
After the liberation of Albania, the Albanian
Government hoped that the Government of the
United Kingdom would understand that as the
attempts of ;British missions in Albania had failed
completely, they should be brought to an end.
The Albanian traitors who had been helped by
these missions were completely unmasked and
forever eliminated from the life of the Albanian
people.
After such a bitter struggle, after her unparalleled sacrifices in the fight against the Italians
and the Germans, side by side with her great
allies, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
the United Kingdom, the United States of
America and all the other anti-fascist nations,
Albania completely liberated itself by its own
efforts and began to reconstruct its new life amid
the ruins of war, in accordance with the wishes
and aspirations of its people who for centuries
had suffered so much under the oppressive
domination of foreign imperialists, instruments
of the aggressive imperialism of fascist Italy and
nazi Germany. For the first time in its history,
the Albanian people was master of its destiny,
thanks to the blood it had shed so prodigally.
T.he United Kingdom, knowing full well the
sacrifices borne by our people in the common
cause, should have established friendly relations
with the new Albanian State, but nothing was
done to that end. On the contrary, the Government of the United Kingdom behaved in such
a way that relations with the new Albanian
democracy deteriorated and finally led to the
present results. It is particularly difficult to understand Field-Marshal Alexander's request to
the President of the Council of Albania, Colonel-

tude inamicale du Gouvernement du RoyaumeUni a l'egard du peuple albanais est amplement
demontree par le fait que tous ces criminels de
guerre, les quislings, les agents de la SIM et de
la Gestapo se grouperent et furent loges sous la
protection des autorites britanniques, dans les
plus beaux batiments de Rome, du Caire, etc.
. Les demandes justes et reiterees du Gouvernement albanais pour qu'on extrade ces criminels
qui avaient mis l'Albanie a feu et a sang avec un
cynisme et une impudence incroyables, ne furent
pas prises en consideration. Sous la protection
des autorites britanniques, ces criminels de
guerre albanais vivent aujourd'hui tranquillement a Rome, au Caire et ailleurs. On les aide a
s'organiser pour etre employes, en cas de besoin,
contre le peuple albanais; ils font de la propagande contre le peuple albanais, et cela, sous la
protection bienveillante du Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni.
Grace a l'amitie existant entre notre peuple et'
le peuple anglais, grace a l'alliance antifasciste
et a la cause commune qui nous liaient dans la
lutte contre un ennemi commun, le Mouvement .
de liberation nationale, malgre l'attitude des missions britanniques, n'a jamais porte ala connais.
sance du peuple albanais des faits aussi sombres;
au contraire, le Mouvement de liberation nationale deploya tous ses efforts pour que l'amiti6
entre nos peuples se renforce et que 1'alliance
antifasciste, condition indispensable de la vie.
toire finale, ne subisse aucune atteinte.
Apres la liberation de l' Albanie, le Gouvernement albanais pensait que le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni aurait compris que, les tentatives
des missions britanniques en Albanie ayant completement echoue, il fallait mettre un terrne a
ces dernieres. Les traitres albanais qui avaient
ete aides par ces missions furent totalement demasques et €limines a jamais de la vie de notre
peuple.
Apres une lutte apre, entreprise au prix de
sacrifices inoui's contre les Italiens et les Allemands, aux cotes de ses grands allies, l'Union
des Republiques socialistes sovietiques, le
Royaume-Uni et les Etats-Unis d'Amerique, et
tous les autres peuples antifascistes, l'Albanie se
libera completement par ses propres forces. Sur
les decombres laisses par la guerre, elle commen~a d'edifier sa vie nouvelle seIon les desirs
et les aspirations de son peuple qui, durant des
siecles entiers, avait tant souffert sous la domination la plus lourde des imperialistes etrangers,
des instruments de l'imperialisme agresseur, de
l'Italie fasciste et de l'Allemagne nazie. Le peupIe albanais, pour la premiere fois dans son histoire, etait maitre de sa destinee et cela grace au
sang verse sans compteI'.
Le Royaume-Uni, qui connaissait bien leg
sacrifices faits par notre peuple pour la cause
commune, aurait dO. etablir des relations arnicales avec le nouvel Etat albanais. Rien ne fut fait
clans cette voie; au contraire, le Gouvernement
du Royaume-Uni agit d'une maniere telle que
les relations avec la nouvelle democratie albanaise empirerent, aboutissant ainsi aux resultats
actuels. Particulierement incomprehensible fut la
demande, en date du 22 janvier 1945, adressee
par le marechal Alexander au colonel-general

340
General Hoxha, on 22 January 1945, that the
Allied Military Mission, in reality consisting exclusively of British officers, should be replaced by
a British military mission consisting of the same
British officers with the addition of BrigadierGeneral Hodgson as Chief and two or three
dozen British officers and men.

At a time when Albania was expecting her
ally, Great Britain, to show its Government's
gratitude and to send a diplomatic mission, at
a time when Albania was completely liberated
and her internal situation had become normal
again-a state of affairs of which the Government of the United Kingdom was well awarea military mission of fifty or sixty people was
sent to Albania. Such an action was characteris,tic of the attitude of the United Kingdom Government. Colonel-General Hoxha drew FieldMarshal Alexander's attention to this circumstance by stating, in his reply, that he failed to see
the need for sending a British mission, since the
Allied Military Mission was authorized to remain in the country until' diplomatic relations
had been established between the two countries
in recognition of the assistance in arms and ammunition given to the Albanian army fighting
on Yugoslav territory.
Field-Marshal Alexander's ultimatum to Colonel-General Hoxha was promptly sent through
Colonel Palmer. It contained the following
points :
1. Inform Colonel-General Hoxha that the
Government of the United Kingdom cannot
grant polit:M;al recognition to any Government in
Albania until the internal situation of the country has been stabilized.
2. Inform Colonel-General Hoxha that the
refusal to allow a British military mission in
Albania and the restrictions which he thinks
proper to impose upon the liberty of movement
of British officers will be considered as acts of
discourtesy.
'
3. In view of the fa~t that Albania will no
longer be supplied with arms, ammunition or
other material after the withdrawal of the enemy,
and in view of the fact that Force 399 has now
finished its task of distribution, Colonel-General
Hoxha must be informed that if a mission is to
stay in Albania, it will be a new mission of a
different character from the one which is there
at present.
4. In view of those facts and of the possibility
of any change of attitude, ask Colonel-General
Hoxha to revise his decision and to permit a
British military mission in the fonn proposed
originally. It must be made clear to ColonelGeneral Hoxha that if he does not accept the
proposal to send a mission, he will delay still
further the recognition of the Albanian Government.
5. The reply of Colonel-General Hoxha to this
last point must be obtained within three or four
days at most.

Hoxha, President du Conseil des ministres albanais. Le marechal Alexander sollicitait du colonel-general Hoxha que la Mission militaire alliee,
qui en realite se composait seulement d'officiers
britanniques, fUt remplacee par une mission
militaire britannique qui serait composee des
memes officiers, a la tete desquels se trouverait
le general de brigade Hodgson, ainsi que de deux
ou trois douzaines d'officiers et de soldats britanniques.
Au moment all l'Albanie attendait de son
alliee, la Grande.Bretagne, la reconnaissance de
son Gouvernement et I'envoi d'une representation diplomatique, au moment ou l'Albanie
etait completement lib6ree et sa situation interieure redevenue normale--ee que le Gouvernement du Royaume-Dni n'ignorait pas-une mission militaire de cinquante a soixante hommes
fut envoyee en Albanie. Vne telle initiative etait
. caracteristique de l'attitude adoptee par le Gouvemement du Royaume-Dui; le colonel-general
Hoxha attira sur ce point l'attention du marechal Alexander en lui faisant remarquer, dans sa
reponse, qu'il ne voyait pas la necessite d'envoyer
une mission britannique, etant donne que la
Mission militaire alIiee etait autorisee a sejourner
dans le pays jusqu'a ce que les relations diplomatiques fussent etablies entre les deux pays, en
reconnaissance de l'aide en armes et en muni·
tions apportee a l'armee albanaise qui combattait en territoire yougoslave.
L'ultimatum du marechal Alexander destine
au colonel-general Hoxha ne manqua pas d'arriver aussitot par l'interrnediaire du colonel Palmer. 11 comportait les points suivants:
1. Informer le colonel-general Hoxha que le
Gouvernement du Royaume-Dni ne pourra accorder la reconnaissance politique a aucun Gouvernement en Albanie, tant que la situation
interieure du pays n'aura pas ete stabilisee.
2. Faire comprendre au colonel-general
Hoxha que le refus d'agreer une mission mili·
taire britannique en Albanie et les restrictions
qu'il a juge opportun d'imposer a la libertc de
circulation des officiers britanniques, seront consi·
deres comme des actes discourtois.
3. Etant donne que l'Albanie ne recevra plus
d'armes, de munitions ou de matcriel divers par
suite de la retraite de l'ennemi, et etant donne
que le detachement 399 a maintenant acheve
son travail de distribution, ,informer le colonelgeneral Hoxha que, dans le cas ou une mission
devrait sejourner en Albanie, ce serait une nouvelle mission de caractere different de celle qui
s'y trouve actuellement.
4. Etant donne les points precedents et l'eventualite d'un changement d'attitude, demander
au colonel-general Hoxha de revenir sur sa decision et d'agreer une mission militaire britannique
sous la forme qui avait ete proposee au debut.
Il faut clairement indiquer au colonel-general
Hoxha que, s'il n'accepte pas la proposition d'envoi d'une mission, il ne fera que retarder davantage la reconnaissance du Gouvemement albanais.
5. La reponse du colonel-general Hoxha ace
dernier point doit etre obtenue dans un d6lai de
trois a quatre jours au maximum.

341
It is clear from this document that Field-Marshal Alexander was aware of the liberati"on of
Albania and knew that the enemy had evacuated
our territory, that the supply of arms and other
war material had come to an end and that Force
399 had finished its distribution. Hence, it might
be asked what was the point of sending a reinforced British military mission to Albania, commanded by a General, under conditions imposed
by the Field-Marshal himself. Surely, a small
British diplomatic mission would have been adequate pending recognition!

.Du document susmentionne, il ressort clairement que le marechal Alexander avait connaissance de la liberation de l'Albanie, qu'il savait
que l'ennemi avait evacue notre territoire, que
la fourniture d'armes et d'autre materiel de
guerre avait pris fin et que le detachement 399
avait acheve la distribution. Dam ces cireanstances, on peut se demander quelle etait 1'utilite
d'envoyer en Albanie, sous des conditions imposees par le mankhallui-meme, une mission militaire britannique commandee par un general,
alors qu'une mission diplomatique restreinte eOt
ete suffisante jusqu'a la reconnaissance du Gouvernement albanais!

The object of the British military mission was,
ostensibly, to keep the United Kingdom Government informed of the situation in Albania, with
a view to hastening recognition of the Albanian
Government. The British Government was, however, better informed than any other Government on the situation in Albania, since officers
such as Colonel Palmer, Major Smith and others
under the command of General Hodgson remained in Albania and continued to supply their
Government with information. The purpose then
was not to recognize the Albanian Government.
The facts are obvious: it was a question of
strengthening the British Military Mission under
the command of a General, for quite different
purposes. The arrival of General Hodgson and
other members of his Mission in Albania coincided with the presentation of the request by the
ML Mission (the British Military Liaison Mission responsible for distributing relief and preparing for the arrival of UNRRA) .

Ouvertement, le but de la mission militaire
britannique etait de mettre le Gouvernement dv
Royaume-Uni au eaurant de la situation en
Albanie afin de hater la reconnaissance du Gouvernertlent albanais. Mais, de tous les Gouvernements, celui du Royaume-Uni etait le mieux
informe sur la situation en Albanie, car des officiers comme le colonel Palmer, le commandant
Smith et d'autres, sous le commandement du
general Hodgson, etaient toujours en Albanie et
continuaient a lui fournir des informations. Il
ne s'agissait point de reconnaitre le Gouvernement albanais. La situation est sans equivoque.
11 s'agissait tout simplement de renforcer la mission militaire britannique sous le commandement
d'un general, pour des buts tout a fait differents. L'arrivee en Albanie du general Hodgson
et des autres membres de sa mission coincida
avec la demande presentee par la Mission ML
(mission militaire britannique de liaison chargee
de la distribution des secours et de la preparation
de l'arrivee de l'UNRRA).

It was then that the British authorities in
Albania began to make insistent demands for
mine-sweeping. The Chief of the Military Liaison
Mission presented an ultimatum to Colonel-General Enver Hoxha informing him that in the
event of the conditions being refused, UNRRA's
arrival in Albania would become impossible.

C'est alors que commencerent les exigences
des autorites britanniques en Albanie en vue du
dragage des mines. Le chef de la mission militaire de liaison presenta au colonel-general Enver Hoxha un ultimatum lui faisant savoir qu'en
cas de refus des conditions, l'arrivee de
1'UNRRA en Albanie serait impossible.

Let us see what were the conditions proposed
by the Military Liaison Mission to our Government. The first conditions was that about 1,500
to 1,700 British officers and technicians should
be landed in Albania to carry out the distribution of UNRRA relief. This personnel was to be
stationed in the ports of Durazzo, Valona, and
elsewhere and was to dispose of well-defined
zones in those ports; in other words, it was
to occupy all Albania's ports. This significant
proposal was categorically rejected by ColonelGeneral Bnver Hoxha, who agreed neither to the
number of personnel proposed nor to the other
proposals of the Military Liaison Mission. In
view of the Albanian Government's attitude, the
Mission was compelled to cut down the figure
mentioned above to eighty persons.

QueUes etaient les conditions proposees par
la mission militaire de liaison a notre Gouvernement? La premiere condition etait le debarquement en Albanie de 1.500 a 1.700 officiers et
techniciens anglais pour assurer la repartition des
secours fournis par l'UNRRA. Ce personnel
serait stationne dans les ports de Durazzo, de
Valona, et ailleurs; i1 disposerait de zones bien
delimitees dans ces ports; en fait, il occuperait
tous les ports de l'Albanie. Cette proposition
significative fut refusee categoriquement par le
colonel-general Bnver Hoxha; ni l'importance
numerique du personnel envisage, ni les autres
propositions de la mission militaire de liaison
ne furent acceptees. Devant l'attitude du Gouvernement albanais, la mission fut obligee de
reduire le nombre ci-dessus mentionne a quatrevingts personnes.

What were the objects of the Military Liaison
Mission? We cannot'do better than quote below
the important documents in the possession of the
Albanian Government which were communicated by a British official:

Quelles etaient les visees de la mission militaire de liaison? Laissons parler les documents
importants ci-dessous, qui se trouvent en la possession du Gouvernement albanais. et qui ont
ete communiques par une personnalite officielle
britannique:

342
"We have received, from the Military Liaison Mission, information which draws attention to the fact that the Albanians are regarded as enoemies and which stresses the absolute necessity of combating them for purposes
of security. At the same time there are rumours
that all the officers of this Mission are armed
with revolvers and are engaging in firing
practice."
.
This document goes on to speak of the way lO
which the landing in Albania was to take place.
It says:
". . . It was explained that to begin with
a small unit of reconnaissance craft would be
sent. This unit would be instructed to make
a landing and to contact the nearest local ~u­
thorities. Hoxha would undoubtedly be lOformed. Negotiators would go to Hoxha to
submit to him a number of conditions subject
to which he would be given assistance. They
would receive very strict orders not to accept
a compromise. In the event of General
Hoxha's failing to agree, they would endeavour to contact other groups in Albania."
All these manreuvres took place under the
guise of alleged philanthropic objectives, but in
fact, they were directed against a heroic small
nation that had sacrificed itself in defending its
freedom and independence - trampled under
foot by foreigners.
What was the British Military Mission under
Brigadier Hodgson doing? All the members of
the British Mission in Albania, including its
head, Brigadier Hodgson, were moving about
freely in every part of Albania and making contact with anybody they chose. All the charges
laid against the Albanian Government that it
was embarrassing them "in their work", was not
allowing them to "move about freely" and that
the British Mission "was cooped up in the Mission's office at Tirana"-all these charges are
pure invention.
Let us refer to the documents signed by General Hodgson himself and sent to Colonel-General Enver Hoxha, dated 7 April 1945. He
wrote:
"I have just returned from my visit to
southern Albania. In various places soldiers
paid me military honours but since I had very
little time at my disposal, I could not stop. 1
was impressed by their keeness and their fine
military bearing. I also had the satisfaction of
, meeting a number of your commanders and
1 talked with them about their battles and
their past; 1 was greatly interested in all they
had to tell me."
Any facility requested by General Hodgson
from the Albanian authorities was granted without delay. On 26 April 1945, General Hodgson
wrote to Colonel-General Hoxha:
"I have just come back from Scutari where
I had a very enjoyable and interesting stay.
The hospitality of the Chairman of the Town
Council, and of Colonel Shefquet Pec;i and his
officers, was excellent."

"NoilS avons rec;u de la mission militaire de
liaison des informations nollS signalant les
Albanais comme etant des ennemis, insistant
sur la necessite indispensable de les combattre afin d'etre prets a tou~e eventualite. D'autre part, le bruit court que tous les officiers de
cette mission sont armes de revolvers et font
des exercices de tir."
Sur la maniere dont devait s'effectuer le debarquement en Albanie, le document en question continue:
Cl • • • On expliqua qu'au debut on enverrait
une petite unite de bateaux de reconnaissance.
Cette unite aurait pour instructions de faire
un debarquement et de prendre contact avec
les autorites locales les plus proches. Sans
aucun doute, Hoxha devait en etre inform6.
Des parlementaires se rendraient chez lui et
lui presenteraient une serie de conditions dont
dependrait l'assistance qui lui serait apportee.
lis recevraient des instructions tres severes leur
enjoignant de n'admettre aucun compromis.
Dans le cas OU Hoxha n'accepterait pas, ils
s'efforceraient d'entrer en contact avec d'autres groupes albanais."
Tout ces manceuvres etaient masquees par
de pretendus buts philanthropiques, mais etaient
en realite dirigees contre un petit peuple herorque
qui s'etait sacrifie pour la defense de sa libertc
et de son independance, foulees aux pieds par les
etrangers.
Que faisait la mission militaire britannique
command~e par le general de brigade Hodgson?
Tous les membres de la mission britannique en
Albanie, le general de brigade Hodgson en tete,
circulaient librement aux quatre coins du pays,
entrant en contact avec tous ceux avec qui ils le
desiraient. Toutes les accusations portees contre
le Gouvernement albanais, accusations suivant
lesquelles ce dernier les gcnait "dans leur travail" et ne leur permettait pas "de circuler librement", et la mission britannique "etait cantonnee a Tirana dans le bureau de la mission", sont
de pures inventions.
Laissons parler les documents signes par le
general Hodgson lui-meme et envoyes au colonel-general Enver Hoxha, en date du 7 avril
1945. Le general Hodgson ecrit:
"Je viens de rentrer de ma visite dans le
sud de l'Albanie. Dans diverses localites, des
soldats m'ont rendu les honneurs, mais, etant
donne le peu de temps dont je disposais, je
n'ai pas pu m'arreter. J'ai ete impressionne
par leur zele et leur bonne conduite militaire.
J'ai eu egalement la satisfaction de rencontrer
un certain nombre de vos commandants et je
me suis entretenu avec eux de leurs combats,
de leur passe; j'ai ete vivement interesse par
tout ce qu'ils avaient a me raconter."
Toute facilite sollicitee par le general Hodgson aupres des autorites albanaises lui etait immediatement accordee. Void ce qu'ecrivait, le
26 avril 1945, le general Hodgson au colonelgeneral Hoxha:
"Je viens de rentrer de Scutari ou j'ai fait
un sejour tres agreable et trcs interessant.
L'hospitalite du President du Conseil municipal de cette ville, du colonel Shefquet Pe~i
et de ses officiers, fut excellente."

343

On 9 July 1945, General Hodgson asked Colonel-General Hoxha for permission to go to
southern Albania again: "I should like, with
your approval, to go to southern Albania as soon
as possible, as three months have elapsed since
my last visit." Colonel-General Hoxha's reply
was that he gladly gave him permission to go to
southern Albania.
Let us now see how General Hodgson and
members of his Mission responded to all these
tokens of good will and kindness on the part of
the Albanian authorities and the President of the
Albanian Government. We give below a few
facts taken from hundreds of others.
In July 1945, General Hodgson went to
southern Albania, where he made the following
statement: "The form of the Albanian Government is a dictatorship." Speaking of the Greek
frontier provocations, General Hodgson said to
the Commanding Officer 9f our Third Division:
"The provocations of the Greeks are nothing
more than salutes." General Hodgson expressed
his opinion on the elections of 2 December 1945
as follows: "The elections in Albania take place
at the Kosova Cinema with the help of partisan
bayonets." When the British Military Mission
left Durazzo, an English officer, A. Neal, said
openly: "We shall come back, but in a different
way".
It would take a volume to list the British
Mission's interferences in Albanian internal
affairs, but we shall confine ourselves here to
quoting a document signed by a highly placed
British personality in Albania; this document
contains the secret and confidential report
PLjSEGj154j5 addressed to his office and
dated 6 April 1946 :
"It should be borne in mind that Brigadier-General Hodgson, who commanded the
British Military Mission, adopted an uncompromising attitude towards the Albanian
Government. He always spoke of Albania in
the most offensive way. He frequently boasted
of having said: 'Out with Hoxha!'. To begin
with, Brigadier-General Hodgson enjoyed
every facility for moving about freely in
Albania, and the fact that these facilities were
later restricted is entirely due to his own attitude. In spite of that, Brigadier-General
Hodgson, right up to his last days in Albania,
was always out on shooting expeditions."
In the light of these patent truths, it is quite
clear how ill-prepared the British authorities
were to establish good relations with a people
who entertained such friendly feelings towards
the British people. The highly-placed Englishman already referred to goes on to say in the
same document:
"Without being in any way prejudiced with
regard to the Albanian Government's problems
of domestic and foreign policy, I very much
dislike the malicious rumours about affairs in
Albania which are current in Italy and even
penetrate as far as London and Washington.
Personally, I have always tried to put a stop
to them and to fight them, but new ones are
continually cropping up."

Le 9 juillet 1945, le general Hodgson soIlicitait du colonel-general Hoxha la permission de
se rendre de nouveau en Albanie meridionale.
Il ecrivait: "J e desirerais, avec votre approbation, faire le plus tot possible un voyage dans le
sud de I'Albanie, etant donne que trois mois se
sont deja ecoules depuis ma derniere visite." La
reponse du colonel-general Hoxha fut qu'il lui
permettait avec plaisir de se rendre dans le sud
de l'Albanie.
De quelle manU:re repondaient le general
Hodgson et les membres de sa mission a tous ces
temoignages de bienveillance et de bonte de la
part des autorites albanaises et du President du
Gouvernement albanais? Ci-dessous, nous vous
citons quelques faits entre des centaines d'autres.
En juillet 1945, le general Hodgson se rendit
dans le sud de l'Albanie, ou il s'exprima ainsi:
"Le Gouvernement albanais a la forme d'une
dictature." Parlant des provocations grecques a
la frontiere, le general Hodgson dit textuellement
ce qui suit au commandant de notre 3eme divi~
sion: "Les provocations commises par les Grecs
ne sont que des salutations." A propos des elections du 2 decembre 1945, le gener~l Hodgson a
exprime son point de vue en declarant: "Les
elections en Albanie se font au cinema Kosova
par la force des bai'onnettes partisanes." Lorsque
la mission militaire britannique quitta Durazzo,
l'officier anglais A. Neal declara publiquement:
"Nous reviendrons, mais d'une autre maniere."
Il faudrait tout un livre pour enumerer les
ingerences de la mission britannique dans les
affaires interieures de l' Albanie. Mais nous nous
bornerons a citer id un document signe par une
haute personnalite britannique en Albanie, document qui contient le rapport secret et coOOdentiel PLjSEGj154j5, adresse a son bureau le
6 avril 1946:
"Il faut se rappeler que le general de brigade Hodgson, qui commandait la mission
militaire britannique, adopta une attitude
intransigeante a I'egard du Gouyernemenl
albanais. Il s'exprimait toujours d'une maniere
brutale a l'egard de l'Albanie. 11 se vantait
frequemment d'avoir dit: "Hoxha ala porte!".
Au debut de son sejour en Albanie, le general
de brigade Hodgson avait toutes facilites pour
circuler librement dans le pays entier, et le
fait que ces facilites furent plus tci.rd limitees
tient entierement a son attitude. Malgre cela,
le general de brigade Hodgson, jusqu'a la fin
de son sejour en Albanie, etait toujours parti
a la chasse."
A la lumiere des faits patents, il ressort cIairement a quel point les autorites britanniques
etaient mal preparees pour instaurer des relations amicales avec un peuple qui nourrissait une
grande sympathie a I'egard du peuple britannique. La haute personnalite britannique ci·dessus mentionnee ajoute dans le m~me document:
"Tout en n'ayant pas de parti pris dans les
problemes de politique interieure et exterieure
du Gouvernement albanais, je hais les rumeurs
medisantes sur les affaires de l' Albanie, rumeurs qui circulent frequemment en Italie,
penetrant m~me jusqu'a Londres et Washington. J'ai toujours essaye, quant a moi, d'y
mettre un terme et de combattre ces bruits,
mais il en circule constamment de nouveaux."

344
When one of our great Allies, the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, recognized the Albanian Government, the United Kingdom Government did the same, though subject to a few
conditions connected in particular with the elec-.
tions to the Albanian Constituent Assembly
which were to take place on 2 December 1945.
In that connexion, Brigadier-General Hodgson
wrote a letter to Colonel-General Enver Hoxha,
dated 8 October 1945, asking if the British Mission would be pennitted to observe the progress
of these elections. In his reply the President of
the Council wrote:
"In our independent and democratic country of Albania, the Military Mission of our
great ally, England, like all other missions, is
cordially welcomed, and ·has been granted all
the facilities it has asked for in order to follow
at close quarters the glorious phases of our
people's history. On the occasion of the elections we see no reason for changing our
friendly and cordial attitude towards Allied
missions, and especially toward the Mission of
which you are the head. I hasten to reply that
I shall be happy for the British Mission, like
all the other missions, to continue to enjoy the
rights and' freedom enjoyed hitherto, since
these rights and freedorns are dictated by the
close ties of friendship linking our two sovereign and democratic peoples."
After the gratifying results of the elections to
the Constituent Assembly which proclaimed the
Albanian People's Republic, General Hodgson
addressed the following message to Colonel-General Enver Hoxha, the President of the Council:
"Please accept by personal congratulations on the
occasion of your election at Tirana by an overwhelming majority".
The recognition of the Albanian Government
by the Government of the United Kingdom was
purely formal, and the latter, in order to withdraw it, sent a series of notes based on arguments
which will not bear scrutiny. We shall now
briefly explain hOw the recognition of the Albanian Government by the Government of the
United Kingdom was carried out.
The Government of the United Kingdom appointed Mr. Rapp as Minister Plenipotentiary to
Albania and asked the Albanian Government's
approval, which was granted forthwith. Unfortunately, Mr. Rapp did not arrive. The Albanian Government sent a note to the Government
of the United Kingdom, asking for an explanation of this delay and for details regarding the
approval of our Minister in London. The Government of the United Kingdom had stipulated
certain conditions quite outside normal diplomatic procedure for the arrival of its Minister.
In its reply, the Albanian Government said that,
subject to reciprocity, it would grant the United
Kingdom Minister at Tirana all the facilities enjoyed by diplomats in all countries of the world.
The Albanian Government did say,. however,
that Major Victor Smith, who had been appointed First Secretary of the British Legation
at Tirana, was considered persona non grata.
Meanwhile, the Government of the United King-

Quand I'Dnion des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, un de nos grands allies, reconnut le
Gouvernement albanais, le Gouvernement du
Royaume-U ni fit de meme, imposant cependant
quelques conditions, particulierement en ce qui
concerne les elections a l' AssembIee constituante
albanaise, elections qui devaient avoir lieu le
2 decembre 1945. A cette occasion, le general de
brigade Hodgson, dans sa lettre du 8 octobre
1945 au colonel~general Enver Hoxha, demanda
si la mission britannique serait libre d'observer
le deroulement de ces elections. Le President du
Conseillui repondit ce qui suit:
"Dans notre Albanie indep.endante et democratique, la mission militaire de notre grande
alliee l'Angleterre, comme toutes les autres
missions, est accueilIie avec la plus grande cordialite, et toutes les facilites necessaires pour
suivre de pres toutes les etapes glorieuses de
l'histoire de notre peuple lui ont ete accordees.
A l'occasion des elections, nous ne voyons
aucune raisen de modifier notre attitude amicale et cordiale envers les missions alliees et
particulierement a l'egard de la mission que
vous commandez. Avec plaisir, je m'ernpresse
de vous repondre que la mission britannique,
comme toutes les autres missions, continue de
jouir des mernes droits et libertes dont dIe
jouissait auparavant, droits et libertes que
nous imposent l'alIiance et l'amitie etroite qui
unissent nos deux peuples souverains et democratiques."
Apres les excellents resultats des elections a
l'Assemblee constituante qui proclama la Republique populaire d'Albanie, le general Hodgson
adressa ce message au President du Conseil, le
colonel-general Hoxha: "J'ai l'honneur de vous
presenter mes felicitations personnelles au sujet
de votre election a une forte majorite."
La reconnaissance du Gouvemement albanais
par le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni fut de
pure forme, et, pour l'annuler, ce Gouvernement
soumit une serie de notes appuyees par des arguments qui ne resistent pas a l'examen. Nous exposons brievement ci-dessous comment s'est faite
la reconnaissance du Gouvernement albanais
par le Gouvemement du Royaume-Uni.
Le Gouvernement du Royaume-U ni designa
comme Ministre plenipotentiaire en Albanie
M. Rapp, et demanda l'agrement du Gouvernement albanais, agrement qui lui fut immediate.
ment accorde. Mais malheureusement, le Ministre Rapp ne se fit pas voir. Pour ce retard et
pour l'agrement de notre Ministre a Londres, le
Gouvernement albanais demanda, dans une note
adressee au Gouvemement du Royaume-Uni,
des explications et des eclaircissements. Ce Gouvcmement avait pose, pour l'arrivee de son
Ministre, une serie de q:mditions hors de toute
forme diplomatique. Le Gouvernement albanais
lui repondit qu'a titre de reciprocite il accorderait au Ministre du Royaume-Uni a Tirana toutes, les facilites dont jouissent les diplomates dans
tous les pays du monde. En ce qui concernait le
commandant Victor Smith, qui etait designe en
qualite de premier secretaire de la Legation cin
Royaume-Uni a Tirana, le Gouvernement albanais le considerait indesirablc. Entre temps, le

345
dom attempted to serid Brigadier-General Hodgson and his Mission back to Albania pending
the arrival of the Minister.
In reply to the Albanian Government's request
for explanations regarding the delay of the B~it­
ish Minister and the approval of the Albaruan
Minister in London, the Government of the
United Kingdom, in its note or 26 March 1946,
excused this delay on the grounds that certain
questions stated below had not yet been settled.
We shall quote only the latter part of the note
in question:
"... The points on which His Majesty's
Government particularly require assurances
are that facilities shall be given to enable the
work of concentrating and registering British
War Graves to be completed, that Major
Smith will be permitted to enter Albania with
Mr. Rapp, that Mr. Rapp, on proceeding to
his post will receive from the Albanian Government all normal facilities, privileges and
immunities, granted to diplomatic representatives in foreign countries, including facilities
for communicating with His Majesty's Government by courier, by air and by direct wireless communication, and that no obstacle will
be placed in the way of Mr. Rapp's work
either in regard to the provision of the necessary staff or in regard to freedom of movement inside Albania."
The Albanian Government, through its Military Mission in Bari, replied to the Government
of the United Kingdom by a note dated
26 March 1946, in which it gave full assurances
on all the points raised in the British note. Mter
this note, it was quite clear that there was no
further obstacle to the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries or to
the exchange of representatives. But the facts
show that all the obstacles raised by the Government of the United Kingdom were pretexts to
prevent the establishment of diplomatic relations, for even after these obstacles had been
cleared out of the way, the Government of the
United Kingdom not only failed to send its Minister but adopted, without any reason, an openly
unfriendly attitude towards the Albanian people.
In spite of the British Military Mission's incorrect attitude, in spite of the statements made
at the public trial at Tirana by such enemies of
the Albanian people as Abdulla Mu~o, Shaban
BaUa, Sami Qeribashi, Nefail Skikuli, Gjergj
Kokoshi and others, accusing Colonel Palmer
and Major Smith of having advised them to organize against the Albanian public authorities
and of having organized attempts against the
leaders of the Albanian people, in spite of the calumnies regarding the alleged obstacles placed in
the way of members of the British Military Mission
"in the performance of their duties" (and the
facts prove that these "obstacles" would have
been incompatible with the sovereign attitude of
the country which had so generously granted
them hospitality and the right to stay in the country in order to hasten recognition and strengthen
the bond of friendship between our two nations) ;

Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni tenta a nouveau d' envoyer le general de brigade Hodgson
a la tete de sa mission jusqu'a l'arrivee du
Ministre.
En reponse aux explications demandees par le
Gouvernement albanais sur le retard du Ministre britannique et l'agrement du Ministre albanais a Londres, le Gouvernement du RoyaumeUni, dans sa note du 26 mars 1946, invoqua,
pour excuser ce retard, le fait que certaines
questions, indiquees ci-dessous, n'etaient pas encore reglees. Nous citons seulement la fin de la
note en question:
c'. . . Les points sur lesquels le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste requiert des assurances
sont les suivants: donner toutes facilites pour
que soit possible le recensement des tombes des
militaires britanniques; permettre l'entree en
Albanie du commandant Smith avec M.
Rapp; lorsque ce demier sera a son poste, le
Gouvernement albanais devra lui accorder les
facilites necessaires, les privileges et les immunites garantis a tous les representants diplomatiques a l'etranger, ainsi que toutcs facilites
de communiqueI' avec le Gouvemement de
Sa Majeste, par courrier, par voie aerienne,
et directement par radio; aucun obstacle ne
devra entraver les fonctions-de M. Rapp, que
ce soit au sujet du personnel qui lui est necessaire ou que ce soit au sujet de sa circulation
a l'interieur de l'Albanie."
Le Gouvernement albanais, par l'intermediaire
de sa mission miIitaire a Bari, repondit au Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni par une note en
date du 26 mars 1946. Dans cette note, le Gauvernement albanais donnait des assurances completes sur tous les points contenus dans la note
britannique. Apres cette note, il etait bien evi·
dent qu'iln'existait plus aucune difficuIte pour
l'etablissement de relations diplomatiques entre
les deux pays et pour l'echange des representants.
Mais les faits demontrent que ~ous les obstacles
souleves par le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
etaient des pretextes pour empecher l'etablissement de relations diplomatiques, car, meme apres
l'elimination de ces obstacles, le Gouvernement
du Royaume-Uni n.on seulement n'envoya pas
son Ministre, mais adopta, sans aucune raison,
une attitude ouvertement inamicale envers le
peuple albanais.
.
Malgre l'attitude incorrecte de la mission
militaire britannique, malgre les declarations
faites, durant le praces public de Tirana, par les
ennemis du peuple albanais Abdulla Mu~o, Shaban Balla, Sami Qeribashi, Nefail Skikuli, Gjergj
Kokoshi, etc., accusant le colonel Palmer et le
commandant Smith de leur avoir conseille de
s'organiser contre les pouvoirs publics albanais,
d'avoir organise des attentats contre les dirigeants du peuple albanais, malgre les calomnies
sur les pretendus obstacles qu'on dressait devant
les membres de la mission miIitaire britannique
"dans l'accomplissement de leur devoir" ("obstacles" qui, les faits le prouvent, auraient ete
incompatibles avec l'attitude souveraine du pays
qui leur avait si noblement accord6 l'hospitalit6
et le droit de sejour pour hater la reconnaissance
et renforcer l'amitie entre nos deux peuples), le
Gouvernement de la Republique populaire d'Al-

346
in spite of all this, the Government of the Albanian People's Republic at all times adopted a
. pacific attitude in the interests of the frier:dship
uniting us to the British people and also ID the
interest of world peace.
But the Government of the United Kingdom
continued to show an unfriendly attitude. It
helped and encouraged Greek provocations
against our country. General Scobie, addressing
the Greek population at Florina, near the Al~
banian-Greek frontier, said: "Dear people of
Greece, you may rest assured that our army will
not leave our well-beloved Greece until we see
her people happy and their national rights satisfied". This statement appeared in the Janina
newspaper Vorio Ipiros on 11 November 1945.
Another British officer of high rank attached
to the Greek Eighth Division, speaking at a meeting organized in northern Greece, told the
Greeks: "We give you permission to invade
southern Albania".
British officers of high rank, accompanied by
Greek officers, also went constantly to the
Greek-Albanian frontier, examined our frontier
positions through their field-glasses and photographed them. They gave their support to
Albanian war criminals who were taking refuge
in Greece, and directed their organization.
The facts I have given so far clearly show the
true aspects of the United Kingdom Government's policy towards the small Albanian nation.
In the light of these facts it is easy to discern the
1rigin of the provocations and violations comnitted against the Albanian People's Republic
)y this Government.
This proves the falseness of the charge brought
by the Government of the United Kingdom,
which is endeavouring to make the Albanian
Government responsible for the laying of mines
in the Corfu Channel and is saying that it
should know their origin.
I again affirm that the Albanian Government
will never be able to admit the United Kingdom Government's accusation, the purpose of
which is to deny Albania her indisputable right
to be admitted to membership of the United
Nations and to isolate her from the outside world
by accusing her of being a country endangering
peace and security.
It will be realized clearly how absurd is the
British accusation that Albania is endangering
world peace. Can this accusation be based on
the extent of my country's territory or on the
strength and importance of Albania in economic.
political and military matters? You know Albania's situation too well. A country of 1,200,00Q
inhabitants, a country which has been fighting
for centuries against the yoke of foreign rulers,
a country which has suffered the full force of
the misfortunes of world wars - surely such a
country cannot represent a danger to peace.
The Albanian people has fought and is still
fighting for peace and democracy; it was because of its love of peace and freedom that it
never bowed to the yoke of alien domination.
From the very first days of the fascist occupa-

banie a toujours adopte une attitude pacifique
dans I'interet de l'amitie qui unit notre peuple
au peuple anglais, ainsi que dans l'interet de la
paix dans le monde.
Mais l'attitude inarnicale du Gouvernement
du Royaume-Uni continua de se manifester. Il
aida et encouragea les provocations des Grecs
contre notre pays. Void textueIlement les paroles que le general Scobie adressa au peuple grec
a Florina, prcs de la frontiere greco-albanaise:
"Chers Grecs, vous devez etre absolument
convaincus que notre armee ne quittera pas la
Grece bien-aimee avant de voir les Grecs heureux et leurs droits nationaux satisfaits." Cette
declaration a ete reproduite dans le journal de
Janina Vorio Ipiros, en date du 11 novembre
1945.
Un autre offider superieur britannique, attache a la Beme division· grecque, parlant dans
un meeting organise dans le nord de la Grece,
s'est exprime ainsi: "Nous vous permettons d'envahir le sud de l'Albanie."
D'autre part, des officiers superieurs britanniques, accompagnes d'offiders grecs, se sont
rendus continuellement a la frontiere greco-albanaise, ont braque des jumelles, observe et photographie les positions de notre frontiere. Ils donnent leur appui aux criminels de guerre albanais
refugies en Grece et dirigent leur organisation.
Les faits que j'ai cites jusqu'ici mettent au
jour le vrai visage de la politique du Gouvemement du Royaume-Uni a l'egard du petit peuple
albanais. A la lumiere de ces faits, on peut facilement voir I'origine des provocations et des violations commises par ce Gouvernement contre la
Republique populaire d'Albanie.
Cela demontre la faussete de l'accusation portee par le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni qui
cherche a rendre responsable le Gouvernement
albanais du mouillage des mines dans le detroit
de Corfou, mouillage dont il a lapossibilite de
connaitre l'origine.
J'affirme de nouveau que le Gouvernement
albanais ne pourra jamais admettre l'accusation
du Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni dont le but
est de nier tous les droits incontestables de l' Albanie a etre admise au sein des Nations Unies)
de l'isoler du monde exterieur en I'accusant
d'etre un pays qui menace la paix et la securite.
On comprend c1airement combien est absurde
l'accusation britannique suivant laquelle l'Albanie menace la paix du monde. Est-ce en se basant
sur l'etendue du territoire de ce pays, sur la force
ou sur le grand role economique, politique et
militaire de l'Albanie qu'une telle accusation a
ete faite? Vous connaissez tres bien la situation
de l'Albanie. Un pays qui compte 1.200.000
habitants, un pays qui a lutte pendant des siecles
contre le joug des etrangers, un pays sur leque1
se sont abattus les malheurs des guerres mondiales) un tel pays ne peut pas constituer une menace pour la paix.
Le peuple albanais a luttt~ et lutte encore pour
la paix et la democratie; c'est parce qu'il aimait
la liberte et la paix qu'il n'accepta jamais le
joug de l'etranger. Des les premiers jours de I'occupation fasciste du 7 avril 1939, il a lutte avec

347
tion, which began on 7 April 1939, this people
fought the occupying Power courageously in
very difficult circumstances; in spite of the loss
of life and devastations of war, this country
never laid down its arms until the final triumph
over fascism.
The Allied leaders in recognition of Albania's
valour praised her and guaranteed her rights.
The Government of the United Kingdom
more than any other knows how much the Albanian people is anxious Jor peace; but the
truth is that this Government is not concerned
"With the question of who is for and who is
against peace. For its own private ends and in
order to stir up international complications, it
"Wishes to use the small country of Albania as a
means of rousing public opinion not only against
Albania but also against States which extend a
sympathetic welcome to the new and democratic
Albania.
You gentlemen, as members of the Security
Council, the organ of the United Nations pri.rnarily responsible for the maintenance of international peace and security, have the duty of
deciding the question submitted to you, of
defending the small nations and guaranteeing
tranquillity to a small country which is trying
to heal its war scars and is endeavouring with
all its energy to walk in the ways of peace, together with all the democratic nations of the
"World.
I like to believe that your just decision will
prove to the world that the Security Council of
the United Nations does not admit the arguInent that might is right but only that justice is
its own best advocate.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
Mr. President, I am sure you would not wish
:me and the Council would not wish me, at this
hour, to make any detailed comment on the long
statement which we have just heard from the
representative of Albania; but with your permission, I should like to make one or two general
and quite short remarks.
What is the point at issue? After all we have
just been listening to I feel that we must really
remember what is the point at issue.
The point is that an unidentified and undeclared mine-field has been laid, resulting in the
deaths of a number of our sailors and in damage
to our ships. Such laying of an undeclared minefield is a flagrant violation of the Hague Convention.
With, I consider, very good reason, which I
gave yesterday, my Government believed, and
asked the Security Council to find, that those
mines were laid by the Albanian Government or
at least with their connivance.
Now, in reflecting on the presentation of the
case which I had the honour to make to the
Security Council yesterday, I realize that there
may have appeared to be a gap in it. I did not
perhaps show sufficiently clearly that the Albanian Government had a motive for committing
such a crime. Why should they want to blo~
up our ships and kill our men? Now, however,

courage contre l'occupant, dans des conditions
tres difficiles; malgre les pertes en vies humaines
et les devastations causees par la guerre, il ne
deposa les armes qu'a la victoire totale sur le
fascisme.
Les chefs allies, en reconnaissance de sa vaillance, lui ont adresse des eloges et ont garanti
ses droits.
Plus que tout autre, le Gouvernement du
Royaume-Uni sait combien le peuple albanais
desire la paix; mais en realite, pour ce Gouvernement, le probleme n'est pas de savoir qui est
pour ou qui est contre la paix. Il veut, a des fins
particulieres, en creant des complications internationales, utiliser la petite Albanie comme un
moyen de soulever l'opinion non seulement
contre l'Albanie, mais aussi contre des Etats qui
accueillent avec sympathie l' Albanie nouvelle et
democratique.
Messieurs, en tant que membres du Conseil
de securite, Conseil qui est I'organisme principal
des Nations Unies charge du maintien de la paix
et de la securite intemationales, le devoir vous
incombe de trancher la question qui vous est
soumise, de defendre les petites nations et de
garantir la tranquilIite d'un petit peuple qui a
tant besoin de panser les blessures laissees par la
guerre et qui cherche a marcher, avec toutes ses
forces, dans la voie de la paix, qui est celle de
toutes les nations democratiques du monde.
J'aime a croire que votre decision equitable
convaincra le monde qu'au sein du Conseil de
securite des Nations Unies, on n'admet pas la
raison du plus fort et que senle la raison du plus
juste est toujours la meilleure.
Sir Alexandre CADOGAN (Royaume-U ni)
(traduit de l' anglais): Je suis certain qu'a cette
heure, ni vous, Monsieur le President, ni les membres du Conseil ne desirez entendre des observations detaillees sur la longue declaration que
vient de faire le representant de l' Albanie; mais,
si vous me le permettez, j'aimerais formuler
quelques breves remarques d'ordre general.
Quelle est la question qui nous occupe? Apres
tout ce que nous venons d'entendre, iI faut que
nous nous remettions a l'esprit ce dont il s'agit.
Void le fait: on a pose, sans le signaler, un
champ de mines qui n'a pu etre identifie; ces
mines ont provoque la mort cl'un certain nombre
de nos marins et cause des degats a nos navires.
Poser un champ de mines sans le signaler est
une violation flagrante de la Convention de La
Haye.
A mon avis, mon Gouvernement, comme je
vous l'ai explique hier, a d'excellentes raisons de
penser que ces mines ont ete posees par le Gouvernement albanais, ou du mains avec sa connivence, et demande au Conseil de securite de
conclure en ce sens.
Or, en reflechissant a la fa~on dont je me suis
exprime hier lorsque j'ai eu l'honneur de vous
soumettre cette affaire, je me rends compte que
mon expose semblait peut~etre presenter une lacune. Peut-etre n'ai-je pas indique avec suffisamment de cIarte que le Gouvernement albanais
avait un motif pour commettre un tel crime.
Pourquoi voulait-il faire sauter nos navires et

348

that gap has been filled most conveniently by.the
Albanian representative, and the case agamst
Albania seems to be, since he spoke, far blacker
than it was before.
It is true that about nine-tenths of his speech
would appear, at first sight, to be wholly irrelevant, and technically it was; but, viewed as a
whole, his speech was really important, particularly because it betrayed. the Albanian motive.
Consider this: Albania objects to the passage
of our ships and complains of incursions of Greek
vessels. Apparently Albania has many other reasons to hate us, but look: mines appear conveniently and mysteriously at the very spots desired
by the Albaman Government to give effect to
their policy. That is a very curious and noteworthy fact.
Now, with reference to the subject of innocent passage, I submitted to the Security Council yesterday that this was really irrelevant and
could not excuse the laying of an undeclared
mine-field, which is what we are discussing or
what we certainly ought to be discussing.
I. did not argue at length the legal rights or
wrongs of that case, and I do not intend to do
so now. There are legal opinions on both sides,
but as I said yesterday, the opinions of Governments on this question were last formally obtained in 1928 and 1929, in preparation for The
Hague Conference of 1930. Fifteen nations
stated their opimon that warships have the right
of innocent passage through the territorial waters
of another State. Only two, Bulgaria and Latvia,
formally denied this. Albania is perfectly entitled to hold the same views as Bulgaria and
Latvia-if Latvia were still with us-that warships have not the right of innocent passage
through the territorial waters of another State.
But what Albania has not got the right to do is
to impose its views on others with high explosives. That is not permissible.

Now, I will not now, or at any time, discuss
the alleged grievances against my country, which
formed the subject of the last part of the
Albanian representative's speech, because they
are intrinsically irrelevant. I would only observe
in general that every grudge, every grievance,
real or imaginary, every complaint that the Albanian representative has against my Government merely strengthens my case and makes it
plainly more likely that the Albanian Government did lay these mines.

Now, Mr. President, that is all I wish to say
for the moment. I hope you will give me an opportunity on a later occasion to deal in more
detail with the relevant points which the representative of Albania made.

tuer nos hommes? Le representant de l'Albanie
a maintenant comble cette lacune, tres apropos,
et, depuis qu'il a parle, le role joue par l'Albanie
semble encore plus odieux qu'auparavant.
I1 semble a premiere vue que les neuf
dixiemes de son discours soient absolument a
cote de la question; techniquement parlant, ils
le sont; toutefois, si 1'0n considere de discours dans
son ensemble, il est vraiment important, en particulier parce qu'il a revele le mobile de I'Albanie.
Reflechissez a ceci: I'Albanie s'oppose au passage de nos navires et se plaint des incursions de
vaisseaux grecs. Apparemment, l'Albanie a bien
d'autres raisons de nous detester. Que se passetoil alors? Des mines sont mouillees mysterieusement et a point nomme, a des endroits choisis
pour permettre au Gouvernement albanais de
mettre sa politique en ceuvre. C'est la un fait
trcs curieux, qui vaut la peine d'etre signale.
Quant au droit de passage inoffensif, rai fait
remarquer hier au Conseil de securite que cela
n'avait aucun rapport avec la question, et le
point de vue qu'on pouvait avoir en la matiere
ne pouvait justifier la pose d'un champ de mines
non signale; c'est de ce fait que nous discutons
ou devrions certainement discuter.
Je n'ai pas expose en detail le pour et le
contre dans cette affaire, du point de vue juridique, et je n'ai pas l'intention de le faire en ce
moment. Du point de vue juridique, les deux
opinions ant des partisans; mais, comme je l'ai
dit hier, certains Gouvernements ant pour la
dernihe fois exprime leur avis officiel a ce sujet
en 1928 et en 1929, lors de la preparation de la
Conference de La Haye de 1930. Quinze nations
ant declare que les vaisseaux de guerre avaient
le droit de passage inoffensif dans les eaux territoriales d'un autre Etat. Deux pays seulement, la
Bulgarie et la Lettonic, ant formellement refuse
de le reconnaitre. L'Albanie a parfaitement le
droit de partager l'opinion de la Bulgarie et de
la Lettonie (si tant est que la Lettonic soit encore parmi nous) et de soutenir que les vaisseaux
de guerre n'ont pas le droit de passage inoffensif
dans les eaux territoriales d'un autre Etat. Mais
ce que l'Albanie n'a pas le droit de faire, c'est
d'imposer son point de vue a autrui a coup d'explosifs. Cela n'est pas admissible.
Je ne veux, ni maintenant ni plus tard, discuter les griefs formules par l'Albanie contre mon
pays et dont l'expose a occupe la derniere partie
du discours prononce par le representant de
l'Albanie, parce qu'ils n'ont absolument aucun
rapport avec le fond de la question. Je voudrais
seulement vous faire remarquer de fa~on generale que toute rancune, tout grief, reel ou imaginaire, que le representant de l' Albanie a
contre mon Gouvernement, toute plainte qu'il
peut avoir aformuler contre lui, ne peut que renforcer ma position et prouver d'une maniere plus
cvidente encore que c'est le Gouvernement albanais qui a fait poser ces mines. ,
Voila tout ce que je desire declarer pour le
moment, Monsieur le President. J'espere que
vous me donnerez plus tard l'occasion d'examiner en detail les differents points du discours
prononce par le representant de l' Albanie qui
se rapportent a la question.

349
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Sochilist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Mr.
President I have literally only a few words to
say. I a~ not, surprised .that the represe?tative
of the United Kingdom IS not pleased WIth the
the statement of the Albanian representative,
since this is not the first time that I have seen
Sir Alexander Cadogan express his dissatisfaction
in public when statements made in .the Security
Council did not please him. I know that this
has happened in the past. In this particular case,
Sir Alexander is inconsistent. On the one hand,
he is almost prepared to praise the Albanian
representative because the latter would appear to
have enabled him to make a discovery - but
what this discovery amounts to is a secret. We
are led to believe that the Albanian representative's statement almost confirms Sir Alexander's
statement. On the other hand, Sir Alexander is
not pleased with the Albanian representative's
statement. He thinks that nine-tenths of the
statement is irrelevant and inconsistent. I do not
think such eccentricities of logic can help the
United Kingdom representative. In fact, I have
the opposite impression.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
The only contradiction, and one that often
occurs, is between what I said and what the
USSR representative reported me as saying.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (translated from Russian): I have
nothing against hearing Sir Alexander Cadogan's
objections to my remarks. Let him refute them!
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :
I did not say I was not pleased with the speech
of the Albanian representative.
Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (translated from Russian): I did not
quote Sir Alexander Cadogan. I said that it was
obvious from his remarks that he was not pleased
with the Albanian representative's statement. I
did not quote him.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Monsieur
le President, je n'ai que deux mots a dire. Je ne
suis pas etonne que la declaration faite ici par
le representant de l'Albanie ait deplu au representant du Royaume-Uni. En efIet, ce ri'est pas
la premiere fois que Sir Alexander Cadogan
exprime publiquement son mecontentement
lorsqu'il se dit au Conseil de securite des choses
qui ne lui plaisent pas. A ma connaissance, des
cas semblables se sont deja produits dans le
passe. Cette fois-d, Sir Alexander manque de
suite dans les idees. D'une part, il a presque loue
le representant de l'Albanie de lui avoir fait une
revelation, la nature de cette revelation demeurant d'ailleurs secrete. On pourrait done en deduire que les declarations du representant de
l'Albanie confirment presque celles de Sir Alexander. D'autre part, Sir Alexander n'est pas satisfait du discours prononce par le representant de
l'Albanie. A son avis, les neuf dixiemes de ce
discours sont incoherents et n'ont aucun rapport
avec l'afl'aire. Je ne crois pas que de telles acrobaties puissent apporter une aide quelconque au
representant du Royaume-Uni. J'ai plutot l'impression du contraire.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de f anglais): S'il y a contradiction,
c'est seulement entre ce que je dis et ce que le
representant de l'URSS me fait dire. Des
contradictions de ce genre se produisent souvent.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (trarJuit du russe): Je suis
pret a entendre la replique de Sir Alexander
Cadogan a ce que je viens de dire. Qu'il refute
donc mes declarations!
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de fanglais): Je n'ai pas dit que le
discours prononce par le representant de l'Albanie ne me plaisait pas.
M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques sodalistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je n'ai
pas fait une citation des paroles de Sir Alexander Cadogan. J'ai seulement dit qu'il etait evident, d' apres sa declaration meme, que Sir
Alexander n'etait pas satisfait du discours prononce par le representant de l'Albanie. Je n'ai
pas fait de citation.
Le PRESIDENT: L'inddent est eclairci et no\!,
ferions mieux d'ajourner maintenant le debat '-'
de le poursuivre lors d'une prochaine seance.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The incident has been cleared up and we would
be well advised now to adjourn the debate and
to continue it at a forthcoming meeting.
Tomorrow afternoon's meeting will be devoted to the consideration of the report of the
Atomic Energy Commission. If members of the
Council agree, we might continue discussion of
the present matter on Friday morning at 11
o'clock.

La seance de demain apres-midi sera ce;.:...sacree a l'examen du rapport de la C;:ommission
de l'energie atomique. Nous pounions, si les
membres du Conseil sont d'accord, poursuivre
la discussion de la presente afl'aire vendredi matin a 11 heures.

The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

La seance est levee a18 h. 30.
