V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
---

-·

----~-----------~-

tive use of its growing international networks, thereby
stimulating greater financial support for the University;
6. Urges the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Director-General of the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as
the Rector of the United Nations University, to intensify their efforts to increase financia! support for the
University;
7. Appeals to ali Member States to take cognizance
of the achievements of the United Nations University in
the important areas of its three programmes and to contribute generously to the Endowment Fund of the
University and, additionally or alternatively, make
operating contributions to the University so that its
important work can continue to make substantive
progress.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

-

-

-----

-

--------

- ----

-- ---

-----

----

103
-

.

4. Expresses its appreciation to the President and to
the Government of Costa Rica for the efforts undertaken to organize and finance the University for Peace
without burdening the budget of the United Nations or
the United Nations University, in accordance with
paragraph 2 (d) of General Assembly resolution 34 / 111;
5. Expresses the hope that the widest possible
adherence will be given to the International Agreement
for the Establishment of the University for Peace.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December / 980

ANNEX
lnternational Agreement for the Establishment oí the Unlvenlty
for Peace and Charter of the Unlverslty for Peace
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
OFTHE UNIVERSITY FOR PEACE

35/55.

Establishment of the Unh·ersity for Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 34 / 111 of 14 December 1979, it approved the idea of establishing a University for Peace-a specialized international institution for
post-graduate studies, research and dissemination of
knowledge specifically aimed at training for peace
within the system of the United Nations University-proposed by the President of the Republic of
Costa Rica in his address to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session 13 and offe red by him to the international community through the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Commission on
the University for Peace, 14 established by the General
Assembly in the same resolution and entrusted with
preparing the organization, structure and setting in motion of the University,
Reiterating its appreciation to the President and the
Government of Costa Rica for this generous contribution to international understanding,

Expressing its appreciation to the Commission on the
University for Peace for its work and detailed report on
the establishment of the University for Peace,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral 15 containing his personal comments,

l. Approves the establishment of the University for
Peace in conformity with the International Agreement
for the Establishment of the University for Peace and
with the Charter of the University for Peace, both of
which are set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to open for
signature the lnternational Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace within ten days of its
approval by the General Assembly;
3. Decides to extend the mandate of the Commission
on the University for Peace, established by the General
Assembly in resolution 34 / 111, which shall act as the
preparatory body of the University for Peace pending
the establishment of the Council of the University;
1., O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Plenary Meetings, 11th meeting, paras. 106-122.
"A/35/468 and Corr. l, annex l.
" A/35/468 and Corr. l.

The States parties to the present Agreement.
Recalling that, by its resolution 34/111 of 14 December 1979, the
General Assembly of the United Nations cstablished an intcrnational
commission which, in collaboration with the Government of Costa
Rica, was requested to prepare the organization, structure and setting
in motion of the University for Peace,

Desirous of giving effect to the recommendations ofthe Commission
on the University for Peace endorsed by the General Assembly al its
thirty-fifth session,
Have agreed, in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 35/55 of
5 Decernber 1980, as follows:
Artic/e 1
Establishment of the University for Peace
The University for Peace (hereinafter referred to as the Univcrsity)
is hereby established, to function in accordance with the Chartcr of the
University for Peace, the text of which is reproduced in the annex to
the present Agreement.

Article 2
Headquarters of the University
1. The headquarters of the University shall be established in Costa
Rica on land donated for this purpose by the Government of Costa
Rica.
2. The University shall conclude a headquarters agreement with
the Government of the host country.

Article 3
Legal capacity. privi/eges and immunities
The University shall have in the host country such legal capacity
and facilities and shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as are
necessary for the exercise of its functions and the fulfilment of its purposes.

Article 4
Financing of the University
1. The expenses of the University shall be met from voluntary contributions made by Governments, by intergovernmental organizations
and by foundations and other non-governmental sources, and from
revenue derived from tuition and related charges.
2. The financing of the University shall not have any financia( implications for the budget of the United Nations or that of the United
Nations University. The budget of the University shall not impose any
obligatory assessments on the States parties to the present Agreemcnt
unless they agree otherwise.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

104
Article 5

Article 4

Amendments

Relationship with Governments, organizations
and institutions

l. Parties to the present Agreement may propose amendments.
Such proposals shall be transmitted to the Depositary for communication to the other parties. The Depositary shall consult with the parties
as to the procedure for consideration of any amendments proposed.
2. The Charter of the University for Peace, the text of which is
reproduced in the annex to the present Agreement, may be amended
by the Council of the University in accordance with the procedure laid
down in article 19 of that Charter.
Article 6
Definilive signature or accession

The present Agreement shall be open to ali States for definitive
signature until 31 December 1981 or for accession. 1nstruments of accession shall be deposited with the Depositary.

l. The University may enter into association or conclude agreements with Governments and intergovernmental and other organizations and institutions in the field of education.
2. The University shall, in particular, seek to establish a close
relationship with the United Nations University. The association
which may link the University with the United Nations University
should be determined by common agreement between the two institutions.
3. The University shall maintain close links with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in view of
its special responsibilities in the field of education.
Article 5
Organiza/ion

Article 7
Entry into force

The present Agreement shall en ter into force on the date on which it
shall have been signed or acceded to by ten States from more than one
continent. For States signing or acceding after the entry into force, the
Agreement shall enter into force upon the date of signature or accession.
Article 8
Deposilary

The present Agreement, the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts of which are equally authentic, shall be
deposited with the Secretary-General of the United Nations who shall
perform the functions of Depositary.

The University shall have an organizational framework consisting
of the following:
(a) The Council of the University for Pea.:e, which shall be the
governing body of the University;
(b) The Rector of the University for Peace, who shall be the chief
administrative officer of the University;
(e) The lnternational Foundation, as a financia! supporting body
operating independently;
(e/) The lnternational Centre for Documentation and lnformation
for Peace;

(e)

The lnternational Advisory Board of the University for Peace.
Article 6
Composition of the Council

ANNEX TO THE AGREEMENT

1. The Council of the University for Peace shall be the supreme
authority of the University. lt shall be composed of:
(a)

The following ex officio members:

( i)

The Rector;

Article I

(ii)

Arca directors:

Establishment

(iii)

Four representatives designated by the Secretary-General of
the United Nations, by the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, by
the Rector of the United Nations University and by the Executive Director of the United Nations lnstitute for Training
and Research, respectively;

(iv)

Two representatives designated by the Government of the host
country;

(b)

The following additional members:

(i)

ren representatives of the academic community, appointed by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations in consultation
with the Director-General of the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization;

(ii)

Three students representing the student body.

CHARTER OF THE LJNIVERSITY FOR PEA CE

The University for Peace (hereinafter referred to as the University)
shall be an international institution of higher education for peace established pursuant to the lnternational Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace, of which the present Charter is an integral part, in the light of the general principies contained in the
appendix hereto.
Article 2
A ims and purposes

The University is established with a clear determination to provide
humanity with an international institution of higher education for
peace and with the aim of promoting among ali human beings the
spirit of understanding, tolerance and peaceful coexistence, to
stimulate co-operation among peoples and to help lessen obstacles and
threats to world peace and progress, in keeping with the noble aspirations proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations. To this end, the
University shall contribute to the great universal task of educating for
peace by engaging in teaching, research, post-graduate training and
dissemination of knowledge fundamental to the full development of
the human person and societies through the interdisciplinary study of
ali matters relating to peace.
Article 3

2. In the appointment of the representatives of the academic community, who shall be persons of distinction in the academic field,
regard shall be had to a broad academic, geographical and cultural
distribution.

J. The term of office of the representatives of the international
academic community serving as members of the Council shall be four
years. They may be reappointed.
4. The term of office of the persons representing the student body
on the Council shall be one year. They may be reappointed.

Legal status

Article 7

The University shall have the legal status necessary to enable it to
fulfil its purposes and objectives. lt shall enjoy autonomy and
academic freedom in its operations, in keeping with its profoundly
humanistic purpose, within the framework of the Charter of the
United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Functions and powers of the Council

The Council shall have the following powers:
(a) To establish the general policies which shall govern the activities and operations of the University:

V.

105

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(h) To adopt, revise or abrogate such regulations and rules as are
required for the application of the present Charter and the proper
operation of the University;
(c) To adopt its own rules of procedure;
(d) To elect a President and a Vice-Presiden! of the Council for
two-year terms which may be renewed:
(e) To elect the Rector for a five-year term which may be renewed;
(/) To adopt, on the proposal of the Rector, the annual
programme and budget of the University and to assist in their execution;
(g) To consider the annual and other reports of the Rector on the
activities of the University;
(h) To establish such organs and offices as are required for the
fulfilment of the purposes of the University, within the framework of
the present Charter;
(i) To amend the present Charter in accordance with the
procedure set out in article 19 below and subject to the provisions of
the lnternational Agreement for the Establishment of the University
for Peace;
/j) Such other powers as belong to it in accordance with the present Charter.

University. lts purpose shall be to ensure the proper functioning ofthe
University by identifying, collecting and disseminating data and information relating to peace.
Article /3
lnternational Advisory Board

The lnternational Advisory Board of the University for Peace shall
be composed of distinguished specialists in the various disciplines pursued at the University. The Board shall advise the University on its
academic programmes. The Board shall function on the basis of
regulations formulated by the Council of the University.
Artic/e /4
lnternational Foundation

There shall be attached to the University an lnternational Foundation set up in accordance with arrangements to be made by the Council
in consultation with the host Government. lt shall be composed of
persons of recognized standing. lt shall have its own assets and operate
independently as a financia] supporting body for the University.
Article 15

Article 8

Faculty and staff

Sessions of the Counci/

1. Ali members of the faculty shall be appointed on the basis of
their high academic qualifications and of their commitment to the purposes and objectives ofthe University, with due regard to the need for
appropriate representation in terms of geography, social systems,
cultural traditions, age and sex. In the performance of their duties,
they shall be expected to comply with the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity.

The Council shall meet in regular session twice a year. Special sessions shall be held in the cases specified in the relevant rules of
procedure of the Council. Sessions of the Council shall be convened by
the Rector.
Artic/e 9
Majority required for decisions

Exceptas otherwise specified in the case of amendments to the present Charter, the Council shall adopt its decisions by a majority of its
members present and voting.
Article /O
Rector

The Rector of the University for Peace shall be the chief academic
and administrative officer of the University. In this capacity he shall
assume the over-all responsibility for the organization, direction and
administration of the University in accordance with the general
policies formulated by the Council.

2. The faculty of the University shall consist of the Rector, the
academic staff, visiting professors, fellows, academic consultants and
the research staff at the University campus and at such other centres or
in such programmes other than at the University headquarters as may
be determined by the Council.
3. The Rector shall appoint administrative and other personnel on
terms and conditions determined by the Council for such appointments and in accordance with the present Charter. Due regard shall be
paid in their appointment to the purposes and objectives of the
U niversity.
4. The Rector may at his discretion appoint temporary faculty
members and staff on an ad hoc basis in accordance with the present
Charter.

Artic/e 11

Article /6

Functions and powers of the Rector

Students

The Rector shall, inter a/ia:
(a) lmplement the policies established by the Council;
(b) Administer the University;
(e) Prepare the programme, work plans and annual budget
estimates of the University for submission to the Council for its
approval;

Studentr. shall be admitted to the University in accordance with requirements established by the Council. In this regard, the Council
shall bear in mind the need to ensure a world-wide representation with
special attention being given to the participation of minorities. Parity
should be sought between men and women students at the University.

(d) Execute the work programmes and make the expenditures envisaged in the· budget approved by the Council;
(e) Propose to the Council names of persons qualified for membership in the lnternational Advisory Board:

(/)

Act as the legal representative of the University;

Appoint such staff and designate such officials as are required
for the·proper functioning of the University.
(g)

He shall have such other functions and powers as may be prescribed
by the provisions of the present Charter or otherwise entrusted to him
pursuant to decisions, rules and regulations adopted by the Council.

Artic/e 17
University programmes and degrees

lrenology, which shall comprise the study of peace, education
for peace and human rights, shall be the main concern of the University. The studies carried out at the University shall focus on the topic
of international peace. Completion of a programme of studies, including irenology as a compulsory subject, shall be required for obtaining any degree granted by the University.
l.

2. The University shall, inter alia, grant master's degrees and doctorales under terms and conditions established by the Council.
Artic/e /8

Article 12
lnternationa/ Centre Jor Documenta/ion
and lnformation for Peace

The lnternational Centre for Documentation and lnformation for
Peace shall form an integral part of the organizational structure of the

Assets, financing and use of financia/ resources

1. The assets of the University shall comprise the land donated by
the Government of Costa Rica as the headquarters site of the University, the facilities thereon and such endowment funds as may be
allocated lo it.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

106

ANNEX

2. The University shall derive its revenues from voluntary contributions made by Governments, by intergovernmental organizations
and by foundations and other non-governmental sources, and from
tuition and related charges.
3. The University may decide freely on the use of the financia!
resources available to it for the execution of its functions, in accordance with financia! regulations formulated and approved by the
Council.

1nternational Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade
CONTENTS
Paragraph.,

Sectwn

l.

Preamble.

1:16

Artic/e /9

11.

Goals and objectives

17-51

Amendments

111.

Policy measures

52-168

1. Amendments to the present Charter which are compatible with
the basic aims and purposes of the University and with the lnternational Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace
may be proposed to the Council by:
(a)

A Stale party to the Agreement:

(b)

The Rector;

(e)

Any other member of the Council.

2.

Amendments shall require a two-thirds majority of the mem-

A

lnternational trade

B.

lndustriali,alion ..

72-80

C

Food and agriculture

81-95

D.

Financia! rcsources for development

96-114

E.

lnternational monetary and financia! issues

115

F.

Technical co-operation

G.

Science and technology for development ..

117-125

H.

bcrs of the Council for adoption.
3. The States parties to the lnternational Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace shall be notified without delay
if any amendment to the Charter is adopted by the Council.

1. The persistence of war in the history of mankind and the growing threats against peace in recen! decades jeopardize the very existence of the human race and make it imperative that peace should no
longer be viewed as a negative concept, as the end of conflict or as a
simple diplomatic compromise, but rather that it should be achieved
and ensured through the most valuable and most effective resource
that man possesses: education.
2.

IV.

116

Energy .

126-127

Transport

128-133

Economic and technical co-operation among
developing countries

134-135

K

Least developed countries, most seriously affected countries, developing island countries and
land-locked developing countries . .

136-155

L.

Environmen t .

156-158

M

Human settlemcnts

159-160

N.

Disaster relief

O.

Social development

Appendix to the Charter
General principies formulated by the Commission on the University far
Peace established by the General Assembly pursuant to its resolution
34 / 111 of 14 December I 979

52-71

161
162-168

Review and appraisal of the implementation of the
new lnternational Development Strategy . .

169-180

Peace is the primary and irrevocable obligation of a nation and

the fundamental objective of the United Nations: it is the reason for its
existence. However, the best too! for achieving this supreme good for
humankind, namely education, has not been used.
3. Many nations and international organizations have attempted
to attain peace through disarmament. This effort must be continued:
yet facts show that man should not be too optimistic as long as the
human mind has not been imbued with the notion of peace from an
early age. lt is necessary to break the vicious circle of struggling for
peace without an educational foundation.
4. This is the challenge that now faces ali nations and ali men as
the twenty-first century approaches. The decision must be made to
save the human race, which is threatened by war, through education
for peace. If education has been the instrument of science and
technology, there is ali the more reason to use it to achieve this
primary right of the human being.

35/56.

lnternational Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade

The General Assemb/y
l. Proclaims the Third United Nations Development Decade, starting on 1 Jan uary 1981;
2. Adopts the lnternational Development Strategy
far the Third United Nations Development Decade, as
set forth in the annex to the present resolution.

83rd p/enary meeting
5 December I 980

J.

PRLAMBl.E

1. In launching the Third United Nations Development Decade,
starting on I January 1981, Governments rededicate themselves to the
fundamental objectives enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. They reaffirm solemnly their determination to establish a new
international economic order. To this end, they recall the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New lnternational Economic Order"' of the sixth special session of the General
Assembly, the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties ofStates," and
the resolution on development and international economic cooperation'" adopted hy the Assembly at its seventh special session,
which laid down the foundations for the establishment of the new internatianal economic order.
2. The adoption ofthe lnternational Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade" was an importan! step
in the promotion of international economic co-operation for development. However, the limitations of a strategy, when conceived within
the framework of the existing system of international economic relations, soon became obvious. lnequities and imbalances in these relations are widening the gap between developed and developing countries, constitute a major obstacle to the development of the developing
countries and adversely affect international relations and the promotion of world peace and security. Midway through the Decade, the
world community called for a fundamental restructuring of international economic relations and embarked upon its quest for a new international economic order.
3. The goals and objectives of the lnternational Development
Strategy for the Second Development Decade remain largely unfulfilled. In addition, the present negative trends in the world economy
"' Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).
'ª•Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
"Resolution 3362 (S-VII).
''' Resolution 2626 (XXV).
