United Nations

A/RES/64/154

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 69 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/439/Add.1 and Corr.1)]

64/154. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and
the Optional Protocol thereto
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 63/192 of 18 December 2008, as well as relevant resolutions of the
Human Rights Council, the Commission for Social Development and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Welcomes the fact that, since the opening for signature of the Convention
1.
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 1 and the Optional Protocol thereto 2 on
30 March 2007, one hundred and forty-three States have signed and seventy-six
States have ratified the Convention and eighty-seven States have signed and
forty-eight States have ratified the Optional Protocol, and that one regional
integration organization has signed the Convention;
0F

1F

Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and
2.
ratifying the Convention and the Optional Protocol as a matter of priority;
3.
Welcomes the holding of the second session of the Conference of States
Parties to the Convention, from 2 to 4 September 2009, and the commencement of
work of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;
Also welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 3 and the activities
4.
undertaken in support of the Convention;
2F

5.
Encourages the Inter-Agency Support Group on the Convention to
continue its work to mainstream the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities throughout the United Nations system, and calls upon the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to continue strengthening their cooperation in this
regard;
_______________
1

Resolution 61/106, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.
3
A/64/128 and Corr.1 and 2.
2

09-47107

*0947107*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/154

6.
Invites the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to assist States to
become parties to the Convention and the Optional Protocol, including by providing
assistance with a view to achieving universal adherence;
Requests the Secretary-General to continue the progressive
7.
implementation of standards and guidelines for the accessibility of facilities and
services of the United Nations system, taking into account relevant provisions of the
Convention, in particular when undertaking renovations, including interim
arrangements;
Also requests the Secretary-General to take further actions to promote the
8.
rights of persons with disabilities in the United Nations system in accordance with
the Convention, including the retention and recruitment of persons with disabilities;
Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
9.
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to continue to strengthen
efforts undertaken to disseminate accessible information on the Convention and the
Optional Protocol, including to children and young people to promote their
understanding, and to assist States parties in implementing their obligations under
those instruments;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-sixth session a report on the status of the Convention and the Optional
Protocol and the implementation of the present resolution.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

2
