General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

232

3. The eradication of trafficking in narcotic drugs is the collective
responsibility of all States, especially those affected by problems relating to
illicit production, trafficking or abuse.
4. States Members shall utilize the legal instruments against the illicit
production of and demand for_ abuse of and illicit traffic in drugs and
adopt additional measures to counter new manifestations of this shameful
and heinous crime.
5. States Members undertake to intensify efforts and to co-ordinate
strategies aimed at the control and eradication of the complex problem of
drug trafficking and drug abuse through programmes including economic.
social and cultural alternatives.

39/143.

International campaign against traffic in
drugs

The General Assembl_v,
Recalling its resolutions 35/195 of 15 December 1980,
36/ 168 of 16 December 1981, in which it adopted the
International Drug Abuse Control Strategy, 210 37/168 of
17 December 1982, 37/198 of 18 December 1982, 38/98
and 38/122 of 16 December 1983 and other relevant
general provisions,
Recalling also its resolutions 36/132 of 14 December
1981 and 38/93 of 16 December 1983, in which it specifically acknowledged the economic and technical constraints
impeding many developing countries from combating the
illegal production of and illicit traffic in drugs and drug
abuse,
Noting the concern expressed by the Secretary-General
in his report on the work of the Organization,2 11 in which
he recognized the need for greater efforts to reduce the traffic in and illicit use of drugs,
Taking note of the Quito Declaration against Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs of 11 August 1984 212 and the New York
Declaration against Drug Trafficking and the Illicit Use of
Drugs of I October 1984 213 signed by a number of Latin
American countries, in which drug trafficking was considered to be a crime against humanity and integrated, effective and urgent regional and international action was
demanded, to be supported by the resources necessary for
successfully overcoming the problem,
Considering the activities of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board,
Appreciating the action being taken by the United
Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control in providing financial resources and support for integrated development programmes, including the replacement of illicit crops in
affected areas,
Reaffirming the need to improve and maintain regional
and interregional co-operation and co-ordination, particularly in law enforcement, in order to eliminate drug trafficking and drug abuse, and noting the growing interest in
regional and interregional co-ordination,
Concerned that, despite the significant national efforts
deployed for this purpose, including those of a number of
Latin American and Caribbean and Asian countries, the
illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
has increased noticeably,
Aware of the serious impact on the life and health of
peoples and on the stability of democratic institutions
resulting from the illicit production, marketing, distribution and use of drugs,
21 0 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1981, Supplement No. 4 (E/1981/24), annex II.
2 I I O.fficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. l (A/39/1).

Recognizing that. to root out this evil. integrated action
is required for simultaneously reducing and controlling
illicit demand, production, distribution and marketing,
Aware that action to eliminate the illegal cultivation of
and traffic in drugs must be accompanied by economic and
social development programmes for the affected areas,
Bearing in mind the desirability of programming activities for replacing illegal crops in such a manner as to conserve the environment and improve the quality of life of
the social sectors concerned,
Recognizing the dilemma of transit States which arc
seriously affected, both domestically and internationally,
by drug trafficking, stimulated by demand for and production and use of illicit drugs and psychotropic substances in
other countries,
Aware of the need to mobilize a co-ordinated strategy at
the national, regional and international levels, which
would cover countries with illegal users and producers and
countries used for transit in the world-wide distribution
and marketing circuit, in order to eliminate drug trafficking and drug abuse,
Recognizing the importance of ratifying and acceding to
the international drug contro) treaties,
I. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 214
2. Reiterates that urgent attention and highest priority
should be given to the struggle against the illicit production of, demand for, use of and traffic in drugs;
3. Calls upon Member States that have not yet done so
to ratify the international drug control treaties and, in the
meantime, to make serious efforts to comply with the provisions thereof;
4. Reiterates the importance of integrated action, coordinated at the regional and international levels, and, for
this purpose, requests the Secretary-General and the Commission on Narcotic Drugs to step up efforts and initiatives designed to establish, on a continuing basis, co-ordinating machinery for law enforcement in regions where
this does not yet exist;
5. Recommends that the highest priority be given to
the preparation of specific technical and economic cooperation programmes for the countries most affected by
the illicit production of and traffic in drugs and drug abuse;
6. Also recommends that appropriate priority be given
to the adoption of measures designed to solve the specific
problems of transit States through joint regional and interregional efforts;
7. Urges Member States with available resources and
experience to increase their contributions for combating
the illegal production of and illicit traffic in drugs and drug
abuse, in particular in the countries most affected and
where the problem is most serious;
8. Encourages Member States to contribute or to continue contributing to the United Nations Fund for Drug
Abuse Control so as to enable it to increase its support of
drug abuse control programmes;
9. Requests the Economic and Social Council, through
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, to consider the legal.
institutional and social elements relevant to all aspects of
combating drug trafficking, including the possibility of
convening a specialized conference;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that
appropriate steps are taken to implement paragraph 5 (c)
212 A/39/407, annex
21 3A/39!551 and C\,rr.l and 2, annex.
214 A/39/194.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

of resolution 3 7/ 198 and that a meeting of heads of
national drug law enforcement agencies is convened in
1986;
I I. Also requests the Secretary-General to make the
necessary arrangements for holding, within the framework
of advisory services, interregional seminars to study the
experience gained by the United Nations system, in particular by the United Nations Fund for Drug Abuse Control,
and by Member States in integrated rural development
programmes for replacing illegal crops;
12. Calls upon the specialized agencies and all other
relevant bodies of the United Nations system to participate actively in the implementation of the present
resolution;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
fortieth session the item entitled "International campaign
against traffic in drugs".
IOI st plenary meeting
I 4 December I 984

39/144.

National institutions for the protection and
promotion of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/ l 23 of 16 December 1977,
33/46 of 14 December 1978, 34/49 of 23 November 1979,
36/ I 34 of 14 December 1981 and 38/ 123 of 16 December
1983,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning of national and local institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights, endorsed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 33/46,
Mindful also of the need to create conditions, at the
national, regional and international levels, for the protection and promotion of human rights,
Emphasizing the importance of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 215 the International Covenants on
Human Rights 216 and other international human rights
instruments for promoting respect for and observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Conscious of the significant role which institutions at the
national level can play in protecting and promoting human
rights and fundamental freedoms and in developing and
enhancing public awareness and observance of those rights
and freedoms,
I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General; 21 7
2. Emphasizes the importance of the integrity and
independence of national institutions for the protection
and promotion of human rights, in accordance with
national legislation;
3. Draws attention to the constructive role that
national non-governmental organizations can play in the
work of such national institutions;
4. Encourages all Member States to take appropriate
steps for the establishment or, where they already exist, the
strengthening of national institutions for the protection
and promotion of human rights;
5. Invites all Member States to take appropriate steps
to disseminate the texts of human rights instruments,
215 Resolution 217 A (III).
2 I 6 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

233

including international covenants and conventions, in
their respective national or local languages, in order to give
the widest possible publicity to these instruments;
6. Recommends that all Member States should consider including in their educational curricula material relevant to a comprehensive understanding of human rights
issues;
7. Also recommends that all Member States should
take appropriate steps to encourage the exchange of experience in the establishment of national institutions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in carrying out
public information activities in the field of human rights,
to give due attention to the role of national institutions
and non-governmental organizations concerned with the
protection and promotion of human rights;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to Member States, upon their request, in
the implementation of paragraph 5 above, according high
priority to the needs of developing countries;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue and, as
appropriate, increase assistance in the field of human
rights to Governments, at their request, within the framework of the programme of advisory services in the field of
human rights;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
his reports and of further information received, to prepare
and submit to the General Assembly, through the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social
Council, a consolidated report, for eventual publication as
a United Nations handbook on national institutions for
the use of Governments, including information on the
various types and models of national and local institutions
for the protection and promotion of human rights, taking
into account differing social and legal systems;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/145.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for
improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Charter of the United Nations the
peoples of the United Nations declared their determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the
dignity and worth of the human person and in the equal
rights of men and women and of nations large and small
and to employ international machinery for the promotion
of the economic and social advancement of all peoples,
Recalling also the purposes and principles of the Charter
to achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
Emphasizing the significance and validity of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 215 and of the International Covenants on Human Rights 216 in promoting
respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
21 7 ,\!39 556 and Add. I
