S/2021/401

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 23 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by Mr.
Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, as well as the statements
delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Mexico,
Norway, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (on behalf of the
A3+1 — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines),
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference on “Identical
letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security
Council (S/2016/53)” convened on Wednesday, 21 April 2021. A statement was also
delivered by Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
President of the Security Council

21-05524 (E) 260421 110521

*2105524*

S/2021/401

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Carlos Ruiz Massieu
[Original: English and Spanish]
I thank you for this opportunity to present to you the latest report (S/2021/298)
of the Secretary-General on Colombia and to brief the Security Council on important
developments since the issuance of the report.
It is an honour to share this meeting with Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de
Barberi, and I take this opportunity to thank her and her team for the usual support
extended to the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Victims are at the centre of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed between the Government of
Colombia and the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército
del Pueblo (FARC-EP). Their participation during the negotiation phase was crucial
to ensuring that their perspectives were taken into account, and today they are a
fundamental pillar of peacebuilding and the pursuit of reconciliation. Their courage
and generosity should be a source of inspiration for the signatory parties to continue
working to fulfil the commitments enshrined in the Final Agreement and for all
actors in Colombian society to support them in this task.
On 9 April, Colombia commemorated the National Day of Memory and
Solidarity with Victims. On that occasion, I had the opportunity to talk to
representatives of victims of crimes committed by both the former FARC-EP and
State agents. Certainly, these conversations are an important reminder that, regardless
of the source of the pain, guaranteeing truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition is
the best way to repair the damage and prevent more victims in Colombia.
To do so, it is necessary to guarantee the inclusion, effective participation and
security of all victims. Likewise, it is essential that all actors involved in the conflict
give concrete signs of their commitment so that the expectations of the victims can
be met and to consolidate the foundations for closing the wounds left by conflict.
The meeting held between President Iván Duque Márquez and the leader
of the Comunes party, Rodrigo Londoño, is undoubtedly a very encouraging
development. Its constructive spirit provides a solid basis for the parties to continue
working together despite their different visions. Having different political positions
should not, in any way, translate into affecting the superior interest, which is the
implementation of the peace agreement. I encourage the parties to continue to move
forward in defining the road map for implementation agreed at that meeting.
Now into the fifth year of implementation, it is also essential that the parties
remain committed to building on the achievements made and resolving pending
challenges, and thereby move forward — with the support of all actors in Colombian
society — in solving structural problems, particularly considering the challenges of
overcoming the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Protecting life is the fundamental purpose of any peace process. In the case
of Colombia, the importance of carrying out appropriate actions to achieve this is
even more evident in the light of the violence facing communities, social leaders
and former FARC-EP members. Since the publication of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, acts of violence against social leaders and communities have been registered
in different departments, one of them being the Cauca department, where yesterday
the indigenous Governor, Sandra Liliana Peña Chocué, was killed, and where four
2/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

more former combatants have also been killed, for a total of 266 since the signing of
the Final Agreement.
On 9 April, authorities reported the arrest of the alleged perpetrator of the
killings of a social leader and two former combatants. This is a positive result that
highlights the importance of redoubling the efforts by State entities involved in the
fight against impunity and of ensuring them appropriate financial and technical
resources. It is urgent that the policies and measures taken by the State, including
the recent strategic security plan, translate into better results, especially in the 25
municipalities where most of the violence is concentrated. I hope that by the end of
2021 we will be able to report that the trend of these deplorable crimes has finally
been reversed.
Similarly, the sustained presence of security forces, accompanied by the
growing deployment of public entities and services, is essential to guaranteeing
effective control of the territory and improving the protection of communities by the
State, as well as to allow for the consolidation of development opportunities and the
rule of law.
The Final Agreement establishes that a stable and lasting peace requires the
effective reintegration of former FARC-EP members into social, economic and
political life. Progress made by the parties in this regard has been notable. In this
period, progress by the Government in the purchase of land for former territorial
areas for training and reintegration, including two additional purchases since the
issuance of the report, is encouraging. Thanks to the Government’s commitment and
to concerted work with former combatants, seven of the 24 former territorial areas
for training and reintegration now have land.
An example of the opportunities for reconciliation generated by the peace
agreement was the recent donation by Álvaro Zora — a businessman who in the past
suffered the kidnapping of his father by an illegal armed group — of land in Quibdó,
Chocó, for nearly 50 former combatants to carry out their fish-farming projects
and build their homes. This act of generosity provides certainty and rootedness to
dozens of families of former combatants committed to building a better country, a
new country, especially in a department that has been so hard-hit by the conflict
and poverty.
Two additional collective projects were recently approved in the National
Reintegration Council (NRC), for a total of 90. In that regard, it is noteworthy that
we are close to 50 per cent of former combatants participating in collective and
individual projects. Similarly, the parties have agreed to create a technical working
group on housing within the framework of the NRC, which I hope will lead to
solutions to advance access to housing for former combatants and their families.
These advances show the potential of collaborative work undertaken by
the State, former combatants, victims and communities to transform the conflictaffected territories. The Government’s efforts to respond to the needs of communities
in conflict-affected areas, and their interest in participating in the implementation
of initiatives, such as the development programmes with a territorial focus, should
be noted, although they still need to be complemented with other fundamental
aspects of the agreement, such as the coordinated implementation of the national
sectoral plans of comprehensive rural reform. It is also necessary to take concrete
steps to bring sustainable productive opportunities to more families in the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, a programme that
has shown its potential to change conditions in areas where illegal crops are grown
and to strengthen communities’ trust in the State.

21-055243/29

S/2021/401

As progress is made in this direction, it will be necessary for the parties to
accelerate the implementation of the gender measures in the agreement, and for all
actors to enhance the role of women’s organizations in peacebuilding. Women’s
participation is imperative for peace to be inclusive and sustainable.
It has been more than a year since the COVID-19 pandemic hit Colombia. My
heart goes out to all those who have lost loved ones to the disease. The Government,
local authorities and the public have made significant efforts to overcome the pandemic
and restore normalcy, and while the road to recovery is long and challenging, I am
convinced that the comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement will help
the country to move gradually in that direction.
The Mission has also progressively returned to its normal functioning,
including field activities where our presence is most needed. I have visited several
regions, among them Valle del Cauca department, where I met political and religious
authorities, former combatants and leaders of the communities who recounted the
difficulties facing thousands of civilians — especially of Afro-Colombian origin —
due to clashes between armed groups, the presence of illicit economies and limited
socioeconomic opportunities.
In this complex context, and to help advance the pandemic recovery efforts,
allow me to renew the calls of the Secretary-General and the Security Council for
an immediate cessation of hostilities. We have seen the positive impact that these
gestures can have on the lives of vulnerable communities in conflict-affected regions.
The progress by the three components of the transitional justice system created
by the agreement is encouraging. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace continues to
make key decisions to deliver justice for crimes committed during the conflict; the
Truth Commission is holding important acts of reconciliation while preparing its
report; and the Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as Missing is moving
forward with its noble task.
In conclusion, I would like to express once again my gratitude to the Security
Council for its constant and decisive support to the Colombian peace process.

4/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese]
China welcomes Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi to the meeting
and thanks Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.
I would like to make the following five points.
First, we are worried about the intensification of violence in some parts of
Colombia, which has lasted for some time. We call on all parties to strengthen security
capacity-building and to continue to improve the security situation. We support the
Colombian Government in building up its security forces and strengthen security
deployment in high-risk areas so as to step up the fight against violence and drugrelated crimes, and especially to protect the security and rights of former combatants.
Secondly, we commend the Colombian Government for actively helping
former combatants obtain land and participate in productive projects. We encourage
Colombia to increase development input, continue to promote rural reform and
narrow the gap between urban and rural areas so as to rectify economic and social
weaknesses. Only in this way can the process of reintegrating former combatants be
deepened continuously, and the hard-won peace be lasting.
Thirdly, we welcome the meeting between the leaders of the Colombian
Government and the Comunes party and appreciate the agreement between them on
designing a road map for the follow-up and implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We hope that the
two parties will effectively leverage existing mechanisms, including the tripartite
mechanism between the Government, the Comunes party and the United Nations, so
as to strengthen consultations and work together to implement the agreement.
Fourthly, China supports the work of Special Representative Ruiz Massieu and
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and encourages the Mission
and the United Nations country team to divide the work rationally, strengthen
coordination, complement each other’s efforts and work in synergy.
Regarding Colombia’s request for the mandate of the Verification Mission to
be expanded, China will treat it positively in general. At the same time, we hope that
the Secretariat will make greater efforts to maximize the use of existing resources
while making reasonable and diversified financing arrangements for the newly
added resources.
Fifthly, China commends the Colombian Government for actively carrying
out the vaccination campaign against the coronavirus disease. We have already
provided three batches of vaccines to Colombia. China will continue to work
with the international community to support Colombia in its fight against the
pandemic, support the Colombian peace process and support Colombia’s accelerated
development.

21-055245/29

S/2021/401

Annex III
Statement by the
United Nations

Permanent

Mission

of

Estonia

to

the

I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing today. I would like to express Estonia’s strong support to the work
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We warmly welcome Her
Excellency Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Colombia.
We fully recognize that handling the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic takes a lot of attention. At the same time, it is crucial to stay on the
course and continue the efforts in implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in its entirety.
We welcome the progress made during the last reporting period, especially
with regard to the transitional justice system that provides truth, justice and
reconciliation for the victims. The first indictment by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace against eight former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo for war crimes and crimes against humanity is an
important step forward. This paves the way towards the end of impunity. The
victims’ rights need to be respected. A lot still remains to be done, especially with
regards to the victims’ participation in the transitional justice system. Therefore,
Estonia supports expanding the mandate of the Verification Mission to support the
work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
We welcome the continued commitment by both parties — the Government
and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común — in implementing the peace
agreement. The constructive meeting held between President Duque Márquez and the
President of Comunes, Rodrigo Londoño, on 10 March was a remarkable sign of it.
However, challenges remain and threaten the success of implementing the
peace agreement. We are deeply concerned about the continuation of grave violations.
In the first quarter of 2021, the security situation has significantly deteriorated in
several key areas of the country, including the Pacific region.
The killings of former combatants, social and indigenous leaders and human
rights defenders have continued. The alarming number of killings needs to be curbed
urgently by rebuilding trust and State authority. We condemn all sexual and genderbased violence and underline the importance of access to comprehensive services by
all survivors without discrimination.
We condemn the continued recruitment and use of children by illegal armed
groups and criminal organizations. All children must be released. We encourage the
Government to strengthen child protection measures and allocate sufficient resources
for the implementation of necessary programmes, particularly at the local level and
in vulnerable areas of the country. The spiral of hate generates displacement and
insecurity and must be ended.
Finally, building peace takes time, effort and active commitment by all
parties. Estonia strongly supports the continued dedication to implementing the
Final Agreement.

6/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: French]
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing and assure him of our full support in implementing his mandate. I
also welcome the presence among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Ms. Blum de Barberi.
Building peace is a long and painstaking undertaking. Much progress has
been achieved by the people and the Government of Colombia. We must welcome
that progress but also take a clear-eyed look at the remaining challenges. More than
four years since the singing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, the implementation of several of its provisions
is still lacking. I shall focus on four aspects in particular.
First, we regret the continuation of violence in Colombia. It impacts children,
young people, former combatants, civil society actors, ethnic community leaders,
human rights defenders and journalists. It must stop, and the perpetrators must be
brought to justice. The solution in the long term will require strengthened State
presence in the most isolated areas. The policy of dismantling armed groups must
also be implemented and finalized.
Secondly, we recognize the significant efforts devoted to reintegrating former
combatants. These efforts must continue, with a focus on former combatants residing
outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
Thirdly, the Comprehensive Rural Reform must be fully implemented. In this
regard, it is important to continue land purchases. Achieving peace means providing
fair and viable socioeconomic opportunities for all. The grip of drug-trafficking
must be loosened once and for all by strengthening the illicit crop-substitution
programme. The chapters of the agreement on ethnic and gender issues must also
receive specific attention, as must those relating to political reform, where progress
is slow.
My fourth point is perhaps the most important: we must commend the consistent
progress made by the Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Nonrepetition. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace issued its first indictment in Case 01.
Many former combatants have contributed to the process of establishing the truth.
It is necessary to continue on this path and to ensure that all parties to the conflict
commit to the process in good faith. Finally, I express my hope that the Security
Council will promptly adopt a draft resolution extending the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in accordance with the recommendations
of the Secretary-General.
Implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace is a long-term process, and challenges remain. That is
why France, together with the European Union, will continue supporting all those
working every day to build peace in Colombia.

21-055247/29

S/2021/401

Annex V
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, Nagaraj Naidu Kakanur
I would like to begin by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his comprehensive briefing on the peace process
and on the activities of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia towards
the implementation of its mandate.
The overall progress over the past three months towards the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace has been positive. The signatory parties have remained faithful to the
agreement. The President of Colombia, Iván Duque Márquez, and the President of
the Comunes political party, Rodrigo Londoño, met last month and agreed to work
jointly on the implementation road map by strengthening reintegration and security
guarantees for former combatants. The Government has also held the first of the
seven territorial sessions of the National Reintegration Council, as agreed with the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC).
The FARC, now the Comunes party, has continued to put faith in the democratic
process and started preparing for the 2022 elections. The transitional justice process
has advanced, with the first indictment by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The
announcements made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace reflect its autonomy and
independence. These are all encouraging developments, which we welcome.
The year 2021, the fifth year of implementation of the peace agreement, is
crucial. The focused implementation of the five priorities proposed by the SecretaryGeneral to reinforce the implementation of the agreement in 2021 will be important.
In this context, I have the following observations to make.
The concentration of violence in some regions is mainly due to the limited
State presence, which is being exploited by illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations fighting over illicit economies. The recently approved national policy
for the dismantling of illegal armed groups is a positive step to augment the presence
of State institutions, including the deployment of security forces. The integrated and
enhanced presence of State authorities throughout the country is fundamental to
lasting and durable peace.
The expeditious implementation of rural reforms, the reintegration of excombatants, including in non-territorial areas for training and reintegration across
the country, and the provision of land and the effective implementation of illicit
crop-substitution programmes are essential to reduce violence. It is important
to ensure that the great majority of former combatants be involved in incomegenerating activities. In this regard, land allocation, housing and creating enabling
infrastructure will be important.
The strengthening of protection and security for former combatants is an
important element of the peace process. Regular dialogue between former combatants
and public security forces, including in the context of the Tripartite Mechanism for
Security and Protection, could help provide timely and more effective responses
to the problem. There have been steps in this direction, including filling vacancies
at the National Protection Unit and strengthening of institutional capacity with
respect to gender, which could be expedited. The authorities also need to strengthen
security outside former territorial areas for training and reintegration and implement
a specific protection strategy for women former combatants.
The Government has begun implementing its coronavirus disease-vaccination
drive, which is a positive step in the fight against the pandemic. It must be ensured
8/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

that the population targeted by peace-related programming, including former
combatants, have access to vaccines and medicines.
Strengthening judicial capacity, particularly in the regions most affected
by violence, is also significant. The Special Investigations Unit of the AttorneyGeneral’s Office should be provided with resources to strengthen the campaign
against impunity.
The United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is a good example of
the United Nations capacity to bring about positive change in both security and
development aspects in post-conflict settings. It has helped and strengthened the
efforts of national authorities to bring together communities and institutions to
advance peace, development and the rule of law, especially in areas historically
affected by the conflict. In this context, we support the request for an expansion
of the Mission’s mandate to support the verification of compliance with restorative
sentences to be issued by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Lastly, I would like to emphasize the special relationship India shares with
Colombia. In 2019, India and Colombia celebrated 60 years since the establishment
of diplomatic relations. Over the years, the relationship has only strengthened and
diversified in various areas of mutual interest — political, cultural and commercial.
This is evidenced by growing trade and investments from India and the increasing
presence of Indian companies in Colombia. In 2018, the Indian Space Research
Organization successfully launched FACSAT 1, the first-ever Colombian Air Force
nanosatellite. India offers more than 100 training slots to Colombian officials
annually under the Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation programme. Also,
every year, thousands of Colombians visit India for tourism, nature therapy and
learning yoga. As Colombia marches ahead on its journey towards peace, progress
and prosperity, we are confident that it will successfully overcome all outstanding
challenges to the peace process and emerge stronger as a major economy in Latin
America, and, in this journey, India, as Colombia’s long-standing partner, will
continue to support it.

21-055249/29

S/2021/401

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, for his continued hard work and that of his team.
It is also great to see Minister Blum de Barberi with us again. I want to
pay tribute to the tireless efforts that her Government and the people of Colombia
are making to build peace. We know this requires determination and persistence
right across society and the political system. We are heartened by the considerable
progress made. We reiterate our strong support to all parties as they work towards
the full implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace. I would like to make three points this afternoon.
First, we share the concerns expressed at the persistent levels of violence
in some parts of the country. Over the reporting period, the number of former
combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders killed worryingly increased
further. We recognize the concerted efforts the Government is making to protect
those targeted. But the urgency of curbing this violence, including that faced by
indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities, cannot be overstated. We urge the
Colombian Government to work in key affected municipalities to establish its
presence and build trust with communities.
Reports of child recruitment by illegal organizations and recent reports of
children killed in crossfire are also of deep concern. Holding those responsible for
violence to account is critical in building trust and sustaining peace.
While we note the progress recorded in the implementation of the gender
chapters of the agreement, more work needs to be done to ensure the full
implementation of gender and ethnic provisions across all chapters.
We reiterate our support to the Special Forum on Gender and all entities
working to secure justice and equality. We also encourage continuing efforts to
combat gender-based violence.
My second point is the crucial role constructive dialogue plays in building
trust and maintaining momentum, particularly at this critical juncture. That is why
the recent meeting between President Duque Márquez and Rodrigo Londoño, which
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz helped facilitate, was so
important — such a positive development.
We encourage both parties to continue working together on the proposed
implementation road map. We also urge that the progress in the meeting carry
through to the important platform for dialogue and partnership provided by the
Commission for the Follow-Up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Peace Agreement.
My final point relates to transitional justice and the proposed expansion of
the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Investment in
peace is not just a financial or administrative concern; the most vital investment in
peace is belief: it is trust. Transitional justice, centred on victims and with the full
participation of women, is the bedrock for Colombia’s own future. The year 2021 is
decisive for both Colombia’s transitional justice system and the Truth Commission.
We have already seen important progress in the Special Jurisdiction for Peace on
Cases 01 and 03.
It is now crucial that former combatants, members of the public security
forces and third parties to the conflict provide exhaustive and truthful accounts
10/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

of crimes committed, that they recognize their responsibilities and contribute to
reparations. The Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Nonrepetition provides the framework needed. It is a real demonstration of this precious
and innovative peace agreement in action. All those who engage with the System
need to be protected.
Ireland welcomes the proposed expansion of the Mission’s mandate and looks
forward to the Council adopting a corresponding draft resolution as soon as possible.
The United Nations independent verification of the restorative sentences can help
bolster trust in the system for victims.
As I conclude, I wish to take a moment to applaud the decision by the
Colombian Government to grant temporary protection status to Venezuelan
refugees and migrants, a response based on common humanity and deep respect for
human rights. The generosity of Colombia serves as an example to the world and
demonstrates to us all that we really do — as the Irish-language proverb says — live
in each other’s shelter.

21-0552411/29

S/2021/401

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu
for the briefing on the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/298) on the situation
in Colombia and for the work he and the team of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia carry out. I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi.
Mexico welcomes the recent meeting between the President of Colombia,
Iván Duque Márquez, and the President of the Communes political party, Rodrigo
Londoño, facilitated by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
as well as their commitment to working together on a road map to continue the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace and to strengthen efforts to protect ex-combatants. As we
have articulated previously, political dialogue is the best road map towards genuine
stabilization in Colombia.
We take note of the progress in the cases under consideration by the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace. Likewise, we should like to underscore that the Special
Jurisdiction plays an essential role in transitional justice by putting victims at the
centre in upholding their rights, making reparation for harms and ensuring nonrepetition. In our view, this is the path that will lead to ultimate reconciliation.
We recognize the value of the request by the Government of Colombia and the
Communes political party for the United Nations Verification Mission to support
this process through the verification of sentences. We reiterate that the support of
the Mission to the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is consistent with the
letter and spirit of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace. Mexico consequently supports the request of the Colombian
Government to extend the mandate of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia with the purpose of reviewing the sanctions issued by the Jurisdiction;
compliance with those judgments will bolster the efforts to achieve peace
in Colombia.
On the other hand, we reiterate our concern about the levels of violence
that continue to prevail in certain parts of the country and what that represents for
women, mainly Afro-Colombian women, indigenous women and their respective
communities, which have been disproportionately affected. Addressing the situation
of insecurity requires mandatory consultations with women in the communities
affected in order not only to learn about their needs first-hand but also to invite them
to participate more actively in making decisions that ensure their safety.
Preventing violence against women human rights defenders requires adequate
funding from the authorities. Effective steps towards peace requires resources
and technical assistance for Afro-descendant and indigenous organizations. The
challenges posed by insecurity and lack of resources must be overcome in order to
achieve more meaningful access for Afro-descendant and indigenous women, who
are, regrettably, frequently victims of the transitional justice system.
We commend the Government’s efforts to support ex-combatants in
participating in productive projects, which contributes to providing them with
economic stability and a life goal. We would urge that more women also be provided
the opportunity to participate in such programmes and that they receive the help
necessary to overcome the structural obstacles that prevent their full participation.
12/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

Last year the International Committee of the Red Cross registered 389 victims
of explosives — the highest number in the past four years — including 226 civilians.
That situation requires the creation of a more rigorous framework for the management
of small arms and light weapons in order to prevent their trafficking, as well as more
effective international cooperation in that undertaking.
Finally, Mexico agrees with and supports the recommendations issued by the
Secretary-General on the way in which the Mission will carry out the verification
of the Special Jurisdiction’s judgments, in accordance with the request made by the
Colombian Government.

21-0552413/29

S/2021/401

Annex VIII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Norway to
the United Nations, Trine Heimerback
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu for
another informative briefing. We also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2021/298) and fully support the recommendations made.
I would like to start by congratulating President Iván Duque Márquez and
Rodrigo Londoño, leader of the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), for their commitment to the peace
process, as demonstrated by their meeting in March. The fact that both of them
recognized the need for a comprehensive and integral implementation was
encouraging and timely. Norway firmly believes that a continued dialogue between
the parties will significantly enhance implementation, reduce polarization and build
confidence.
We strongly urge the parties to make better use of the formal and informal
spaces established in the institutional architecture of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Indeed, the Commission for
the Follow-up, Promotion, and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement remains the principal mechanism for resolving challenges and obstacles
to implementation, including on security issues.
We encourage the parties to conduct more meetings of the National
Reintegration Council, and Norway welcomes the progress made in the tripartite
working group on mines. We also urge the parties and the United Nations to reestablish the tripartite mechanism regarding conflict-related assets.
Today, more than any other issue, the targeted threats and violence against and
killings of former combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders, including
women leaders and representatives of ethnic communities, represent a serious threat
to the peace agreement. It is with great regret that we now count 265 ex-combatants
signatories to the peace agreement killed since it entered into force, along with the
24 human rights defenders and social leaders killed just during this last reporting
period. In some regions, communities also suffer from forced displacements, the
deployment of anti-personnel mines and increased recruitment of children by armed
groups.
In that light, State presence in all parts of the country and a comprehensive
implementation of the agreement are essential to overcoming the conditions
underpinning violence and to ensuring the protection of civilians. While we
recognize the efforts being made by the authorities to improve the security situation,
the numbers speak for themselves.
More needs to be done to prevent, protect and ensure accountability for those
horrific crimes. It is urgent to implement the Comprehensive Security System for
the Exercise of Politics, including Decree 660, on community protection, and to
provide sufficient support to the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the
Attorney General.
Gender-based violence also continues to hamper the reintegration of women
ex-combatants and disrupts the vital work of women leaders and human rights
defenders. To guarantee their security and their equal and meaningful participation,
it is crucial that the gender provisions in the agreement be fully implemented,
together with the Comprehensive Programme for Safeguards for Women Leaders
and Human Rights Defenders.
14/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

We must take seriously the reports to the effect that victims and alleged
perpetrators do not feel that they can contribute to the Comprehensive System for
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition without risking their lives. That is
concerning and may jeopardize victims’ access to truth and reparations. The Special
Jurisdiction for Peace has ordered governmental agencies to ensure the protection of
those appearing before the court.
Compliance is essential for the implementation of article 3.4 of the agreement
and to meet the demands of victims.
The progress made by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace on Cases 01 and
03 represent a milestone in the implementation of the peace agreement. Norway
urges all actors to contribute fully to the Comprehensive System, to recognize their
responsibilities and to tell the whole truth. The importance of the System being
able to carry out its work independently, without political interference, and without
risking the lives of those who contribute, cannot be overstated.
In conclusion, let there be no doubt that Norway remains committed to working
with the Colombian people and parties in their efforts towards lasting peace.

21-0552415/29

S/2021/401

Annex IX
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
We thank the Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for presenting the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/298)
on the situation in that country.
Unfortunately, the report confirms the lack of progress in the implementation
of the key provisions of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, which the Security Council mandated the Mission
to monitor. That is cause for growing concern, especially in view of the pending
electoral cycle.
Let me recall that the agreement put an end to the half-century-long internal
armed conflict and could receive broad international support owing to the fact that
it was the outcome of a painstaking direct dialogue and the concrete agreements
reached by the Colombian parties, with the United Nations Mission there to observe
their implementation. That historic document should not be perceived as a unilateral
statement of intention, and therefore its implementation must be accompanied by a
continual dialogue among its signatories.
In that context, we welcome the meeting between President Duque Márquez
and the leader of the Comunes party, Rodrigo Londoño, on 10 March, as well as
the decision to extend the mandate of the trilateral Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Peace Agreement. We
call on the Colombian sides to maintain constructive contacts at all levels in order
to ensure transparency at all steps and their compliance with the letter and spirit of
the agreement. Unilateral measures that have not been agreed on cannot advance the
peace process.
That point is valid for each out of five priority tracks that the Secretary-General
highlighted in his report and that cover almost all aspects of the settlement. We agree
with the statement in the report to the effect that the progress made on those five
tracks is insufficient. We are counting on Bogotá to make additional efforts within
its obligations under the agreement to improve the situation.
One of the most urgent issues is ensuring the safety and security of civilians,
including participants in the peace process, their family members and representatives
of civil society. We regret that murder statistics have not declined and that insufficient
progress has been made in related investigations. In addition, the crime rate has
increased, causing the environment to deteriorate in previously safer districts.
Security threats are so high that in January-February this year 13,500 people
were forcibly displaced, as noted in the report. For comparison, that number equals
as many people as all those officially enrolled in the peace process.
Members of the Security Council receive regular information on the progress
that Colombia’s Government achieved in carrying out those programmes that
are not stipulated in the agreement. At the same time, the implementation of the
agreement itself is proceeding too slowly. The same can be said about, inter alia,
the comprehensive land reform under way, land allocation, crop substitution and the
work of the National Reintegration Council.
We believe that Colombia’s Government and society should focus primarily
on the implementation of the provisions of the agreement. Failing that, the prospects
of lasting peace in Colombia will remain ever more elusive.
16/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

I turn now to the report and the work of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
It is well known that unresolved security issues can drive people to take up
arms once again. That is why we believe that it is important that report reflect the
evolving number of so-called dissidents. Those figures can be indicative of the
effectiveness of the peace process.
Once again, we were rather perplexed to see that the report mentions the
challenges that the LGBT community faces. We do not quite understand what that
information has to do with the peace process and overcoming the consequences of
the internal armed conflict. The Council would derive greater benefit from receiving
information about social security and the safety of families with children where the
breadwinner has been the victim of the conflict or an attack. Single-parent families
represent a truly vulnerable group in a post-conflict environment.
In addition, the report gives scant information on the resolution of disputes
between the Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional with regard to the
resumption of direct dialogue without preconditions. Sustainable peace cannot come
to Colombia unless all key stakeholders embark on the path thereto.
As concerns the initiative to extend the mandate of the Mission and mandate
it to monitor the implementation of certain separate decisions of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, we took note of the information that was shared in a letter
from the Secretary-General dated 25 February. The Council also discussed that
issue repeatedly. We assume that at this point we have a shared understanding of the
fact that such a step is needed, especially now that we have a corresponding direct
dialogue between the Colombian sides.
In conclusion, the report indicates that it would be premature to state that
the peace process in Colombia is irreversible. The relative peace in the country is
too fragile whereas the number of factors that are negatively affecting prospects for
peace are increasing. That is why the Secretary-General, the Security Council and
the guarantors of Colombia’s peace process are directing their efforts at the consistent
implementation of the peacebuilding tasks stipulated in the Final Agreement.
International support for that historic accord involves trusting the Colombian
people to strictly abide by the provisions of the agreement.
As a member of the Permanent Five, Russia is ready to render further assistance
to the Colombian peace process in order to make it sustainable and irreversible.

21-0552417/29

S/2021/401

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines to the United Nations, Inga Rhonda King
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of Kenya, the Niger,
Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
I begin by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu
for his presentation and reaffirming our support for the efforts of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia and the Colombian peace process. I also
acknowledge the presence of Her Excellency Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia.
In November, Colombia will celebrate the fifth anniversary of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. It will
be an opportune moment for all Colombians, in particular the signatories to the
agreement, to reflect on the gains achieved while also recognizing the challenges
and opportunities inherent in its full implementation.
The A3+1 is encouraged by the positive developments in the peace process.
We are pleased with the renewed commitment by the parties, as highlighted by
the 10 March engagement between President Iván Duque Márquez and Rodrigo
Londoño, leader of the Comunes party. That, we believe, speaks to the dedication
of the signatories and provides reassurance that they are united in fulfilling their
obligations.
We urge the parties to stay the course and work more determinedly, in
communion with the people, who, are also vested in the success of the agreement.
In terms of security, we take note of the proposed strategic plan for protection
and are pleased with the approval of the public policy guidelines for the dismantling
of illegal armed groups. We also appreciate ongoing efforts by the Government
through the National Commission on Security Guarantees to strengthen the State’s
security apparatus.
A robust and integrated approach remains crucial to resolving lingering
security challenges, especially in the most marginalized and conflict-affected areas,
such as Cauca, Nariño, Antioquia, Caquetá, Norte de Santander and Catatumbo.
We therefore urge the authorities to continue improving prevention and protection
measures and bolster the State’s presence through the deployment of public security
forces in these areas.
The A3+1 also strongly condemns the incessant violence against the groups
made most vulnerable, including former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo combatants, youth, indigenous people and AfroColombians, social leaders and human rights defenders. The recurrent acts of
violence attest to how deeply the root causes of the conflict are entrenched.
Advancing on mechanisms such as the Comprehensive Programme for
Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, together with fulfilling
the women and peace and security and youth, peace and security agenda, during this
peacebuilding stage and in accordance with the agreement, is therefore pivotal.
Our delegations underscore the fact that the proper reintegration of former
combatants into Colombian society requires full and continued access to basic
services, including housing, land and economic activities. In that respect, we take
note of the developments vis-à-vis access to land for former combatants. Similarly,
we echo the call made by the Secretary-General for the acceleration of the approval of
18/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

productive projects so that by the end of this year the majority of former combatants
are involved in income-generating activities.
We maintain that comprehensive rural reform, in accordance with the full
implementation of the chapters on rural reforms and the National Comprehensive
Programme for Substitution of Illicit Crops, along with the recommendations of the
High-Level Forum of Ethnic Peoples to address the issues facing former combatants
of indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin, will enable a smooth reintegration into
Colombian society.
Transitional justice is also critical. The A3+1 commends the progress made
thus far within the Comprehensive System for Truth Justice, Reparation and NonRepetition. If not set right, historic wrongs will continue to haunt many Colombians.
Accordingly, we express our appreciation for the work of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, the Truth Commission and the Special Investigations Unit of the Office
of the Attorney-General. We believe that progress on each component is central to
the delivery of truth, justice, accountability and redress. In addition, we note the
concerns expressed about the independence of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
and emphasize the need for this component of the Comprehensive System to be
fully respected.
We again underscore the importance of the Commission for the Follow-up,
Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement and
urge the parties to avail themselves of this mechanism to settle their differences.
We welcome the extension of its mandate until next year. As highlighted in the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/298), substantive and constructive dialogue
between the parties within the Commission and in other forums will strengthen
implementation across the agreement in 2021 and help devise joint solutions. To that
end, we remain hopeful that the parties can resolve their differences on the National
Reintegration Council.
Achieving peace in Colombia is also central to preserving Latin America and
the Caribbean as a zone of peace. It would also ensure a more stable world. In that
context, we encourage the Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional to
engage in dialogue in order to foster a more peaceful society.
Finally, the A3+1 underscores that durable peace in Colombia will not occur
overnight or immediately reverse the afflictions endured over the years. It will,
however, pave the way for a new Colombia and usher in a new dawn for the millions
who aspire to a better life.
Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterate
their support for the Secretary-General’s five priorities for the comprehensive
implementation of the Final Agreement and remain hopeful that they can be achieved
during this critical year through the constructive work of the tripartite mechanism.

21-0552419/29

S/2021/401

Annex XI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Jonathan Allen
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his briefing. I also welcome back Minister Blum de Barberi to the Council.
As the Special Representative has just outlined, there were some encouraging
developments during the most recent reporting period. The United Kingdom welcomes
the productive meeting last month — facilitated by the Special Representative —
between President Iván Duque Márquez and Mr. Rodrigo Londoño. As we approach
the milestone fifth anniversary of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace this year, we welcome that both parties have
committed to efforts to enhance its comprehensive implementation and to strengthen
reintegration and security guarantees for former combatants.
As we have highlighted many times in the Council, the continued insecurity
in conflict-affected communities is an ongoing threat to building peace. The United
Kingdom remains deeply concerned that social leaders, human rights defenders and
former combatants continue to face deadly violence from armed groups and criminal
organizations.
In that respect, we note the progress made by the National Protection Unit
towards filling its vacancies and clearing the backlog of over 1,000 protection
requests. We also commend the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of the
Attorney-General for its improving track record of investigations and convictions.
And we are encouraged that the Ministry of the Interior is strengthening its capacity
to respond to the early warnings issued by the Ombudsman’s Office. It is vital that
these measures continue to be enhanced, in order to curb the violence directed at
Colombians working to build a future free from conflict.
We have long called, in the Council, for a realistic long-term plan to dismantle
armed groups and criminal organizations and bring State services, security and justice
to all citizens. Expanding and improving State presence and security is a crucial
step in stabilizing conflict-affected areas. Now that the Government has presented the
guidelines of this dismantling policy, we look forward to its swift implementation.
The United Kingdom also remains extremely concerned about the continued
recruitment of minors by illegal armed groups in Colombia. We call on all armed
groups to immediately release all minors from their ranks. We also note with concern
the tragic deaths of minors during Government operations against armed groups in
Guaviare last month and welcome the Government’s investigation into those deaths.
Turning now to the reintegration process, we are encouraged by the continued
progress made during the reporting period, including the holding of the first session
of the National Reintegration Council, and advances in land purchases for a number
of territorial areas for training and reintegration. We urge the Government to ensure
coordinated action in support of all former combatants, including those outside the
former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
The transitional justice system is a cornerstone of the peace agreement, and
the first indictment of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, on 26 January, represents
an important milestone. We welcome the constructive response of six former
leaders of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
to their indictment — asking victims for forgiveness and committing to answering
their questions during the hearings. Acknowledging responsibility for crimes and
injustices will pave the way for reconciliation and sustainable peace.
20/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

The Council has been working to respond to Colombia’s request, which the
United Kingdom very much welcomed, for the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia to support the Special Jurisdiction for Peace by ensuring compliance
with its sentences. Against the backdrop of ongoing conversations, the United
Kingdom hopes that we will soon be able to take action to formally add this task to
the Mission’s mandate.
Let me conclude by saying that the United Kingdom recognizes the important
progress achieved thus far in the implementation of Colombia’s historic peace
agreement, as well as the significant challenges that remain. We urge the parties to
remain seized of those challenges and to intensify their efforts in that regard during
this crucial year. The United Kingdom remains fully committed to helping Colombia
achieve a lasting peace.

21-0552421/29

S/2021/401

Annex XII
Statement by the Acting Alternate Representative for Special
Political Affairs of the United States of America to the
United Nations, Jeffrey DeLaurentis
I thank Special Representative Ruiz Massieu for his briefing. The United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia continues to play a vital role in supporting
peace in Colombia. As always, we welcome Minister Blum de Barberi to the
Security Council.
We acknowledge the Government of Colombia’s continuing commitment to the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
particularly given the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease and the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in Venezuela. We also welcome President Duque Márquez’s
extraordinary humanitarian decision to grant protected status for 18 months to many
of the 1.7 million Venezuelan refugees and migrants in Colombia.
As the Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2021/298) notes, this year will
be decisive for the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. For that work to be
successful in upholding victims’ rights and in laying the foundation for reconciliation,
it is critical for former combatants, members of the public security forces and third
parties to the conflict to provide exhaustive and truthful accounts of the crimes
committed, to acknowledge their role in the conflict and to contribute to reparations.
As we have seen, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace has already taken its first
steps in the pursuit of justice for acts of kidnapping and hostage-taking committed by
former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), as well as through its revelation of new information regarding
the “false positive” killings by State agents. We welcome those developments and
note that continued support by the international community can help ensure the
success of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
The continued participation of former FARC-EP combatants in reintegration
efforts stands as a significant success and is a testament to the commitment of the
Colombian Government and people. Despite these great strides, however, we must be
wary of the obstacles to fulfilling the accord’s transformational promise.
We remain concerned about ongoing violence by non-State armed groups
against human rights defenders, social leaders, former combatants and other
vulnerable populations. In addition, killings of former FARC-EP combatants continue
despite efforts by Colombian authorities. While national and regional authorities
have provided support through evacuations, we urge the Government of Colombia
to take action to implement the evacuation road map announced last year. It will
also be essential to ensure that adequate security guarantees are in place so that
ex-combatants can safely fulfil the sentences of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
Continued rural violence has also disproportionately affected Afro-Colombian
and indigenous communities, deepening long-standing inequities and accelerating
displacement. We urge the Government of Colombia to continue expanding police
and judicial presence in rural areas as part of an approach that protects social leaders,
supports victims and promotes the full political, economic and civic participation of
members of ethnic minority groups and women.
Finally, we encourage the Government of Colombia to accelerate the
implementation of the rural reform provisions of the agreement and implement a
holistic approach to security, rural development and counter-narcotics in strategic
regions of concern. The path to sustainable peace lies in greater State involvement
in rural areas and the growth of licit economies, underpinned by security, public
22/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

service delivery, infrastructure and the rule of law. A robust crop-substitution
programme based on community infrastructure, rather than cash payments, would
also help ensure that communities affected by armed conflict can escape the cycle of
continuing violence that illicit economies often fuel.
The United States again reiterates its appreciation for the Government of
Colombia’s attention to these issues and to our shared objectives. The progress we
have seen on this wide-ranging accord reflects the commitment and the will of the
Colombian people to put more than half a century of conflict behind them.
The United States will continue its strong partnership with Colombia in service
of a brighter future, and thanks one and all for their hard work to reach that goal.

21-0552423/29

S/2021/401

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dinh Quy Dang
I would like to warmly welcome Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to this meeting. I thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his informative briefing.
Since the signing of the landmark Final Agreement for Ending the Conf lict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, Colombia has made important progress.
However, there are still many steps before the agreement can be fully implemented.
As a result, as reconciliation and the reintegration progress face multiple challenges,
the peace process remains fragile. In that regard, we would like to stress the
following points.
First, with regard to the peace process, we commend the constructive
meeting between President Duque Márquez and Mr. Rodrigo Londoño, president
of the Comunes party, to discuss the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement.
We acknowledge the Government’s commitments with regard to the reintegration
process, including the provision of protection and security for former combatants.
We call on all relevant parties to continue engaging in constructive dialogue at
the political and technical levels in order to address the various challenges and
differences in the peace process, especially through the mechanisms set forth in
the agreement.
We commend the efforts made by the political parties in reviewing their
programme and electoral strategy for the 2022 elections. This year will be decisive
for Colombia, especially in terms of making preparations for the 2022 elections.
Every effort should therefore be made to create the most favourable conditions for
the organization of, and participation in, the elections. The United Nations and the
international community should support Colombia’s efforts towards that end, while
fully respecting its sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence.
Secondly, with regard to security, the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2021/298 gave us very worrying information on the unabated violence and attacks
against Colombians, including social leaders and conflict-affected communities.
Illegal armed groups, criminal organizations and their support networks have taken
advantage of illicit economies to strengthen their social and territorial control.
We condemn all the violence and attacks and urge all groups concerned to
immediately stop these appalling acts. We reiterate that such violence and attacks
are unacceptable and that its perpetrators must be brought to justice.
In that connection, we urge the National Commission on Security Guarantees
to take concrete actions to dismantle those organizations and strengthen the
investigation and the application of justice. It is also important to redouble efforts
to ensure security and to implement practical measures promote development in
conflict-affected communities. It is through the well-being of these communities
that the value of peace is upheld and maintained.
Thirdly, we commend the Government’s reintegration efforts and the progress
achieved so far across the socioeconomic and political fields, especially in the
context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Reintegration is a long-term process
that requires patience, political will and practical steps.
We look forward to the role of the National Reintegration Council, together
with the United Nations, regional and international organizations, in developing a
joint strategy to assist former combatants in stabilizing their lives.
24/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

In conclusion, we would like to commend and reiterate our support for the
unceasing efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission and the United Nations
country team in contributing to the process of peace, security, unity and development
in Colombia. We fully support the draft resolution on the expansion of the United
Nations Verification Mission’s mandate.

21-0552425/29

S/2021/401

Annex XIV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Claudia
Blum de Barberi
[Original: Spanish]
I thank the President for convening this meeting and the Council members
for their continued support for Colombia. I also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and his Special Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for the report
(S/2021/298) presented today.
President Iván Duque Márquez has pointed out that peace emerges from a
society’s decision to build a dignified future based on truth, solidarity, adherence to
legality and the rejection of all forms of violence.
Colombians and the world, in general, have not forgotten the levels of violence
of the 1980s and 1990s, when criminality terrorized our population without respite
and threatened our democratic institutions.
The world has seen Colombia’s progress since the beginning of the century
as reflected by enhanced security and more peaceful coexistence, as well as the
strengthening of our institutions, economy and society.
Since 2018, the work on the implementation of the peace with legality policy,
including the 2016 agreement, has been arduous, and we continue to advance in all
the transformations necessary for Colombia to be an increasingly just, peaceful and
inclusive society.
As recognized in the Secretary-General’s reports, the downward trend in all
indicators of violence has been consolidated in recent years. We have managed to
reduce crime and guarantee the rule of law, thus protecting the human rights and
integrity of more and more Colombians.
The 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace was signed in the knowledge that the former combatants of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) were not the
only perpetrators of violence in the country. It was therefore unrealistic to think that
its implementation would in itself be sufficient to achieve an immediate and absolute
stable and lasting peace.
Since the second half of the last century, organized illegal armed groups
have remained in certain areas of the country, posing challenges to stabilization
and consolidation. In their pursuit of routes for drug trafficking and other illicit
economies, those criminal organizations attack the population, target social leaders,
harm farmers and clash with the security forces, which ensure the rule of law. Groups
involved in transnational organized crime are the enemies of all Colombians and fuel
violence in the country.
In analysing compliance with the Final Agreement, the report cannot mention
only the actions of the Government as one of the signatory parties. The existence
of Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común dissidents should rightly be seen
as non-compliance by the former guerrilla movement, now a political party. The
enemies of the agreement and of peace in Colombia are the criminals, including the
dissidents. Eighty per cent of the murders of former combatants are perpetrated by
dissidents and drug traffickers.
With regard to the two components of the mandate of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, it is important to stress that security is our
greatest challenge. In that regard, we spare no effort in capacity-building. In 2020,
26/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

steady progress was made in adopting and implementing measures to strengthen the
security of former combatants, promote the investigation and prosecution of crimes
against them, achieving high rates of success, and enhance the efforts of the security
forces to dismantle criminal structures in the territories.
The Technical Committee on Security and Protection, which brings together
15 State bodies, set out the security measures for former combatants and members
of their political party, which has adopted the name Comunes. The Committee has
met 64 times and its technical subcommittees 110 times. That is a top priority of
President Duque Márquez.
Coordinated actions have contributed to the reduction in homicides and
victimization of former combatants. In 2020, homicides decreased by 10.8 per cent
as compared to 2019. To date in 2021, the number of total victimizations has fallen
by 51 per cent as compared to the same period last year. We will continue to act with
determination to protect their lives and safety.
As the report (S/2021/298) acknowledges, there is clear progress in the political,
economic and social reintegration of the more than 13,000 former combatants who
remain in the legal system. The Mission has verified that the political participation
of former guerrilla members is a reality. The party created by former combatants
participated in the 2018 parliamentary elections and in the 2019 departmental and
municipal elections. Its political headquarters and members are protected, and a
robust campaign against political violence is under way. Likewise, in economic
matters, 100 per cent of the individual productive projects of former combatants
and 97 per cent of the collective ones have been developed and approved during the
current Government.
We have ensured the sustainability of their access to basic services and social
security. Their monthly allowance, equivalent to 90 per cent of the minimum wage,
has been maintained, which has meant a disbursement of $67.7 million. That benefit
was due to expire in August 2019 but was extended by the Government of President
Duque Márquez for 10 years. Likewise, 98.6 per cent of former combatants are
affiliated to the health system, and a high percentage are enrolled in training schools
and use banks.
We extended the term of the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration and we are implementing the acquisition of land for the reintegration
of the 2,974 former combatants who remain in them. The Government has acquired
land for seven of those former areas and is in the process of purchasing land for 12
more areas. It is important to clarify that that provision was not in the agreement
and that it reflects the political will of President Duque Márquez to ensure dignified
conditions for those who have demonstrated their commitment to legality.
The report presented by the Mission focuses on five priorities that the
Secretary-General has sought to define as a path to fulfilling the commitments
under the agreement. However, it is necessary to remember that those priorities,
as in all public policy, reflect the platform endorsed by the citizens at the ballot
box when they elected the Government. For the current Administration, the
priorities are established in the National Development Plan 2018-2022, the peace
with legality policy and the framework plan for the implementation of the Final
Agreement, initiated by the previous Government, which addresses all aspects of the
agreement and the competent entities to develop them. Our Government reaffirms
that the guidelines, emphasis and implementation policy are the responsibility of the
Colombian State, as our Constitutional Court has noted.
The priorities of President Duque Márquez are clearly described in the peace
with legality policy. They are the effective reintegration of former combatants;
21-0552427/29

S/2021/401

comprehensive reparations for the more than 9 million victims of violence; support for
the nearly 100,000 families who have joined the illicit crop substitution programmes
and who have demonstrated their commitment to that process; the formulation
and implementation of the development programmes with a territorial focus; and
continued progress in comprehensive rural development.
Colombia therefore maintains a long-term vision of priorities and resource
allocation. Our efforts have resulted in public works, opportunities and development,
benefiting former combatants, victims, rural communities and other vulnerable
populations. With that comprehensive vision, consolidation and stabilization
are advancing and violence is being reduced. That is one of the strengths of the
Colombian peace process, and priorities will continue to be set in that way.
The Colombian Government has been open to scrutiny. We therefore
continuously transmit to the Verification Mission complete and updated information
on the two components of its mandate and the results of the comprehensive
implementation of the agreement. That should reduce the margin for interpretation or
value judgments on issues that are verifiable and is a fundamental aspect of ensuring
confidence in the Colombian peace process, both nationally and internationally.
Meanwhile, the Colombian Government has guaranteed the independence of
the Comprehensive System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. We
have also ensured its adequate funding. In 2020, funds to the tune of $142 million
were allocated to the three entities of the system, and in 2021 a budget of almost $160
million was allocated.
As Council members are aware, in line with the agreement and with the
will to ensure that the transitional justice system has the expected effect on the
reconciliation process in my country, President Duque Márquez asked the Security
Council to add to the mandate of the Verification Mission.
The implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and gender
approaches related to peace implementation have been a priority for us.
The Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement has had five meetings with the Special
Forum on Gender. Its technical secretariat has held 52 working meetings with the
Gender Committee of the National Reintegration Council and 19 meetings with the
Special Women’s Body. It has also held five meetings with the Special High-Level
Forum of Ethnic Peoples. As a result, we have made concrete progress on the 51
gender indicators included in the framework plan for the implementation of the Final
Agreement.
I highlight that, in the rural development strategy alone, a total of 837,000
women have benefited from land restitution and formalization programmes,
comprehensive land subsidies and the delivery of new housing. Colombia will
continue to reaffirm women as key actors and agents in the peace with legality policy.
Peacebuilding in our country has been a complex process and the current
Government is committed to its achievement. Those who want to mislead Colombians
about such efforts are mistaken. Those who want to confuse mislead international
community about the achievements and progress made are mistaken, but those who
seek to mislead the Security Council about the reality in my country and the region
are even more mistaken.
The Government has developed a judicious 15-year planning process to
achieve genuine change through the development and implementation of irreversible
paths, in addition to honouring the victims and extending a hand to those who have
the true will to renounce crime and live in legality.
28/29

21-05524

S/2021/401

I do not want to end without mentioning that, following the visits of the
Security Council in 2017 and 2019, we believe it to be of the utmost importance to
convey a standing invitation to the Security Council to come to our country this
year, when public health conditions permit, so that it can see the road travelled and
the challenges ahead.

21-0552429/29
