UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/6
15 February 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At the 3631st meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 February 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council deeply deplores the continuation of armed
hostilities in Afghanistan, which have brought death and destruction to the
people and property of the country and threaten the peace and security of
the region.
"The Security Council is particularly concerned about the recent
intensification of shelling and air attacks in and around the capital city
of Kabul and the blockade of the city, which has prevented the delivery of
foodstuffs, fuel and other humanitarian items to its population.
"The Security Council calls on the parties involved to end the
hostilities forthwith and not to obstruct the delivery of humanitarian aid
and other needed supplies to the innocent civilians of the city. In this
regard, the Council commends the efforts of the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other humanitarian agencies in
Afghanistan, which are working under the most trying circumstances, and the
airlift of food supplies from Peshawar to Kabul, and urges the
international community to continue its support of those life-saving
efforts.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned that the continued conflict
in Afghanistan provides fertile ground for terrorism, arms transfers and
drug trafficking, which destabilize the whole region and beyond. It calls
on the leaders of the Afghan parties to put aside their differences and to
halt such activities.
"The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the efforts of
the United Nations Special Mission in Afghanistan to bring about a peaceful
solution to the conflict through the establishment of a fully
representative, broad-based, authoritative council acceptable to all
Afghans. It calls upon all Afghans to cooperate fully with the Special
Mission as it works towards this goal.

96-03687 (E)

150296

/...

S/PRST/1996/6
English
Page 2

"The Security Council calls on all States in a position to do so to
take steps to promote peace and stability in Afghanistan, in particular by
urging the parties to the conflict to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Special Mission. It also calls on all States to refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan and to prevent the flow
to the Afghan parties of weapons and other supplies that can fuel the
fighting.
"The Security Council urges the captors of the members of the crew of
the Russian aircraft in Kandahar to release them immediately and without
any preconditions.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the full
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. It reaffirms its readiness to assist the Afghan people in
their efforts to return peace and normalcy to their country, and it
encourages all States, as well as the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, the Non-Aligned Movement and others, to support the efforts of
the United Nations Special Mission to the same end.
"The Security Council will remain actively seized of the situation in
Afghanistan."

-----
