UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/2000/137
21 February 2000
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND SPANISH

LETTER DATED 18 FEBRUARY 2000 FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE
SECURITY COUNCIL TO THE SECRETARY-GENERAL

I have the honour to inform you that your letter of 31 January 2000
attaching the report of the International Commission of Inquiry on East Timor
(A/54/726-S/2000/59) has been brought to the attention of the members of the
Security Council. Grave violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law have been committed; those responsible for these violations should be
brought to justice as soon as possible.
The members of the Security Council welcome the commitment of the
Government of Indonesia, as set out in the letter to you dated 26 January 2000
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Alwi Shihab (A/54/727S/2000/65, annex), to bring those responsible to justice through Indonesia’s
national judicial system. To that end, they encourage Indonesia to institute a
swift, comprehensive, effective and transparent legal process, in conformity
with international standards of justice and due process of law. In this
context, Council members recognize that the accountability of those responsible
for the aforementioned violations would be a key factor in ensuring
reconciliation and stability in East Timor. They are particularly conscious
that early and effective action by the Government of Indonesia would contribute
to improved relations between the peoples of Indonesia and East Timor.
The members of the Security Council share your belief that the United
Nations has its role to play in this process in order to help safeguard the
rights of the people of East Timor, promote reconciliation and ensure future
social and political stability. The members of the Council welcome your
intention to assist in this effort. In this regard, they encourage you to
consult with the Government of Indonesia on any assistance it may need from the
United Nations in taking this process forward.
The members of the Security Council would be grateful if you could inform
the Council on further developments in order to assist its consideration of the
situation in East Timor.
(Signed) Arnoldo Manuel LISTRE
President of the Security Council
----00-30844 (E)

210200
