II.

eign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries,98 held at Nico­
sia from 7 to 10 September 1988,
Bearing in mind also the important contribution of the
United Nations in the field of decolonization, in particular
through the Special Committee on the Situation with re­
gard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting oflndependence to Colonial Countries and Peo­
ples,
1. Declares the period 1990-2000 as the International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report that
would enable the Assembly to consider and adopt an ac­
tion plan aimed at ushering in the twenty-first century, a
world free from colonialism.
59th plenary meeting
22 November 1988
43/49. Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 43/48 of 30 November 1988, in
which, inter alia, it urged the host country to abide
scrupulously by the provisions of the Agreement between
the United Nations and the United States of America re­
garding the Headquarters of the United Nations, dated
26 June 194799 and to reconsider and reverse its decision
to deny the visa requested for Mr. Yasser Arafat, Chair­
man of the Executive Committee of the Palestine Libera­
tion Organization,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General of
1 December 1988 100 in which it is stated that the host
country informed him that "we see no basis for changing
our decision",
Affirming the right of persons mentioned in section 11 of
the Agreement to enter the United States of America with­
out any impediment for the purpose of transit to or from
the headquarters district,
1. Deplores the failure of the host country to respond
favourably to the request of the General Assembly con­
tained in its resolution 43/48;
2. Decides, in the present compelling circumstances
and without prejudice to normal practice, to consider the
question of Palestine, item 37 of the agenda of the forty­
third session of the General Assembly, in plenary, at the
United Nations Office at Geneva during the period from
13 to 15 December 1988;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to make the neces­
sary arrangements for the implementation of the present
resolution, and authorizes him to adjust the schedule of
meetings at the United Nations Office at Geneva during
those days as required.
67th plenary meeting
2 December 1988

98 A/43/667-S/20212, annex, sect. I, para. 239.
99 See resolution 169 (II).

100 A/43/909.

49

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

43/50.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of South
Africa 101
A

INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY WITH THE LIBERATION
STRUGGLE IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/23 A of 20 November 1987,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 102 in particular paragraphs 183 to 194,
Gravely concerned at the escalating repression of and
State terror against opponents of apartheid and the in­
creasing intransigence of the racist regime of South Africa,
exemplified by the continuous extension of the state of
emergency, the imposition of severe restrictions on peace­
ful anti-apartheid organizations and individuals, the in­
creasing number of arbitrary detentions, trials, torture and
killings, including those of women and children, the in­
creased use of vigilante groups and the stifling of the press,
Noting with serious concern the racist regime's continu­
ing acts of aggression and destabilization against neigh­
bouring independent African States, including assassina­
tions and abductions of freedom fighters in those States
and elsewhere, and the continuing illegal occupation of
Namibia,
1. Reaffirms its full support to the majority of the
South African people in their struggle, under the leader­
ship of their national liberation movements, the African
National Congress of South Africa and the Pan Africanist
Congress of Azania, to eradicate apartheid totally, so that
all the people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of
race, colour or creed, may enjoy equal and full political
and other rights, and participate freely in the determina­
tion of their destiny;
2. Reaffirms also the legitimacy of the struggle of the
people of South Africa and their right to choose the neces­
sary means, including armed struggle, to attain the eradi­
cation of apartheid, and the establishment of a free, demo­
cratic, unfragmented and non-racial South Africa;
3. Condemns the racist regime and its policies and
practices of apartheid and, in particular, the execution of
patriots and captured freedom fighters in South Africa
and demands that the racist regime:
(a) Stop the execution of political prisoners at present
on death row;
(b) Recognize prisoner-of-war status of captured free­
dom fighters in accordance with the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 194970 and Additional Protocol I of 1977
thereto; 69
4. Demands again:
(a) The lifting of the state of emergency;
(b) The immediate and unconditional release of Nel­
son Mandela and all other political prisoners and de­
tainees;
(c) The lifting of the ban on all political organizations
and opponents of apartheid;
(d) The safe return of all political exiles;
(e) The withdrawal of the regime's troops from black
townships;
101 See also sect. I, footnote 9, and sect. X.B.3, decision 43/414.
102 Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-third Session,

Supplement No. 22 (A/43/22).
