UNITED NATIONS

,SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL
RECORDS
UN LWARY

THIRTY-FOURTH

2121
NEW

YEAR

MEETING:

MAY18lg@

6 MARCH

1979

UN/sA
GOLLECT

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2121)
of the agenda

. . . . . . . t . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial
Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13121) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2121

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
ANT;f+i G-fi ,f ii”! t
Documents’ of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Suppleme+ of the Oficial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates
. . .,thesuppienient in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
; .adopted.% ,.@&t,Jam pubh&d in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security CorkZ. The net system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions

adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2121st MEETING
HCld in New York on Tuesday, 6 March 1979, at 3.30 p.m.
president:

Mr. Leslie c>i HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

the cause of their own liberation
freedom in general.

and for the cause of

1. Adoption of the agenda

4. I wish to congratulate you personally, Mr: President,
on your assumption of the office of President of the Council
for the month of March, and I wish you successirrcarrying
out those responsible functions. Your well-known diplomatic skill, negotiating ability and political wisdom will
perhaps enable the Council, if not to solve, then at least to
move off dead centre the solving of the important problems
of peace and security with which it is faced at the present
moment.

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to, President of the Security
Council (S/13121)

5. I also wish once again to congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Bishara, for the efforts he exerted and the
contribution he made in the month of February during the
consideration on one of the most delicate issues in international relations.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/Zltl)

i%e meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
Illhe agenda was adopted.

Questh concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 28 February 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Equatorial Guinea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/13121)
1. The PRESIDENT
In accordance with the decisions
taken at the preceding meetings, I invite the representative
of Angola, Benin,.Botswana, Cuba, Ethiopia, Ghana, Sri
Lanka and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. de F&&redo
(Angola), Mr. Hozmgavou (Benin), Mr Modisi (Botswana),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Seifu (Ethiopia), Mr Sekyi
(Ghana). Mr Fernando (Sri Lanka) and Mr. Komatina
(Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make a statement.
3. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you and, through you, all the other members
of the. Council for having given me this opportunity to
explain my Government’s views on present developments in
and regarding Zimbabwe and once again to express our
solidarity with and to pay tribute to the heroic struggle and
the sacrifices the people of that country are making both for

6. I should like to expressmy profound condolences to his
family and the Mission and Government of Saudi Arabia
on the passing away of Ambassador Jamil Baroody, a
distinguished diplomat and an illustrious representative of
his country, who made an invaluable contribution towards
the realization of the principles and objectives of the United
Nations, The world Organization has lost a diplomat from
whose wisdom and experience we have all derived great
benefits. It is all the poorer for the loss of a man whose fiery
oratory inspired many of our debates.
7. The- problems with which we are faced are neither new
nor surprising. Actually, we are again confronted with the
policy of aggression abrcad and repression at home that the
illegal racist regime of Southern Rhodesia has been pursuing unceasingly. We are witnessing the death throes of an
anachronistic regime which has been condemned by the
entire international community and against which the
whole people of Zimbabwe has risen up in arms, a regime
that is maintaining itself in power thanks only to the sup
port of private interests and monopolies greedy to exploit
the natural resources of the country.
8. Current events prove beyond any doubt what we
atready knew, namely, that the very existence of the racist
rt5gime amounts to permanent aggression both against the
people of Zimbabwe and against the independence of African States. The systematic terrorist actions of the armed
forces and mercenaries of that regime threaten the security
and independence of African countries, especially of the
fro&me States, as well as peace in the region and beyond.
It is necessary immediately to check this threat, which has
turned the region into the most acute hotbed of conflict in
the world-as is proved by South Africa’s most recent
brutal ‘attacks against Angola. In order to achieve this, it is
imperative to take vigorqus,
direct and joint action.
_

actions their support for the liberation of peoples. They
have endorsed the principle of selfdetermination-construed as the right to independent national life and free
social development-as the basic principle of their own
policy since their first conference, held at Belgrade in 1961,
and have propelled the struggle for its realization into active
international life as one of the absolute priorities of their
action.
1

9. Parallel with its aggression, the minority racist r6gime
continues to pursue a policy of brutal repression against the
people of Zimbabwe, endeavouring at the same time to
legalize neo-colonial relationships through a so-called internal settlement. As a matter of fact, the racist r6gime is trying
to impose on the people of Zimbabwe solutions that would
deprive it of the fruits of its liberation struggle, solutions
that would render genuine independence and free develop
ment impossile. The racist r@me, is trying to achieve this
through stage-managed elections to be held under the pressure of the repressive apparatus of the racist r&ime, the
purpose of such elections being to impose on the people of
Zimbabwe puppet groups of quislings with a view to creating a false impression that the racist r6gime has been eliminated. The final aim of these manceuvres is to perpetuate
oppression, to disrupt the united front of freedom fighters
and to undermine the international support enjoyed by
them. There is no doubt that these attempts, like all others,
are bound to fail because to&y peoples are lesswilling than
ever before to reconcile themselves to relations based on
subjugation. The people of Zimbabwe are giving proof of
this every day. Peoples cannot be deceived any more. They
know how to distinguish freedom from lack of freedom and
genuine independence from sham independence. All those
who believe that by any kind of manoeuvring they can make
someone other than a people’s liberation movement speak
in the name of that people are grossly mistaken. Actually,
the purpose of such manoeuvres is to prolong the life of
racist regimes, a course that would at the same time open
the way to a confrontation of the global interests of the
world Powers.

14. Supporting peaceful settlements wherever they are
possible on the basis of the principle of selfdetermination,
the non-aligned countries have consistently supported the
armed liberation struggle as -a legitimate form leading
towards the realization of the objectives of independence
and freedom, to which every people is entitled under the
Charter. These positions as an indivisible part of the totality
of a policy of non-alignment have been affnmed at’all
gatherings of non-aligned countries-including
the last
ministerial conference, held at Belgrade, and the extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries held at Maputo, Mozambique.
These positions have also been embodied in all actions by
all non-aligned countries in the United Nations. In order to
strengthen the liberation struggle in all its forms, the Coordinating Bureau, meeting at Maputo, recommended that
the sixth summit should admit the.Patriotic Front as a full
member of the non-aligned movement.
15. The non-aligned countries have made an historic contribution by initiating and accelerating the process of decolonization throughout the world, a processwhereby millions
of people in Asia, Africa and Latin America have achieved
their independence. That is the reason why an increasing
number of countries are rallying to the enduring values of
non-alignment, and, for that very reason, the ministerial
meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau underlined inits document [see S/23185] that, as an independent, global factor,
the policy and principles of non-alignment had provided a
firm basis for promoting and safeguarding the genuine
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
and supporting the efforts of peoples under colonial
oppression.

10. My country condemns most emphatically the aggressive actions against Angola, Mozambique and Zambia, in
the same way as it condemns any attempt at imposing upon
the people of Zimbabwe-by
means of “internal settlements” and bogus elections-new forms of subjugation in
place of the old ones. We must translate into practice the
numerous resolutions of the United Nations and eliminate
thii most inhuman form of discrimination and oppression
ever imposed on human beings.
11. In accordance with its policy of support for every
authentic struggle for freedom and independence and
against colonial domination, aggression and occupation,
and in the spirit of its non-aligned policy and very close
relations wifh the liberation movements and front-line
States that are the bulwark of the freedom of Africa, my
country will lend, within the limits of its abilities, all-out
assistance to this struggle. Solidarity with. the people of
Zimbabwe, with the front-line States and with the countries
of the African continent constitutes an obligation towards
the fundamental principles of the United Nations-towards
peace, freedom and the inalienable rights of men, peoples,
nations and States.

16. The firm determination of the peoples of southern
Africa to continue their liberation struggle in all its forms
constitutes a decisive factor in the attainment of their freedom and independence. International assistance and sup
port are additional factors indispensable to the promotion
of those objectives,
17. We are convinced that the situation in which the
people of Zimbabwe finds themselves today calls for the
taking of urgent measures with a view to thwarting the
aggressive actions of the racist regime against the independent African States, supporting all the forms of the struggle
waged by the Patriotic Front for the independence of Zimbabwe and preventing the legalization of the so-called internal settlement of 3 March 1978 or of any so-called
representatives likely to emerge from stage-managed elections. Strong action at the national and the international
levels should be undertaken by all Member States in order
to prevent the recruitment of mercenaries by the racist
r6gimes. It is also imperative to adopt the measures provided for in Article 41 of the Charter, to prevent the violation of existing mandatory sanctions and to impose new
ones.

12. The struggle waged by the peoples of southern Africa
under the leadership of their liberation movements-and in
this specific caseby the people of Zimbabwe, headed by the
Patriotic Front, the only authentic representative of that
people-is not solely an African struggle but also a struggle
involving all peoples and countries. Therefore, the international community is duty bound to support this struggle. It
is indispensable to translate declarations against racial discrimination, minority rule and apartheid into actual deeds.
13. In that regard, the non-aligned countries~havefuElled
their share of responsibiity. They have confirmed by their
2

_

.-

:

18. Our action of solidarity with the victims of coloniaiism and racism would not be complete if it failed to
encompass the front-line States as well. It is therefore indispensable to condemn all acts of armed aggression and
attempts at destabilization directed against Tanzania,
Angola, Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique, as well as
any other form of direct complicity in such acts.
,_
19. We deem it necessary also to strengthen all forms of
support for these States, both at the national and at the
international level, in order to enable them to counter systematic aggression by racist regimes to which they are subjected owing to their role as secure rear bases for the
liberation struggle and to help them overcome the security
and ecomonic consequences of such a situation.

,. ...

salient achievements of the United Nations since its incep
tion. In this context I wish not only to expressour appreciation but to seek the co-operation and assistance of members
of the Security Council that are not members of the nonaligned movement for the implementation of this historic
task on behalf of humanity.
25. Only one month ago an extraordinary meeting of the
Coordinating Bureau was held at Maputo to consider the
situation in southern Africa and to reiterate the collective
solidarity and unflinching support of the non-aligned countries for the peoples of southern Africa at this critical and
decisive phase in their struggle for freedom from colonialism, racism, racial discrimination ‘and apartheid and the
attainment of their inalienable right to self-determination
and national independence. Our support is based on the
policy and principles of non-alignment as enunciated by the
heads of State and Government at our summit conferences.
Our principles include the inalienable right of people to
self-determination and true independence and the right of
all people to live without contravention of their human
rights as envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is in this
context that we call upon the Security Council to make
every effort to contribute to the liquidation of the inhuman
regime in Zimbabwe and to put an end to the colonization
of Zimbabwe.

20. To conclude, the process of the liberation of Zimbabwe has entered an advanced, actually decisive, phase.
Racism is at the end of its strength: it is undermined from
within, isolated abroad, subjected to the pressure of an
ever-stronger and more united front of the forces of peace,
independence and progress. This calls for more energetic
action on our part. Consequently, we believe that the Security Council should act resolutely without any delay or hesitation. I wish to repeat that my country will give its
unflinching support to such action.
21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

26. As I see it, there are certain aspects relating to the
situation which must engage the attention of the Council
and indeed of the entire international community.

22. Mr. FERNANDO (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, at the
outset let me thank you and through you the other members
of the Council for this opportunity of saying a few words on
the current situation in the British colony of Southern
Rhodesia. It is significant that you, as the representative of
non-aligned Nigeria, with your wide experience and competence in the struggle against apartheidand racist domination
in Africa, are to guide our deliberations during the current
debate. It is also my duty to take this opportunity to congratulate not only you but the two previous Presidents of
the Council, Ambassadors Mills and Bishara of Jamaica
and Kuwait respectively, for their strenuous efforts to maintain the peace and security of the world. It is a matter of
added pride to my delegation that all three of you are from
non-aligned countries.

27. First, in the colony the illegal Smith regime continues,
in pursuance of the theory and practice of its perverted race
doctrine, to harass, torture, intimidate and deny the most
elementary human rights to the people of Zimbabwe and to
detain, imprison, persecute and execute freedom fighters
and those struggling for the liberation of their country. The
few token cosmetic gestures of “liberalization” in no way
alter the basic barbarity of the regime. All this has been
condemned before: it needs to be condemned again and
again until the entire system is destroyed. At Maputo, Foreign Ministers of non-aligned countries were acutely aware
that, “in a desperate bid to survive, the illegal minority
regime is increasingly resorting to massacres and acts of
repression against the broad masses”. Those who support
the regime actively, or by apathy,are condoning these practices and are guilty of encouraging them.

23. Permit me on this occasion to express on behalf of Sri
Lanka and other non-aligned countries our deepest condolences on the death of Ambassador Jamil Baroody of Saudi
Arabia.

28. Secondly, as part of this desperate bid to survive, the
r6gime last year foisted upon the colony the so-called internal settlement. At the non-aligned ministerial conference
held last year at Belgrade, our Ministers rejected and totally
condemned the so-called internal settlement in Southern
Rhodesia, They considered that agreement to be a sham
and a fraudulent attempt to consolidate racist minority
power and stated that a just solution would be possible only
if it was based on the wishes of the majority. I wish also to
reiterate the following words used by the Foreign Minister
of SriLanka in a statement a few months ago:
“We do not have confidence in the internal settlement,
we do not accept any settlement that excluded the participation of the Patriotic Front, which has been recognized
by the Organization of African Unity as the sole liberation movement of Zimbabwe. The internal settlement,
we feel, is intended to preserve the political and economic
interests of the minority for the foreseeable future. We

24. We are facing the critical and final phase in the liberation of southern Africa. It is my duty as Chairman of the
Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries to recall
the non-aligned countries’ abiding commitment and historic contribution to the initiation and acceleration of the
process of decolonization throughout the world. Since the
first summit conference, the non-aligned countries have set
themselves, as one of their fundamental and priority tasks,
the total emancipation of subjugated peoples from racial
discrimination and colonial exploitation. Proceeding from
this commitment, the non-aligned countries have taken
important initiatives in the United Nations and in other
international forums which have significantly contributed
to the independence of millions of people in Asia, Africa
and Latin America. Indeed these initiatives inaugurated the
era of decolonization which is now regarded as one of the
3

‘believe that the policy of racial discrimination in Southern Rhodesia could end only-and only-by a genuine
transfer of power to the majority based on the principle
of one man, one vote.”

At the same conference, the Co-ordinating Bureau recommended that the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe should be
‘admitted as a full member of the non-aligned movement as
“a telling further support for the liberation struggle waged
by the people of Zimbabwe, led by the Patriotic Front, for
the speedy establishment of a free, independent and nonaligned Zimbabwe”.

29. I need not go into this settlement any further on this
occasion. I would merely refer to Security Council resolution 423 (1978), which condemned it. Following on that
agreement, the regime has taken steps towards an election
to take place on 20 April. The terms and conditions under
which the so-called election is .to take place is the most
telling commentary on the regime’s real intention-to
entrench its rule and further to ensnare the people of Zimbabwe in its murderous clutches. The result is prearranged
to operate totally against genuine freedom and independence. It is the duty of the Council to denounce the election in
advance for what it is intended to be: an unmitigated,
crudely concealed act of political hypocrisy and deceit, an
insult to the declared views of the international community.
The pseudo-election should receive no recognition of any
sort and all States have a duty to avoid giving it even an
implied form of recognition. The principle is clear: asstated
in General Assembly resolution 33/38A, there should be no
independence before majority rule and any settlement
affecting the future of the colony, whatever its title or status,
must be worked out in accordance with the aspirations of
the people of Zimbabwe and with the full participation of
the Patriotic Front.

33. Though the international community has been mindful of the legitimacy of the struggle of the people of Zimbabwe against the Ian Smith regime, there have been
inconsistencies of attitude among certain States Members of
the United Nations. In these circumstances it is our duty to
appeal to all Member States to lend their full support to
settle this critical situation in Zimbabwe. There are some
members of the international community who may advocate different methods to achieve the universally acepted
goal. It is our duty to understand them, but to renew our call
to them to j6in us in this struggle to uphold the inalienable
right of the people of Zimbabwe. I am making this call
because it is essential that the entire international community should at this stage pledge its moral, material and political assistance to the people of Zimbabwe.
34. The struggle of the people of Zimbabwe is not only
their own, but the struggle .of all peoples who believe in
freedom, independence and human dignity. In this context,
I wish to appeal to the members of the Security Council to
undertake effective measures, taking into consideration all
relevant provisions of the Charter, to deal decisively with
the aggressive actions of the racist regime which threatened
peace and security in the region as well as in the rest of the
world.

30. The third aspect which should be of concern to us is
represented by the acts of wanton aggression that the
regime is continuing to commit against the front-line States
which are supporting the just and legitimate liberation
struggle in that Crown Colony. The grave concern of the
non-aligned countries was clearly expressed at the extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau at
Maputo which had as its central theme “to provide an
opportunity for expressing heightened solidarity with the
liberation movements and the front-line States”.

35. Mr. ROLbN ANAYA (Bolivia) (interpretation from
Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation cannot but convey
to you the pleasure we feel at .seeing you conducting the
Council’s business in the third,month of this year, which
marks a difficult period for world peace and security. Bolivia, which, as I have said before in this same forum, is one of
the’countries of Latin America which has suffered most
from a threefold colonialism, has a firm resolve which has
already been put into effect to some extent: that of soon
establishing diplomatic representation in Nigeria and,
through that representation, enhancing the most brotherly :
relationships with all the peoples of Africa.

31. The Security Council, as the custodian of intemational peace and.security, has befQre it nu.merous resolutions condemning acts of aggression committed by the
Smith regime against the independent States of Angola,
Botswana, Mozambique, Tanzania and Zambia, and calling for the.terminat.ion ofthose acts. The response from the
Smith regime has been only to step up the brutalattacks and
to penetrate even deeper into those States, violating their
sovereignty and territorial integrity and causing death and
destruction. The credibility of the Council itself is on trial.
Clearly the regime in Rhodesia is receiving sustenance and
support and there are leaks and loopholes in existing sanctions. These must be sealed.

36. I have experienced at first hand and personally
admired the tireless endeavours and efforts of your predecessor, Ambassador Bishara, to reestablish peace in another
region of the world. I wish to state for the record the sincere
gratitude of my delegation to the representative of Kuwait,
particularly since strangely uncomprehending speakers
have accused the Council of inactivity, without noticing
that it is ceaselessly active, through its President, through
the non-aligned countries, through small countries like my
own, and through all those which are really interested in
world peace and security in confronting the. regional warfare waged by some of the major Powers well known to all,
whose action paralyses the Council.

32. The Security Council must take effective steps to brin8
the illegal regime to order, to destroy the racist structure. in
the country, to prevent and thwart all attempts at achieving
dubious “settlement.s** and deals, and to bring about conditions genuinely allowing for the exercise of the inalienable
right of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination,
freedom and independence. At the non-aligned ministerial
meeting at Maputo, Ministers urged
“‘concerted action by the non-aligned countries, particularly those represented in the Security Council, in support of the resolution adopted at the fifteenth summit of
African heads of State held at Khartoum.in July 1978,
aimed at the adoption of the measures provided for in
Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations’*.

37. In different places in the world, vast and lengthy
regional contlicts constantly renew the threat to world
peace and security. The underlying cause of those disturbances is always the same, although the labels, faces or
intentions may change. Actions may be overt or covert, but
the colonialist problem is the same as manifested in the
4

I :

dispute over spheres of influence. In.:southem Africa it
appears as indisguisedly.and basely racist and inhuman
action undertaken by the illegal regime of Southern
Rhodesia.

I” ^I .x.

!Qiith?s unilateral declaration of independence and has, in
f&t, done so in recent times. An impression has been
allowed to be created that the kith and kin factor is the key
to this puzzling colonial policy of Whitehall. Qne cannot
but arrive at the conclusion that Brifian has protective
policies towards white minority regimes in southern Africa,
which it did so much to create. Even an extension ofpeaceful sanctions against Rhodesia has been opposed.

38. Yet again there have been two kinds of aggression in
that region. One is openly international in nature: it is the
armed action of Rhodesia against Angola, Mozambique,
Zambia and Botswana. The other is of an institutional
nature: it appears in the so-called internal settlement, the
aim of which is to impose the power of racist minorities
against the liberation of the peoples of Africa.

46. Even at this,late hour, my delegation calls on the
British Government, as the administering Power, to take all
necessary steps to bring down the Smith rebellion. We call
on Britain to return the Territory to legality, to ensure that
independence will be granted and that political power will
be-handed over only on the basis of majority rule in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Unless the administering Power acts along these lines, it
should be prepared to accept full responsibility for the racial
war into which Rhodesia is gradually sliding.

39. Bolivia condemns the attacks of the Rhodesian regime
against the front-line States and deplores the incredible
prolongation of the hostilities for more than 10 years; it
agrees with representatives of AfricanStates that local war
in the south of that continent could spred and lead to a
world war if we do not take more resolute action.
40. Aggression of an institutional nature, by virtue of its
simulation of democracy, also deserves condemnation,
because it makes a mockery of the best aims of genuine
majority rule based on legitimate elections. It is absurd to
claim that there can be genuinely free elections in a country
at war, We therefore fully agree thata plebiscite which is not
free is illegal; that a plebiscite which does not pursue the
genuine independence of a country and is not organised by
the government of the majority but imposed by an illegal
minority must also be illegal, even though self-appointed
observers may claim to validate it.

47. It is not my intention to recount here the various
manceuvres adopted by the illegal Smith regime to thwart
all the efforts by the international community at evolving a
solution to the Zimbabwe problem in a manner consistent
with the legitimate aspirations of the majority population in
the Territory. One thing, however, remains clear. Smith has
consistently manipulated, and continues ‘to manipulate, a
section of world opinion, We have witnessed many initiatives, Numerous peace talks have taken place. But Smith
remains in power. Only under military pressure as well as
international sanctions does Smith appear to make some
seemingly conciliatory gestures.

41. ‘All those threats and other reasons have led my delegation to join in sponsoring the draft resohition submitted
[222&h meerr&@ with appropriate reasoning by the representative of Jamaica on behalfuf the non-aligned members
of the Council, with which Bolivia makes commorrcause
yet again because of the consistency that it has always
maintained in its unswerving anti-colonialist stand.

48. No doubt the Anglo-American proposals were conceded in principle by Smith as a means of easing the military
pressure from black nationalist freedom fighters.
49. Indeed, Nigeria supported the Anglo-American plan
out of pragmatic necessity to bring to a merciful end the
ongoing hardship and agony of the people of the Territory.
We-felt that the honour, prestige and power of the United
States would assist in the evolution of a solution to the
problem of Zimbabwe. But all along we felt scepticism
regarding Smith’s bona fides in any meaningful negotiations. And as if to justify our misgivings, negotiations for
the implementation of the plan soon became bogged down
when the rebel leader insisted on retaining the present structure of his notorious army, paramilitary police force and the
judicla~ry.

42. In closing, I would express the deep regret of my
delegation at the death of Ambassador Jamil Baroody,
representative of Saudi Arabia, the dean of the United
Nations diplomatic corps, as that unforgettable man has
been called. On behalf of the people and Government of
Bolivia, I express to his country and to his family our most
sincere condolences.
43. The PRESIDENT: There are no further names on the
list of speakers. I shall therefore ‘now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of NIGERIA.

SO. The stage was then set for an internal settlement which
pretended to concede some shadow of black participation
in an interim administration for the Territory pending the
establishment of a multiracial Government with a so-called
majority-rule orientation. The 3 March 1978 agreement, the
basis of the current interim administration in the Territory,
has even been described in Western circles as ‘the worst
sell-out in modem constitutional history, for all the crucial
arms of Government are still entrenched in the hands of the
same coterie of racists who have exploited the Territory
during these past 13 years.

44. I recall that within weeks of Smith’s unilateral declaration of independence, Nigeria played host to the Conference
of Commonwealth Prime Ministers at Lagos, at which we
were told that the rebellion by Ian Smith would be brought
down in weeks rather than in months. That wasin January
1966, and almost 13 years have elapsed since that Conference; yet we are no nearer a solution today than we were
then.
45. The Government of the United Kingdom, while
accepting legal responsibility for the Territory, has not discharged this responsibility on the ground. We know, for
example, that the British Government has never hesitated
to act fast and firmly wherever its colonial authority was
.challenged, even in the name of freedom. It did so before

51. Even the Reverend Ndabaningi Sithole and Bishop
Abel Muzorewa, the two mainblacks in the Smith Govemment, admitted in the press that the decision to attack
Zambia last October wastaken without even the elementary
5

courtesy of consulting them in the Cabinet. They have been
powerless to alleviate the hardship imposed on blacks as a
result of restrictions of blacks to certain areas, or so-called
piotected villages,. which arc nothing but concentration
camps in the classical sense. Muzorewa and Sithole are
powerless to stop the executions, or, to put it correctly,
judicial murders, which are being carried out by the illegal
Smith r&ime. Since the signing of the internal settlement
agreement on 3 March 1978, more and more people are
known to have been sentenced to death. When-HerMajesty
the Queen recently granted amnesty to certain black Africans in Southern Rhodesia who had been condemned to
death, Smith repudiated that and proceeded with the executions. This is the same Smith with whom we are dealing, the
same Smith who rebuffed the British Crown, the same
Smith who seized power, the same Smith who is now being
given tacit recognition in the so-called elections which are to
be supervised, if we may use that word at this stage.
52. With regard to the international efforts at resolving
the conflict, I&ink it would be correct to assume, therefore:
that the AngleAmerican initiative has slid into an icebox.
In fact, I believe those ‘initiatives are dead, because we do
not hear of Prem Chand, we hear that Lord Carver has been
withdrawn, and there is no sign that the great Powers which
put their honour and prestige behind the settlement intend
to continue their efforts. Again, the factors bringing about
such a stalemate are manifestly evident. The United States
Administration pleaded domestic pressure last year in the
granting of visas to Smith and his clique to visit the United
States. The United States Administration claimed that it
would in fact exploit the visit to put a few home-truths
bluntly before the rebel leader. It was in vain that we not
only pointed out the fact that Smith’s visit would be tantamount to a reversal of the new United States policy in Africa
and diminish United States credibility, but also, and more
important, contended-and
rightly too-that
the visit
would amount to a flagrant violation of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968), on sanctions.
53. Smith had designs of his own. By bringing Sithole with
him, he planned to appea! to right-wing elements in this
country. He contended that his so-called biracial experiment should be given a chance. He revamped the usual call
to prevent the emergence of Marxist-oriented Governments
in the region.
54. Surprisingly, he almost succeeded; for, even before
Smith left the shores of the United States, right-wing elements in Congress had initiated sustained pressure to force
the Carter Administration into rescinding its commitment
to applying the United Nations mandatory sanctions
against Rhodesia. The same caucus has been stepping up
pressure for the dispatch of an observer mission to monitor
the sham elections now scheduled for April 1979. Elections
based on the 3 March 1978 agreement prescribed by the
illegal Smith government cannot be considered free, fair or
legal, no matter whether they are observed or not. Legitimacy can obviously not flow from illegality. As a fust step,
Smith has to bc removed-and we were told this by the
Anglo-Americans. Legality must first be restored to the
Territory; only then can the international community rccognize processesof decolonization and only under such conditions can these be put into effect. It was on that basis that
Nigeria gave support and help to the process of the AngloAmerican formula.

55. I need not repeat the horrors of the attacks which have
taken place within the past week. One need only highlight
some new dimensions. Smith has now started raiding African countries not cpntiguous to Rhodesia. The Rhodesian
war situation has therefore grown wider. It is an obvious
and well-documented fact that the targets of many of these
raids are innocent civilian centres and refugee camps and
not guerrilla bases, as is almost automatically claimed and
reported by much of the Western media.
56. In addition, we should bear in mind that there has
been a further escalation of the conflict in the area, for this
morning the South African racist Government bombarded
Angola, in succession to the actions of the Smith r@ime last
week. Obviously, the alliance has now come closer to perfection, allowing the racist settler colonial systems and r&imes
in southern Africa to continue to push African States into
retaliation, which would lead to. conflagration and a racial
war in the area.
57. In Rhodesia itself the war has become intense. About
90 oer cent of the Territory is under martial law. Civilian
bla&s continue to suffer from the process of enslavement
and dehumanization. Yet some among us continue to be
.
insensitive to their plight.
58. The advertised press campaign of deception in the
United States and British media, in particular, is comical to
many of us who know the facts. But these deliberate distortions appear to be concerted. Over the past days there have
been regular commercials by the Smith r&ime and its sup
porters based on falsehoods which have been broadcast by
many important and key radio stations in the United States.
These advertisements are no doubt beamed at and play on
the weaknessesof certain elements in the West by regularly
displaying photographs and picturing the heroic leaders of
the subjected people of southern Africa as bloodthirsty
communists.
59. We believe that both the United States and the United
Kingdom can, given the necessary political will, still act
jointly to stave off the qcial holocaust which will ensue in
Zimbabwe if Smith is not removed from power, as they
promised. My Government understands the pressures of
those elements in the United Kingdom and the United
States that wish to derail the policies of theexisting Govemments of these States in the interests of a racist settlement in
southern Africa. It is a pity-a great pity indeed-that
human values have become subject to party politics in those
countries.
60. As a first step, and since the situation in Zimbabwe
continues to pose a threat to international peace and security, my delegation strongly feels that the Council must
pronounce itself firmly and unequivocally on the current
political charade being stage-managed in Rhodesia. We
must condemn and reject in advance the oncoming elections, sheduled for the month of April, stating clearly and
categorically that the Council will rccognize neither such
fraudulent elections nor any Government purported to
have emanated from that electoral process.
61. In accordance with the resolution just adopted by the
Nairobi meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Organ&

zation of African Unity, we should also call on all States not
to send any observer missions to the Territory, since this
would be misconstrued as an endorsement of the sham
elections sponsored by the rebel regime. Any official
encouragement given to observe any elections under the
aegis of the illegal regime will amount to support for continuing racial domination, to a reneging by those countries on
their commitments under resolution 423 (1978). and to a
repudiation of the decisions and aspirations of all the
member Governments of the Organixation of African
Unity and of the peoples of Africa. It will mean a rejection
of the point of view of almost all the Members of the United
Nations and it will mean, ipso facto, support for white racial
supremacy and racial war. !t will amount also to repudiation, in the African context, of Western value systems, of
democracy and social justice.

63. My Government, my people, my country-Nigeriawill continue to give political and material support to the
Patriotic Front in its legitimate struggle for the freedom and
independence of its people. We call on all States to render
similar assistance to Zimbabwe’s sole liberation movement
and to all front-line States which, in the process of executing
the resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly, have become victims of racist bombings and
racist threats.
64. My delegation hopes that the Security Council will
take appropriate measures-sooner rather than later-if
the potentially explosive situation in Rhodesia is to be
defused and the threat of Ian Smith and hi illegal racist
regime to international peace and security is to be removed
from the region. This is a simple matter within the capability
of the Council. We hope that Zimbabweans will not
remember thii debate as just another routine exercise in
futility by the Council, but that the Council will uphold the
principles of justice, freedom and human dignity, in accordance with the Charter. That is what the Zimbabweans are
fighting for. That is what the Smith regime is challenging, in
its defiance of the international community-defiance
which the elements in the United States and in the United
Kingdom to which I have referred are striving to support.

62.. Filly,
the Committee on.Sanctions* must meet as
soon as possible to work out ‘means for reviewing and
strengthening the current mandatory sanctions against the
r&ime. We must keep up the pressure against the Smith
regime until the rebel!ion is brought down and a legal
process in accordance with General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) is brought about. _,
’ Security Council Committee established in pursuance of resolution
253 (1968) concerning the question of Southern Rhodesia.

The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

’

.

\

7

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNlTED

NATIONS

Unite
1 Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section,
New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

may
your

LES

PUBLICATIONS
be obtained
bookstore

or

PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
write
to: United

DES

NATIONS

and

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont en vente
dans
les librairies
depositaires
du monde
entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&r
de votre
libraire
a : Nations
Unies.
Section
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.
HIAAHMR

IlOJIYrlllTb

H~namw
JWH~X
aamera
Hauwk.

Ooramaaum
O@benmremibm
Hauuir
IIOXHO
aynart.
s KH~K(HLIX
Hat-aw aretmcmax
BO scex
paRonax
r.rupa.
Haaoaure
cnpamw
06 wnanuax
a
mrnxcno~
Marasane
wiu rmmnre
no anpecy
: Opranwaauns
06-benwuennt.m
C~KUHR
no nponaace
wsaanfric,
Hbm-MOPK
HJIW Xeuesa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

in United

Nations,

New

York

3AUAU

DE

LAS

Naciones
Unidas
estin
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Price:

SUS.

OWbELlUHEHHI~IX

et les agences
ou adressez-vous

KAIC

Las publicaciones
de las
buidoras
en todas
partes
Unidas,
Seccidn
de Ventas.

Litho

OPI-AHM

distributors
Nations.
Sales

NACIONES

HAUHR

UNIDAS

en venta
en librerias
a su librero
o dirfjase

1.50

y casas distria: Naciones

79-70002-November

1981-2,250
