UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCI
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR
“\

2258’”

MEETING:

17 -DECEMBER 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda12258) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~..b...~..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Inted& kiice
Lebanon (S/ 14295)..,....,,,,....,..,...,....,.....,.,.............

1

in

.\I
;

’ ”

SlPV.2258

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council.. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2258th MEETING
Held in New York.on Wednesday, 17 December 1980, at 12 noon.
Mr. Donald F. McHENRY
(United States of America).

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway; Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (SJAgenda/2258)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary&General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/14295)

Council. I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/14296, which contains the
text of a letter dated 15 December from the representative of Lebanon to the Secretary-General.
3. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote ,now on’ the draft resolution
which is before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Bangladesh, France, Jamaica, Mexico,
Niger, Norway, Philippines, firtugal, Tunisia, United
Kingdom of .Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Zambia.
Against:

The meeting

None.

was called to order at Z2.10 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the,Mddle East:
Report of fhe SecretaqGeneral on the-United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/14295)
1. The PRESIDENT: I should likefo inform metnbers
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel and Lebanon in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the.agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the ruIes of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tueni (Lebanon) took a place at the Council table and Mr. Blum
(Israel) took the place reserved for him at the side of
the .Councii ehamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them the report of the SecretawGeneral on
the United Nations Interim Force. in L&anon
(UNIFIL) for the period -from 13June to- 1l’December
1980, contained in document S/14295. The Council
also- has before it the text of a draft resolution contained in document S/14298, which was drawn up in the
course of consultations among the members of the

Abstaining: German Democratic Republic, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.
The draft resolution was adopted by 12 votes to
none, with 2 abstentions (resolution 483 ,(1980)).
C&e member
voting.

(China)

did not participate

in the

4. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the SecretaryGeneral.
5. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
I have taken
note of the resolution just adopted by the Council
and its decision to extend the mandate of UNIFIL
for a further period of six months, until 19 June 1981.
6. Despite the impediments which have prevented
UNIFIL
from fully implementing the mandate
entrusted to it by the Council, the Force is unquestionably performing an indispensable service to
peace, not only in south Lebanon but in regard to the
Middle East situation in general.
7. My report describes in detail the obstacles that
we face. It states clearly that the present situation is
anything but satisfactory; it emphasizes that the
present trend of inadequate co-operation and lack of
progress must be reversed.
8. On my side, I shall of course make every effort
to ensure implementation of the resolution just
adopted. However, it is evident that the efforts of

the United Nations must receive the full co-operation
of all the parties concerned. I reiterate this point, for
it is essential that such co-operation be extended if
real progress is to be achieved.

(1978)-the
says:

resolution establishing UNIFIL-which

“Culls for strict respect for the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized boundaries”.

9. The developments recorded in detail in my report
and events which have occurred since then in the
UNIFIL area of operation indicate a level of armed
activity which is inconsistent both with the resolutions
of the Council and with the assurances that have,
from time to time, been given to the Force.

18. The vote of the Assembly is more than a message.
It is a clear-and imperative mandate. It is also a vote of
confidencein what was -structured by and has happened
since resolution 425 (1978). It is equally, we like to
believe, a vote of confidence in Lebanon, in its deter-,
mination to .remain sovereign and independent, seeking
respect for its territorial integrity within its intemationally guaranteed boundaries.

10. I hope that all the parties concerned will soon
come to recognize that the fulfilment of the objectives
of the UNIFIL mandate is, in the long term, in their
own best interests. In this connection, I would also
hope that members of the Council, especially those in
a position to bring their influence to bear, will continue
to make every effort to help the Force attain the
objectives for which it was established.

19. Npw, there was a further message in yesterday’s
vote by. the Assembly, which concerned an implicit
distinction between the fate of Lebanon and the solution of the. Middle East question. A distinction-a
distinction, I say, but not a divorce-between peace in
Lebanon, for which there was absoiute unanimity, and
peace in the Middle East, over which there are still
some differences. Hence, our repeated insistence
that peace.in Lebanon cannot, should not and indeed,
we hope, will not have to wait for the settlement of
everyone else’s problems and the attainment of the
comprehensive peace for which we all yearn.

11. May I take this opportunity to thank the Lebanese Government once again for the co-operation it
has extended to the Force. We are very much aware
of its concerns and shall remain sensitive to them in
our efforts to fulfil the objectives set by the Council.
12. I should also like to reiterate my deep appreciation to the troop-contributing countries for their steadfast support and understanding.

20. These are not empty words. And we dare hope
that the Council is fully conscious of its ability-the
ability which it alone has as the executive of the
international Organization-to meet the challenge and
help Lebanon to recover its total sovereignty and to
enjoy once again the peace that its people has merited
through long years of tragedy and resistance.

13. May I conclude by paying a tribute to the Commander of the Force, Major-General Erskine, to the
officers and men of UNIFIL and to their civilian
colleagues. Once again, they have carried out their
tasks with courage, dedication and discipline in a situation that is, all too often, not only difficult and
demanding, but dangerous. The United Nations is
greatly in their debt.

21. May I also a,dd that it is illusory to imagine
that one can hope to reach a settlement of the Middle
East question while the war in Lebanon is allowed
to continue. Having now reached the stage it has
reached, the war in Lebanon, which at one time might
have appeared convenient to some, is now a danger
to each and all.

14. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker on my list
is the representative of Lebanon, and I now call on him.
15. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): This meeting of the Council coincides with the conclusion of the thirty-ftith
session of the General Assembly. Many, many statements, particularly on the Middle East, have been
made but very little has been accomplished in
practical terms.

22. The argume.nts in support of this thesis are
innumerable and I shall not burden this debate with
another long speech. I want only to quote, as an independent testimony, one of your most distinguished
predecessors, Mr. President, Governor William
Scranton, who recently wrote the following in No. 24
of Triulogue, the Trilateral Commission’s quarterly,
its special issue on the Middle East:

16. Yet, this has been a session rich in symbols and
lessons, and I beg to point to one, in particular, which
is directly related to our agenda. Before the Assembly
acted on the resolution concerning peace in the Middle
East [resolution 35/207], a separate recorded vote. was
requested on the paragraph about Lebanon. The
result was, as we all know, 144 votes in support of
Lebanon, with no votes against and no abstentions.
The resolution later received only 101 votes.

‘*Take the case of Lebanon, not that it is the only
problem-in the. region, of course, but when Lebanon
is in turmoil, the Middle East pot boils.”
23. This is the first meeting of the Council on Lebanon
over which you, Mr. Piesident, have personally
presided. But you have visited my country and toured
the Middle East. You have come not to vanquish but

17. It was no accident that the paragraph on Lebanon
was exactly the same as paragraph 1 of resolution 425
2

to see, to understand and to help. Your quiet, perceptive, matter-of-fact wisdom has been a great contribution to previous and sometimes agonizing debates,
where your firnnness was always welcome, since it
was the product of a unique blend of the intellectual
honesty of the sc_Iioiar and the pragmatic and gentle
authority of the committed diplomat.

Mixed Armistice Commission (ILMAC) should now
be, at last, under way, because we -have always
viewed the General Armistice Agreement as the centrepiece of an eventual comprehensive settlement of the
Palestinian question, as is clearly spelled out in the
text of the Agreement itself.
33. In our view, the resolution just adopted, should
be interpreted in this light.

24. May I, Mr. President, at this juncture, say how
much we wish, and still hope, that you may remain in
the Council for much longer, if this is not an improper
wish, where those who can spe-akand act for American
responsibility, as you have, are needed beyond what
can be admitted or confessed:

34. It may, of course, become just another resolution
to be added to the impressive collection of resolutions
on south Lebanon-another impossible dream. In such
a case, my Government is determined to seek no further
renewal and to let everybody, ourselves included,
carry their own historical responsibilities. We would
not even object to putting, an early end to the present
mandate, say at mid-term, if it were reported to the
Council that no substantial progress was being made or
that the mandate, in its present form, was not
realistically implementable.

25. May I now say that our ambition would have
been, if conditions had permitted, to see the resolution just voted not as the product of a compromise
but as the expression of what you, Sir, personally,
albeit unavowedly, would have wanted the Council
to be able to do at this particular time.

35. Yet our hope is that this resolution will be a new
beginning: the beginning of an era of peace which will
render UNIFIL, within an immediate time-frame,
really, seriously and sincerely “interim”, which is what
it was meant to be, whatever the outcome-failure
or success.

26. But let us now go into more practical matters;
27. The question is clear to all of us and was made
clearer ‘by the superb report of the Secretary-General
[S/2429.5] and by his remarks this afternoon. I shall
not elaborate, therefore, on the report, but I shall
merely express, over and above my country’s appreciation, the regret that procedural considerations should
have prevented the Council from endorsing it fully.

36. In conclusion, allow me to reiterate to you,
Mr. President, my thanks for your patience and
guidance and, through you, to all the members of the
.Council, and to the troop-contributing countries the
gratitude of my Government and my people for their
support, confidence and sacrifice.

28.. Equally clear is the position of my Government,
which was made explicit in my letter to the SecretaryGeneral of 15 December [S/14296].
29. We have spared the Council the,usual exercise,
so futile because so repetitious, of condemning,
deploring, regretting and the. like. Instead, two things
are of paramount importance for us.

37. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list
is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
38. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Mr. President, at the outset
permit me to convey to you, as the representative of
the United States, my compliments on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Council for the month of
December. We are confident that your manifest ability
and diplomatic skill will stand us all in good stead.

30. The first is that UNIFIL, whose officers and men
are serving peace so gallantly against tremendous odds-,
must become sufficiently credible as a force to be able
to safeguard its own safety and security, to deter hostile
acts and, finally, to implement fully its mandate, which
should culminate in the establishment of an area of
peace and security and the total restoration of Lebanese sovereignty and authority.

39. Our two countries and peoples share a common
heritage and are dedicated to the advancement of the
same goals and values. Despite the tremendous disparity between our two nations in terms of physical
size and military and economic power, we stand
together in the struggle for the preservation of the
fundamental human freedoms in our world, for the
equality and dignity of man, for social justice, for the
equality of all nations, great and small, for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes and for peace
among nations.

31. The second is that UNIFIL’s success in peacekeeping, which depends on the mutual agreenient of all
the parties concerned, must not be allowed to depend
on actions and reactions in the field, but that a political
and diplomatic action must now be developed, moving
from the previous pattern of interventions and negotiations into a systematic, clearly articulated and strongly
structured action to identify the problems, specify
solutions and conciliate and co-ordinate allthe effortsmade in the service of peace.

40. I also wish to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation to Sir Anthony Parsons, the representative of the United Kingdom, who so ably presided over
the Council’s business last month.

32. In this perspective, it is of the utmost significance
to us that efforts to reactivate the Israel-Iebanon
3

41. Once again the Council has renewed the mandate
of UNIFIL.

dence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of
Lebanon within its internationally recognized boundaries. Israel wants peace in and with Lebanon. Israel
has no territorial claims on Lebanon.

42. The Council has on its record the position of
Israel with respect to the complex issues which arise
in this context, especially as regards UNIFIL’s
threefold mandate as laid down in Security Council
resolution 425 (1978). Since this is the case, I can be
very brief.

48. In this connection, I find myself in accord with
the representative of Lebanon that the restoration of.
peace in Lebanon and the solution of all its problems
must not be made contingent on the attain~ment of
an overall solution of the Arab-Israel conflict and
should not await that overall~solution of the conflict.
Regrettably, it is precisely those forces that have been
working against peace in the Middle East in general
that have also undermined thesovereignty of.Lebanon
and are impeding the restoration of its national independence.

43. First, the tragic reality prevailing in Lebanon
must be recognized. .Lebanon is an occupied country.
The occupation is twofold. Syria keeps approximately
one third of its army, amounting to some 27,000 troops,
in Lebanon. The terrorist PLO has over 15,000 armed
men in the country, of whom over 2,000 are located
south of the River Litani. Of these, approximately
1,500 are in the so-called Tyre pocket and about 700
are located in some 40 nests and pockets tolerated
within the UNIFIL area of operation. As long as these
non-Lebanese elements can operate within or from
.Lebanon there will be no real progress towards the
return .of the effective authority of the. Government of
Lebanon throughout the length and breadth of that
country.

49. It was in the,spirit of seeking ‘peacewith-Lebanon
that Israel representatives met with Lebanese representatives on 1December at Naqoura, under&he chairmanship of the Chief of Staff of the United .Nations
Truce Supervision. Organization (UNTSO). As the
Secretary-General indicated. in his latest report, the
Israel,representatives, at that meeting recalled that the
General Armistice. Agreement wasbrought to an end
by the Gove,m*ment of Lebanon by its declarations
and acti.onsin ,1967,and that as a result ILMAC, established under that Agreement, has also ceased to exist.
However, with the desire to improve the existing
situation, Israel certainly welcomes direct meetings
with representatives of Lebanon.

44. Secondly, the situation in Lebanon, particularly
in the south, is of direct concern to Israel. Since the
PLO continues to use-r
rather abuse-Lebanese
territory to initiate and launch attacks against Israel
and its civilian population, it is the elementary duty
of the Government of Israel to protect its citizens
against such PLO activities, especially in the light of
the inability of the Government of Lebanon to prevent
them.

50. Before concluding, I* should like to- take this
opportunity of paying a tribute to the Commander of
UNIFIL, Major-General Erskine, and his staff, as:well
as to the officers and men serving with UNIFIL. They
cq
out their duties in circumstances which are
often arduous and,trying. I should also like to express
again- Israel’s appreciation to countries contributing
contingents. to UNIFIL in the service of international
peaces
. .

45. Thirdly, the situation in the south of Lebanon
cannot be detached from the situation in the country
as a whole. In his report, the Secretary-Genera1
comments that the situation in south Lebanon cannot
be insulated from other extremely complex developments. The Secretary-General mtide this point even
more explicitly in his report of 12 January 1979 when
he observed that the situation in the south “cannot
be divorced from the situation in the rest of- the
country*’ [S/13026, para. 371. The Secretary-General
went on to note that that factor plays an impo.rtant role
in determining the attitude of various factions in the
area, “an attitude which is strongly influenced by their
perception and interpretation of developments, in
Lebanon and in the region as a whole” [ibid.].

5’1. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation fiorn Russian): Mr. President, first of all I should like to welcome you in your
responsible post of President of the Council and to wish
you every success in your work. I should also like to
express my g.ratitude to your predecessor in the post
of President, Ambassador Parsons of the United Kingdom, for the. very successful way in which he guided
the work. of the Council in November.
52, Hardly a week passes without aIarming news
reachlngusfrom southern Lebanon about the ongoing
explosive. situation that prevails in that area, the
deterioration of which harbours within itself a serious
threat to peace and security, for the peoples of the
Middle: East and. h,as,a.detrimental effect on the international situation as a whole.,
/’
53. The. reasons for such a situation can be found in
the aggressive policies which Israel systematically

46. Without wishing to elaborate on the subject, let
me suggest en passant that these comments are particularly pertinent when one comes to examine the
positions taken by the local Lebanese villagers in the
south, Muslim, Christian and Druze alike.
47. I should like to reaffirm Israel’s position of
principle with regard to Lebanon. As indicated once
again in our. vote in the General Assembly yesterday
evening,’ Israel continues to support the indepen4

practises, both towards Lebanon and- towards the
Palestinians who have found refuge in the territory
of Lebanon. In stubbornly pursuing the policy of
confirming its military presence in southern Lebanon
and perpetuating its virtual occupation of part of
Lebanese territory, Israel regularly subjects the
densely populated regions of southern Lebanon to
massed artillery fire and bombardment, In the iast six
months alone, Israeli troops have frequently infiltrated
Lebanese territory, strengthened their presence in the
enclave that is controlled by Haddad’s separatists and
attacked various targets in Lebanon. At the same time.,
the separatist detachments have continued their
attempts to encroach upon the area that is controlled
by United Nations forces in Lebanon have ,added to
their four already existing positions in that area a fifth
one, and have not ceased their provocations against
the personnel of the United Nations forces and the
local population.
54. Israel’s armed provocations, which have grown
more frequent since August, and the provocations of
the anti-Government separatist detachments that are
in Israel’s pay have led to an abrupt exacerbation of
the situation in southern Lebanon. Massed.artillery fire
was launched against many regions of Lebanese:territory, including regions.. where units of the ,.United
Nations forces were deployed.
!
55. There can be no doubt that the activities of
Haddad’s anti-governmental formations-which
can
only be regarded as Israel’s direct agents-are aimed
at satisfying the expansionist designs of Tel Aviv and
will iead to the virtual annexation of part of Lebanese territory.
56. As is abundantly clear from the numerous letters
from the representative of Lebanon to the SecretaryGeneral and the President of the Security Council,
Israel’s provocations andhose of its minions continue
to the present day. In this connection, the situation in
southern Lebanon, and. throughout the Middle East
region is becoming ever more heated, bringing
increasing privations to the Lebanese people and to
the Palestinian refugees.
57. All these aggressive actions by Israel can, be
regarded only as gross,violations of Lebanon’s sovereignty and of the fundamental principles of the Charter,
which Israel undertook to respect when it became a
Member of our Organization. These provocations give
further proof of the stubborn reluctance of the Israeli
leaders to heed the opinion of the international community. The reason for this is that Tel Aviv expects
to enjoy total impunity in view of the position of the
United States, which has not allowed the Council to
take any effective steps against the virtuaily uninterrupted Israeli aggression.
58, As has frequently been pointed out before in the
Council, after the signing of the separate
treaty with Egypt which untied the hands of the ag-

gressor, Israel considerably stepped up its armed
pressure on Lebanon and further increased its provocations against the Palestinians -located in that
country. There can be no doubt that the present
escalation of tension in Lebanon is one of the direct
results of the Camp David collusion between the
United States, Egypt and Israel.
59. The Soviet delegation considers that the resolution just adopted by the Council is a weak one since
it contains no condemnation of the aggressive actions
of Israel and the Haddad separatists that are acting on
* 1
its orders.
60. The Soviet delegation would like to stress that, in
connection with our consideration of the mandate of the
United Nations forces in Lebanon, the Council should
have adopted a ,resolution which clearly and unambiguously required Israel strictly to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon, within the
confines of its internationally recognized boundaries
and also to put an end to ‘any intervention carried out
directly or through the Haddad separatists in its pay in
the internal affairs of this independent Member State;
61. One may quite legitimately wonder how long the
Council.intends to acquiesce in a situation where one
of. the Member, States grossly and blatantly violates
the spirit and the letter of the Charter and cynically
flouts the resolutions of the Council aimed at bringing
about the normalization of the situation in southern
Lebanon. Has the Council no means that would permit
it to force the Israeli aggressors to respect the opinion
and wishes of the international community?
62. It is a matter of regret that recently there has
been frequent evidence of a determined effort to alter
the nature and orientation of the United Nations
fames’ mandate and to vest inappropriate functions in
those forces. An attempt is being made to ignore the
undisputed fact that resolution 425 (1978) pursuant to
which those forces were set up, quite dearly and unambiguously defined their purpose as that of first and
foremost confirming the withdrawal of Israeli forces
from all Lebanese territory.
63. In this connection, the Soviet delegation feels
it essential once again to emphasize that it is inadmissible, to use United’ Nations forces in southern
Lebanon for purposes that go beyond eliminating the
consequences of Israeli aggression in that country.
64. The delegation of the Soviet Union abstained in
the vote on the draft resolution and considers it necessary to confirm its position of principle regarding the
United Nations forces in Lebanon, including the
question of control of these forces by the Council,
the principles underlying the selection of the
national contingents and the methods of financing
the forces.
65. Mr. FLORIN
(interpretation

(German Democratic Republic)
Mr. President, permit

from Russian):

me first of all to congratulate you on assuming the
Presidency of the Council for the month of December
and to wish you every successin that responsible task.
At the same time, the delegation of the German
Democratic Republic would like to express its satisfaction and also its gratitude to the President of the
Council for the month of November, the deeply
respected representative of the United Kingdom,
Sir Anthony Parsons.

Palestine- enjoy their right to self-determination,
including- the right to create their own independent
State, and that the sovereignty and security of all
States in the region, including Lebanon and Israel,
be guaranteed.
71. There can be no doubt that the military forces
that are acting on behalf of the United Nations are
subject.to the decisions of the Security. Council alone.
The resolution which has just been adopted has a
number of defects. It provides no decisive measures
which would be likely to put an end to Israel’s
machinations and those of the Haddad bands. The
delegation of the German Democratic Republic
abstained in the vote since we continue to have reservations about the way in which the mandate of the
.United Nations forces in Lebanon is formulated, and
also &bout its composition and financing.

66. In resolution 425 (1978), the Council unambiguously demanded that Israel, the aggressor, should
respect the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence of Lebanon and completely
evacuate Lebanese territory. On 24 April last, the
Council adopted resolution 467 (1980) and once again
condemned Israel for violating the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.
.
‘.
67. Today it can be seen that the situation has not
changed for the better, but rather has deteriorated.
The Secretary-General’s report indicates that Israeli
strong points have been set up directly on Lebanese
territory, which represents an ‘obvious violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon,
a State Member of the United Nations. The Qovemment of ‘Lebanon has frequently had occasion to
protest against these arbitrary acts on the part of Israel
and has drawn the attention of the Council to them.

72. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretafion
from
French): Mr. President, since my delegation has not
yet had occasion to do so, permit me first of all to
congratulate you on the assumption of the Presidency
of the Cuuncil’ for the ,month of December. I am
pleased to $ee you, the representative of a great and
frie.ndlynation with which France has a close relationship, occupying that position. Your diplomatic
experience, your knowledge of the United Nations
and the successyou have had throughout your career
among us ‘are a sure guarantee of the assurance and
the effectiveness with which you will conduct our
work.

68. The aims and intentions’ of the ruling circles in
Israel have remained unchanged for many years now.
The targets are to detach the southern part of Lebanon
from the Lebanese State and destroy the Palestinian’
.refugee camps in order to sap that people’s will to
attain freedom. The most recent Israeli acts of aggression and the further arming of the Haddad bands in
the pay of Israel leave no doubt about Israel’s resolve
to ignore the fundamental rights of the Arab people of
Palestine and the Lebanese people.

73. I alsowish to thank your predecessor, the repre-‘
sentative of the-United Kingdom, Sir Anthony Parsons,
for the exemplary manner in which he directed our
debates last month.
74. In joining in the decisionjust taken by the Council to renew for six months the mandate of UNIFIL,
my delegation wishes to emphasize the importance it
attaches to the mission of the Force in Lebanon. At
the same time, we wish to. stress that the objectives
established for the Force in resolution 425 (1978) continue to be fundamental. They are, it will be recalled,
of three kinds: to confirm the withdrawal of the Israeli
forces; to restore international peace and security; and
to assist the Lebanese Government to ensure the
restoration of its effective authority in the region.

69. The disquieting behaviour of imperialist elements
of the United States imperialists in the Middle and
Near East and their policy aimed at generally exacerbating the international situation are regarded by
Israel as creating the most auspicious climate for the
escalation of its own aggressive action against ‘the
Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. As in the past,
Israel, the aggressor, is given economic and military
support by the United States. The responsibility of
those in imperialist circles that have given Israel direct
assistance or have resisted any condemnation of its
aggressive acts is indisputable. At its thirty-fifth session, the General Assembly made its o.wn weighty
comment on this subject.

75. Now, as is noted by the Secretary-General in his
report, UNIFIL has not been able fully to accomplish
its task&spite&e. intensive and praiseworthy efforts
which have been.made at all levels.
76. Inthat connection, we tind’the events mentioned
by the Secretary-General in his observations profoundly reprehensible. Referring to armed elements,
he says that two positions were recently set up in the
UNIFIL area, and- this has. led to serious incidents
with UNIFIL troops, that the de facto forces haves
continued to resist further deployment of UNIFIL in

70. The German Democratic Republic, together with
other socialist States and peace-loving countries, has
consistently favoured a just and durable political
settlement to the Middle East conflict. It is essential
that Israeli troops be withdrawn from all the Arab
territories occupied in 1967, that the Arab people of
6

the enclave held by them, that they have added a fifth
position to the four that they have already established
inside that area, that the Israeli forces have themselves
stepped up their activities, that they have among other
things established encroachments along the intemational border and increased their presence within the
enclave.

upon you and which, it would appear, is the most
noble,-since it relates to the maintenance of peace in
the world. My delegation is all the more pleased
to do so, since you represent a great country with
which Tunisia has always had the best relations of
friendship and co-operation. I should like most sincerely to wish you all the success you deserve.

77. We fully support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General in paragraph 68 of his report. It is
absolutely essential for all the parties to co-operate
fully with the Force in the attainment of the.objectives
of its mandate. In this spirit, we appeal urgently to all
the parties concerned scrupulously to respect the
cease-fire called for by the Council, to avoid all acts
likely to provoke violent reactions and to make resolute efforts to bring about the consolidation of the
UNIFIL area.

84. I should also like to say how much we appreciate
and are grateful for the remarkable, exemplary and
typically British manner in which the representative of
the United Kingdom, Sir Anthony Parsons, guided our
work during the month of November.
85. Once again the situation in the Middle East is on
the Council’s agenda; once again we are called upon
to express our anxiety and concern over a situation
which knows no respite and which is becoming
increasingly dangerous; and once again we are faced
with the same difliculties and the same obstacles,
namely, the obstinacy of one of the parties concerned
in pursuing a policy of hegemony and arrogant defiance
of the international .communitp.

78. I reaflirm in this connection that ‘my country
regards the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
politi.cal independence of Lebanon as. of vital .importance, The significance ,of the unanimous vote last
night in the plenary meeting of the General. Assembly*
should escape no one. -:

86. In its resolution 425(1978), the Council entrusted
to UNIFIL a very clear mandate and specific objectives: essentially, they are to confirm the withdrawal
of Israeli forces from Lebanon, to restore international
peace and security and to assist the Lebanese Govemment in. ensuring the restoration of its effective
authority in the area.

79. My delegation welcomes the efforts made by
the Se&eta&General to reactivate ILMAC, which
led to the preparatory meeting on 1December. That is
a positive development which deserves to be pursued
and which we strongly encourage.
80. The Force has been given a mandate to assist
the Lebanese Government to restore its effective
authority in the area. We appreciate that Government’s
desire to increase its military as well as civilian
presence in the area and we welcome the pursuit of
that effort.

87. We must note today that UNIFIL has not been
able ‘completely to fulfil its mandate. According to ihe
Secretary-General’s report, it has been prevented from
making progress towards the full implementation of
the objectives set out in resolution 425 (1978).
88. The difficulties the Force has met in implementing
its mandate have indeed emerged from all sides. In
total impunity Israel has established positions along
the international frontier, increased its presence in the
enclave, violated the air space and the territorial waters
of a sovereign State and multiplied its attacks against
targets inside Lebanon. The de facto forces, supported
and supplied by Israel, as is stressed by the SecretaryGeneral, are opposing the deployment of UNIFIL,
restricting its freedom of movement and that of its
personnel, reducing its observer capacity, and directly
attacking UNIFIL personnel and the local population
of the area.

81. In conclusion, I wish, on behalfof my delegation,
to congratulate and to thank General Erskine for the
remarkable way in which he has discharged his
responsibilities as Commander of the Force since the
beginning of its mission and to offer our best wishes
in the pursuit of his career. Our congratulations and
best wishes at the end of the year are also addressed
to allZhe officers and all the members of the Force.
82. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (interpretationfrom French):
Mr. President, during the month of December it is
our privilege to have you guiding our deliberations.
In assuming the Presidency of the Council, you have
once again given us the opportunity to witness your
great talents and further to appreciate the diplomatic
tact and know-how we have come to expect of you and
which you have always coupled with a sense of
effectiveness and responsibility.

89. The facts are clear and intolerable, the responsibilities obvious and acknowledged. Indeed, in paragraph 62 of his report the Secretary-General states that
the Israeli authorities have not extended to the Force
the degree of co-operation it requires, while, in paragraph 60, he indicates that the leadership of the
Palestine Liberation Organization has renewed its
assurances of co-operation with the Force, and he
welcomes the positive collaboration of the Lebanese
Government. In this connection we cannot but join

83. In addressing to you its sincere congratulations,
my delegation is pleased to assure you of its complete
co-operation in order to assist you in bringing to a
happy conclusion the mission which has been conferred
7

the Secretary-General in welcoming, in our turn, that
spirit of co-operation and the efforts the Government
of Lebanon is continuing to make, despite its limited
means, to facilitate the task of UNIFIL.

directly involved. That goes for the armed elements
under the PLO, the defucro forces of Major Haddad
and for Israel.
97. Norway joined UNIFIL, convinced that the
Force would perform, as the Secretary-General says
in paragraph 66 of his report, “an indispensable
service to peace, not only in southern Lebanon, but
with regard to the Middle East situation in general’*.

90. Our commitment to the principles contained in
the Charter, as well as our explicit responsibility
with regard to peace-keeping, dictate that we must
refuse to accept the prevailing status quo as constituting an irreversible fait accompli. Israel must
understand, once and for all, that it must withdraw
from Lebanon completely and unconditionally and
end its direct or indirect activities inside Lebanon’s
international borders. Only thus will that country, to
which we are all committed, regain its unity, its
sovereignty and its political independence.
91. The Council, in its wisdom, has iust adopted a
resolution renewing the mandate. of IJNIFIL for the
coming six months. It has taken an important step
towards a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement
of the problem of the Middle East, which cannot be
divorced from the situation prevailing in southern
Lebanon. We hope that the Force will be able fully
to carry out the task entrusted to it by the Council
with a view, precisely, to allowing Lebanon definitively to recover its effective authority in the area.
92. In this connection I wish to express through
you, Mr. President, my delegation’s thanks to the
Secretary-General for the excellent report he has submitted to us and the tireless efforts he is making
together with the Council. Those words of thanks
are also addressed to the countries that are directly
contributing to this important peace-keeping operation as well as to the staff of UNIFIL and UNTSO.

98. We also thought-and still think-that it would be
in the best interest&of all the parties involved for them
to extend their full co-operation to UNIFIL. We
would thus on this occasion renew our appeal to them
to act accordingly. The dangerous situation which
would arise if the Furce were to be withdrawn could
benefit no one and wouId have disastrous co.nsequences, in particular for the entire region.
99. Norway therefore supports the renewal of the
mandate of UNIFIL and is ready to continue its participation in the Force. It is our hope that practical
ways and means can be found to, implement fully
UNIFIL’s mandate in its entire area of operation up to
the internationally recognized borders of Lebano-n.
Respect for the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of Lebanon is a prerequisite for the restoration
of Lebanese control over its territory. Thus all armed
,incursions across its borders have to cease forthwith.
100. My Government has not failed to take note.of
the fact that the Chief of Staff of UNTSO-in accordance with the expressed will of the Council-has continued his efforts towards the reactivation of ILMAC,
and that.@-meeting.betweensenior Israeli andLebanese
offtcers took place under hischairmanship on 1December. We hope that this development-among the few
positive features of the repo-rt before us-can result
in further meetings and gradually meet the objectives
laid down in resolution 467 (1980).
101. I would fail in my duty if I did not draw the
attentio.nof the members of the Council to the regret:
table fact that the financing of this important peacekeeping operation leaves much to be desired. This
increases the burden of, those- countries which are
troop-contributors. Once more I want to stress that
Norway regards it, to be the collective responsibility
of the international community to contribute to peacekeeping operations of this kind.

93. Mr. AASEN (Norway): Mr. President, it gives
my delegation satisfaction to see you presiding over
the work of the Council. Your vast diplomatic
experience and skill assure us that the presidency is
in the best of hands.
94. I should also like to pay a tribute to the representative of the United Kingdom, Sir Anthony
Parsons, for the tactful and competent manner in
which he guided the Council’s work last month.
95. Norway, as a troop-contributor to UNIFIL,
notes with particular concern and regret that once more
the Secretary-General has had to report to the Council
that, despite strenuous efforts at all levels, UNIFIL
has been prevented from making further progress
towards implementing fully the objectives of resolution 425 (1978).

102. In conclusion, let me express once more our
deep appreciation to the Secretary-General, to the
Commander of’UNIFIL, Major-General Erskine, and
his staff; both civilian and military, and to all the
offtcers and men of UNIFIL, for the competent and
brave way in which they are discharging their duties
in a complex situation. Their contribution to peace is
in accordance with the fundamental purpose of the
United Nations.

96. We compliment the Secretary-General for his
sustained efforts, but, like the Force itself, he is
dependent on the co-operation of the parties, and such
co-operation has not been forthcoming. On the contrary, the report before us shows clearly that there is
a lack of co-operation on the part of all the parties

103. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of-Lebanon. who has asked to exercise his right
of reply.
8,

104. Mr. T&N1
(Lebanon):
When I asked to
exercise my right to reply I had not, of course, heard
the statements of the representatives who have since
taken the floor and I think they have answered fully.
I have no desire whatsoever to engage in polemics or
to play into the hands of the representative of Israel
by broadening the scope of this debate beyond what is
on the agenda. However, I cannot resist the temptation
of reading to him and to the Council a description by
Disraeli of one of his adversaries in a debate: “a
sophistical rhetorician inebriated with the exuberance
of his own verbosity and gifted with an egotistical
imagination
that can at all times command an interminable and inconsistent series of arguments to malign
his opponents and glorify himself”.
105.

111. The meeting convened by the Chief of Staff of
UNTSO on 1 December is an important step in that
direction. It is, however, with regret that we read
in paragraphs 60,61 and 49 of the Secretary-General’s
report that there has been a “definite hardening of
position” towards UNIFIL
on the part of certain Palestinian groups and increasing harassment during the
past six months by Major Haddad, and that border
encroachments
by the Israeli forces appear to be
designed “to create a new defensive line forward
of the armistice demarcation line”.
112. Once again, the United States urges all the
parties to co-operate in the spirit and the letter of
resolution 425 (1978) in which UNIFIL
was charged
with the critical task of restoring international
peace
and security in its area of operation
and with
assisting the Government
of Lebanon to ensure the
return of its effective authority in south Lebanon.

I should like to stress three points.

106. First, the condition sine qua non for the implementation of any resolution adopted by the Council
is the withdrawal of Israel. There is no better testimony
of Israel’s intention not to withdraw than the statement
that we have listened to today and the pronouncements by Israel about its right to carry out a policy
of pre-emptive strikes inside my country.

113. The United States is particularly concerned that
the mobility
of the Force, including the Observer
Group, should in no way be threatened. In our view,
any impeding of the ability of the Force to move
at will would be a grave limitation on its effectiveness.

107. Secondly, the presence in my country of Syrian
troops as an Arab deterrent force and of the Palestinians is not on the agenda. It is a legitimate decision of the Arab community,
to which we belong, and
what happens between us and the Syrians and the
Palestinians is our concern-and
our concern alone.
I think my country has displayed sufficient attachment
to the principles of sovereignty and independence for
us not to need any lessons from anybody on this
particular point.

114. Finally, we wish to record our admiration for
the tireless &or& of the Security Council and of the
Secretary-General,
of Mr. Urquhart and his staff, and
of General Erskine and his officers and men. Their
determination
and professionalism
has ensured
important
achievements
for UNIFIL.
The Force,
above all, has provided a measure of comfort to the
people of south Lebanon, while at the same time
ensuring that local clashes do not escalate into regional
confrontation.

108. Thirdly,
I would emphasize
that UNIFIL
-which we are all supporting, and in which so many
people from so many countries are investing human
sacrifices and shedding their blood-can
succeed only
if the Israeli Government
is prepared to cease its
aggressive, expansionist policy and to allow the cycle
of violence to be broken once and for all.

115. The deployment
of Lebanese army forces in
areas maintained by UNIFIL
has contributed to the
hope shared by all members of the Council and by
the people of Lebanon that the Lebanese Government
will be able to reassert its authority in the south so
that there may be an end to the disruption and suffering
there.

109. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as representative
of the UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.

116. Members of the Council, I close, you will note,,
without dignifying by a response the comments made
by my colleagues from the German Democratic
Republic and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

110. We meet today to consider the seventh renewal
of the mandate of UNIFIL.
Once again, the SecretaryGeneral has observed in his report that, despite
strenuous efforts, the Force has been unable to make
further progress towards implementing
resolution 425
(1978). On behalf of the United States, I wish to
comment specifically on the commendable
efforts of
the Secretary-General
to work towards fulfilling the
intention of the Council that UNIFIL
be in fact an
interim Force.

The meeting

rose at I .20 p.m.

NOTE
’ Oficial
Records
of the General
Plenary
Meetings,
98th meeting.

9

Assembly,

Thirty-fifth

Session,

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS UNIES

Lcs publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et la agencesdepositaires du
monde cntier. Informcz-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous I! : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

IIOJIYYIlTh

UOAAHUR

OPI-AHUBAI[ZIM

OKhEAHHEHHhIX

HAIUIH

M3nariuft Oprami3asrrn O@benmienxbrx Haunt'+
3HWaX
H areHTCTBaX BO X%X pafionax Mupa.
aauxex

Haunfi.

xm~mfo~
CeKsHfl

bfara3wre

no nponaxe

~oxwo
XynsTb
8 KHHMILIX
MaraHasonHTe
CnpaBKH
06 HIAaHHfiX
a
HIIH ~HLUHTB
no anpecy:
Oprann384m
06zexnwiixbrX
HaaannR, HbIO-MOpK
HBH )KenaEa.

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en libretias y casasdistribuidoras en
todas pattes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-41462~September 1986-2.050
