A /72/PV.75

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

75th plenary meeting

Friday, 22 December 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 114 (continued)

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 114.

(b) Election of the Executive Director of the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme

(c) Election of two members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Committee

Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/661)
The President: As stated in the Secretary-General’s
note (A/72/661), the General Assembly, in its resolution
56/206, decided that the secretariat of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme should be
headed by an Executive Director at the level of UnderSecretary-General, to be elected by the Assembly for a
term of four years upon nomination by the SecretaryGeneral after consultation with Member States.
In the light of the aforementioned provisions of
resolution 56/206, the Secretary-General nominates
Dato’ Maimunah Mohd Sharif of Malaysia for election
by the Assembly as Executive Director of the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme at the UnderSecretary-General level, for a term of office of four
years. Accordingly, may I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to elect Dato’ Maimunah Mohd
Sharif as Executive Director of the United Nations
Human Settlements Programme for a term of office of
four years?
It was so decided (decision 72/413).
The President: As stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s note, the effective date of her appointment
will be communicated to the Assembly at a later stage.

The President: Members will recall that in
accordance with paragraph 4 (a) to (e) of resolution
60/180, of 20 December 2005, the Organizational
Committee shall comprise seven members of the
Security Council, including permanent members; seven
members of the Economic and Social Council, elected
from regional groups; five top providers of assessed
contributions to United Nations budgets and of voluntary
contributions to United Nations funds, programmes
and agencies, including a standing peacebuilding fund;
five top providers of military personnel and civilian
police to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
representation from all regional groups in the overall
composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that, at the 80th plenary
meeting of its seventieth session, the Assembly
elected El Salvador and Montenegro as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2016, and that at the 63rd plenary meeting
of its seventy-first session, the Assembly elected
Colombia, Egypt, Indonesia, Kenya and Mexico as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for a two-year term of
office, beginning on 1 January 2017.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-46045 (E)

*1746045*

A/72/PV.75

Consequently, the General Assembly will
need to fill the seats vacated by El Salvador and
Montenegro, whose two-year term of office expires on
31 December 2017.
The Assembly will now proceed to the election of
two members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission. By its resolution 60/261, of
8 May 2006, the Assembly decided that the members of
the Organizational Committee shall serve for renewable
terms of two years, as applicable. Accordingly, El
Salvador and Montenegro are eligible for immediate
re-election.
Regarding candidatures for the two vacant seats, I
should like to inform members that the group of Eastern
European States has endorsed the Czech Republic, and
that from the group of Latin American and Caribbean
States, El Salvador is the only candidate.
Members will recall that by its resolution 60/261,
the General Assembly decided that the rules of
procedure and established practice of the Assembly for
the election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee.
For this election, rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election shall be held by secret ballot.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph
16 of General Assembly decision 34/401, whereby the
practice of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections
to subsidiary organs when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard, unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on
that basis?
It was so decided.
The President: Since the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled, may
I take it that the General Assembly decides to elect
the Czech Republic and El Salvador as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2018?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate the Czech
Republic and El Salvador on their election as
2/6

22/12/2017

members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 177
Impact of exponential technological change on
sustainable development and peace
Draft resolution (A/72/L.38)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico to introduce draft resolution
A/72/L.38.
Mr. Gómez Camacho (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
One of the greatest challenges that our Organization
faces is anticipating challenges and preparing for their
impact in a timely manner. In general, we react instead
of preventing. Even when there are clear indicators, we
often decide to ignore them due to our rigid mindset.
That is the case with technological change that is
unfolding at an extremely rapid, even exponential pace,
and has begun to transform the most basic aspects of
our daily lives, with a disruptive effect that in some
cases we do not yet fully understand. We must recall
that technology is by nature neutral. It is we who choose
how it is to be used.
Today, artificial intelligence is leading us towards
a new industrial revolution. The growing digitization
and automation of economic activity is already having
a twofold impact. It replaces human capital, but it
also generates new jobs and reduces working hours. It
also reduces the price of goods and services through
collaborative global economies.
In the Charter of the United Nations, we have
committed to promoting social progress and to elevating
the standard of living of our societies. The creation of
a core group of 25 countries and the inclusion of the
item in the agenda of the plenary of the Assembly are
steps in that direction by enabling the impact of the
exponential technological change in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development to be understood in all its
depth and complexity.
The virtue of draft resolution A/72/L.38, which we
are introducing today, lies fundamentally in the fact
that it will set a dialogue in motion. Nevertheless, to
17-46045

22/12/2017

be precise, its aim is neither to limit nor to regulate
technological development per se, but to understand
and address its effects. Outside of our negotiation halls,
robust answers are expected, and they cannot be limited
by bureaucratic inertia, agreed language or resistance
to change.
The draft resolution therefore charts a road
map. First, it invites Member States to consider the
challenges posed by technological development and to
devise national strategies and public policies. Secondly,
it calls on relevant United Nations mechanisms and
entities, both in New York and in Geneva, to incorporate
this perspective into its work. Thirdly, it provides a
mandate for the forum on science, technology and
innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals of
the Economic and Social Council so that, next June,
it can present the findings of the United Nations
system so that these may be discussed and enhanced
by our countries’ experts. Fourthly, it provides for the
continuation of the discussion at the next session of the
General Assembly in order to choose the path forward
on the basis of evidence.
With the effort of all delegations, we now have a
proactive consensus text on a new and very relevant
issue for the Organization. We have made the General
Assembly a guiding force in this cross-cutting process,
as it also influences social aspects, human rights and
other areas that could affect peace in our societies.
As such, we must be able to address this matter in a
natural and frank manner, without fear. Avoiding such a
discussion will neither reduce the pace of technological
development nor alter its impact on the daily lives
of people whose well-being is at the heart of United
Nations action.
Mr. Pontiroli (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union and its member States would
like to thank Mexico for its constructive facilitation of
the preparation of draft resolution A/72/L.38 and all
delegations for their engagement.

A/72/PV.75

We believe that it is important to deepen our
understanding of the impact that rapid technological
change can have on the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals. We see merit in exploring the
opportunities and challenges presented by these
technologies, fully engaging all stakeholders, and
we welcome the commitment by Mexico and other
participants to avoid politicization of this topic.
In this regard, we anticipate with appreciation the
adoption today of the draft resolution on the impact of
rapid technological change on the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals. We look forward to
the findings of the Technology Facilitation Mechanism
and the consideration by the multi-stakeholder forum on
science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Taking note of these discussions, the European
Union and its member States believe that the discussion
of this topic should continue in the appropriate existing
forums — the Technology Facilitation Mechanism; the
multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and
innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals;
and the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development — including with a view to avoiding any
duplication. That position is in line with our broader goal
of strengthening the role and authority of the General
Assembly, including by improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of its work.
Ms. Iiguni-Kanda (Japan): Science, technology
and innovation are essential elements for achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, and we recognize
the value of holding such discussions here at the
United Nations. We believe, however, that the agenda
items and frameworks on science, technology and
innovation, including rapid technological change, must
be streamlined. It should be noted that we already have
two agenda items on technology under the Second
Committee, while the multi-stakeholder forum on
science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable
Development Goals and the Commission on Science
and Technology for Development serve as platforms for
discussions to share knowledge and experiences.
To avoid duplication with the existing frameworks,
we reached consensus to hold a session on rapid
technological change within the science, technology
and innovation forum, instead of establishing a new
expert group, as originally proposed in paragraph 4
of draft resolution A/72/L.38. Furthermore, it is our
expectation that the discussion of rapid technological

17-460453/6

A/72/PV.75

change will be promoted under the initiative of the
Technological Facilitation Mechanism, including the
inter-agency task team, the 10-member group and the
science, technology and innovation forum. The forum,
including the session suggested in paragraph 4, will
be planned and managed, in close consultation with
Member States, by the co-Chair.
Finally, it is the understanding of all Member States
involved, including Japan, that the session on the impact
of rapid technological change mentioned in paragraph 4
will be held on the condition that additional budgetary
resources are earmarked for the session.
Ms. Christian (United States of America): While
we will join the consensus on draft resolution A/72/L.38,
we take this opportunity to clarify important points.
The United States looks forward to discussing
the issue of rapid technological change on sustainable
development within appropriate forums, including the
multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and
innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals
and the United Nations Commission on Science and
Technology for Development. However, we do not
believe these issues deserve a separate track within the
General Assembly.
We join consensus on the draft resolution this
year but believe that in future these issues can be
addressed under existing General Assembly agenda
items, particularly item 21 (b), “Globalization and
interdependence: science, technology and innovation for
development”. Further, we understand that paragraph 5
does not add this specific issue to the agenda of the
seventy-third session of the General Assembly, and that
any further consideration of this issue will be under
existing agenda items.
The United States disassociates itself from
the sixth preambular paragraph to the extent that
references to prior United Nations proposals or calls
for access to technology promote technology transfer
or the distribution of intellectual property rights that
is not on mutually agreed terms and voluntary. For the
United States, any such language will have no standing
in future negotiations. The United States continues
to oppose language that we believe undermines
intellectual property rights.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate the Permanent Representative of Mexico
and all our friends at the Mexican Mission on the
4/6

22/12/2017

forthcoming adoption of draft resolution A/72/L.38,
on the impact of rapid technological change on the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Israel is proud to sponsor the draft resolution because
we believe that technological progress, when used
properly, can help us find solutions to environmental
problems, fight hunger and poverty, find cures for
disease and achieve the goals and targets of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We are at the dawn of a new era that will change
the world. Rapid advances in technology are making
the world more accessible and enabling us to do things
that were impossible just a few years ago. Today
technology affects every aspect of our lives, and it is
up to us to make sure that we use technology to make
a positive difference to help transform the world into a
better place.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/72/L.38, entitled “Impact of rapid
technological change on the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution and in addition to those delegations
listen in document A/72/L.38, the following countries
have become sponsors: Armenia, Australia, Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, Guyana, Iceland,
Israel, Italy, Mauritius, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Rwanda, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Tunisia
and Ukraine.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.38?
Draft resolution A/72/L.38 was adopted (resolution
72/242).
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to conclude its consideration of agenda item 177?
It was so decided.
17-46045

22/12/2017

Agenda item 65 (continued)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution (A/72/L.39)
The President: I should like to remind members
that the General Assembly will hold a debate on this
item, jointly with agenda items 30, “Report of the
Peacebuilding Commission”, and 111, entitled “Report
of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding Fund”,
during the resumed part of the seventy-second session,
next year.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ghana
to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.39.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of African States
under the agenda item “Peacebuilding and Sustaining
Peace” and to introduce draft resolution A/72/L.39,
entitled “Nelson Mandela Peace Summit”.
The year 2018 will mark the centenary of the
birth of Nelson Mandela, which is a major milestone
worthy of commemoration considering that global
icon’s contribution to history and his legacy for future
generations. The life of Nelson Mandela was informed
by his selfless commitment and deep sense of duty
not only to his own country, South Africa, and to his
continent, Africa, but to humankind as a whole. His
legacy includes having ushered South Africa out of
the insidious and inhumane institutional system of
apartheid and strengthened the unity of the country
to avoid a civil war and ensure a peaceful transition
to democracy.
As part of the commemoration of the centenary of
his birth and to benefit from his legacy, the African
Group presents for the consideration of the members
of the General Assembly a draft resolution proposing
a summit on peace. That summit, it is envisaged,
would be an official United Nations event, to be held
on the eve of the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly, in September 2018. It is proposed that the
summit take place under the theme “Building on Nelson
Mandela’s legacy to strengthen the United Nations in
the maintenance and promotion of international peace
and security”.
We recall that in his first-ever address to the
General Assembly (see A/46/PV.59), shortly after his
release from prison in 1991, President Mandela made
reference to the historic role of the United Nations as

A/72/PV.75

peacemaker and called on the Organization to resolve
outstanding conflict. Thus the summit would take place
in the context of reflecting on the United Nations as
an institution which, as enshrined in Article 1 of the
Charter, aims to maintain international peace and
security and, to that end, to take effective collected
measures for the prevention and removal of threats
to peace.
The centenary of Nelson Mandela thus presents
an opportunity for world leaders together at the
peace summit and, applying the ideals and values
exposed by the former statesman, recommit to the
nations of the world to preventing conflict, achieving
sustained peace, promoting human rights and ensuring
development for all. As Nelson Mandela stated in his
address to the General Assembly on 3 December 1991,
the United Nations creates the possibility for each to
have a meaningful say in how we should live together in
one peaceful, stable, prosperous and free world.
We urge all members of the General Assembly
unanimously to support the adoption of the draft
resolution so as to ensure that the commemoration is
a truly global tribute that has the full support of the
entire membership of the United Nations.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/72/L.39.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I am delivering
the following oral statement in accordance with rule
153 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 1 of draft resolution
A/72/L.39, the General Assembly would decide to
convene a high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly, to be known as the Nelson Mandela Peace
Summit, a day before the start of the general debate
at the seventy-third session, which will consist of an
opening plenary meeting from 9.30 a.m. to 10:30
a.m. and a plenary meeting from 10.30 a.m. to 6 p.m.,
focusing on global peace in honour of the centenary of
the birth of Nelson Mandela.
With regard to the request contained in a paragraph
1, it should be noted that should a list of speakers not
be completed by 6 p.m., the meeting would either be
closed or any extensions of the meeting beyond 6 p.m.
would entail additional costs for the Department for

17-460455/6

A/72/PV.75

General Assembly and Conference Management for the
2018-2019 budget period, which is not yet approved.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution A/72/L.39
would not give rise to any budgetary implications under
the proposed programme budget for the biennium 20182019.
Copies of the statement that I have just read out
have been distributed desk-to-desk in the Hall and will
also be made available on the PaperSmart portal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana on a point of order.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): I wish to make the following
oral revision to the draft text. It consists of a footnote to
paragraph 8 of the draft resolution, to read as follows:
“The list of proposals as well as final names will be
brought to the attention of the General Assembly. Where
a name is objected to, the objecting member State will
on a voluntary basis make known to the Office of the
President of the General Assembly the general basis of
its objections and the Office will share any information
received with any member State upon its request”.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/72/L.39, entitled “Nelson
Mandela Peace Summit”, as orally revised.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in draft resolution A/72/L.39, the following countries
have just indicated their wish to become sponsors: the
Gambia, Ireland, Senegal and Thailand.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.39, as
orally revised?
Draft resolution A/72/L.39, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 72/243).

6/6

22/12/2017

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): Israel joined the consensus
on resolution 72/243, given the importance of Nelson
Mandela’s legacy. However, we regret that although we
were actively engaged in the informal consultations on
the resolution, the concerns we raised were not taken
into account.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 65.
Programme of work
The President: I would like to draw the attention
of members to the date of recess of the current session.
Members will recall that at its 59th plenary meeting,
on 29 November 2017, the General Assembly decided
that the seventy-second session would recess on Friday,
22 December 2017. However, in view of the work that
remains to be completed for this part of the session, I
would like to propose to the Assembly that it postpone
the date of recess to Saturday, 23 December 2017.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to postpone the date of recess to
Saturday, 23 December 2017?
It was so decided.
The President: I should also like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the
Fifth Committee. Members will recall that, at its 59th
plenary meeting, on 29 November 2017, the General
Assembly agreed to extend the work of the Fifth
Committee until Friday, 22 December 2017. However, I
have been informed by the Chair of the Fifth Committee
that the Committee requests an extension of its work
to Saturday, 23 December 2017, as such an extension
would facilitate reaching consensus on the pending
resolutions before it. May I therefore take it that the
General Assembly agrees to extend the work of the
Fifth Committee until Saturday, 23 December 2017?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

17-46045
