A/65/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions and Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its sixty-fifth session
Volume III
25 December 2010 – 12 September 2011

General Assembly
Official Records  Sixty-fifth Session
Supplement No. 49

United Nations  New York, 2011

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses
indicating the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several
resolutions were adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a
capital letter placed between the two numerals (for example: resolution
3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)).
The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another
arabic numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several
resolutions or decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been
identified by a capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution
31/16 A, resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a
roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General
Assembly were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the
letters “ES” and a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution
2252 (ES-V)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed
by an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1,
decision ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
from 25 December 2010 to 12 September 2011. Resolutions adopted by the Assembly from
14 September to 24 December 2010 appear in volume I. Volume II contains the decisions adopted
by the Assembly during that period.
ISSN 0252-7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee................................................................... 1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)............................................................................................................................... 95
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee.................................................................... 99
IV. Decisions............................................................................................................................................. 183
A. Elections and appointments.......................................................................................................... 185
B. Other decisions............................................................................................................................. 192
Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee.......................................................... 192
Annexes
I. Allocation of agenda items .................................................................................................................. 197
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions.................................................................................................. 199

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

65/37.

Title

Page

Oceans and the law of the sea........................................................................................................................................... 3
Resolution B .................................................................................................................................................................... 3

65/263.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie...................................... 4

65/264.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development............. 7

65/265.

Suspension of the rights of membership of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in the Human Rights Council........................... 13

65/266.

Revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme.............................................................................. 13

65/267.

Organization of the High-level Meeting on Youth.......................................................................................................... 14

65/271.

International Day of Human Space Flight....................................................................................................................... 16

65/273.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2015........................................................................................................................................ 17

65/274.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union.................................................................................... 23

65/275.

International Day of Friendship...................................................................................................................................... 30

65/276.

Participation of the European Union in the work of the United Nations.......................................................................... 31

65/277.

Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS...................................... 33

65/278.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa................................................... 47

65/279.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action ........................................... 51

65/280.

Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020 .................................................... 53

65/281.

Review of the Human Rights Council ............................................................................................................................ 53

65/282.

Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations......................................................................................... 62

65/283.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution................ 62

65/284.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support................................ 65

65/285.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council................................................................................................................................................................ 72

65/286.

Implementing the smooth transition strategy for countries graduating from the list of least developed countries............. 72

65/287.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia....................................................................................................................... 74

65/307.

Improving the effectiveness and coordination of military and civil defence assets for natural disaster response.............. 75

65/308.

Admission of the Republic of South Sudan to membership in the United Nations.......................................................... 76

65/309.

Happiness: towards a holistic approach to development ................................................................................................. 77

65/311.

Multilingualism.............................................................................................................................................................. 78

65/312.

Outcome document of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on Youth: Dialogue
and Mutual Understanding............................................................................................................................................. 82

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

65/313.

Follow-up to the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development .................. 87

65/314.

Modalities for the fifth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development .................................................................. 88

65/315.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly....................................................................................................... 89

65/316.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum......................................................................... 93

2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 65/37 B
AR
/ ES6/53/7B

Adopted at the 84th plenary meeting, on 4 April 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.65, sponsored by: Australia, Brazil, Canada, New Zealand, Saint Lucia

65/37. Oceans and the law of the sea
B1
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole on the Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine
Environment, including Socio-economic Aspects (“the Regular Process”),2
Recognizing the work done by the Group of Experts on the Regular Process, and welcoming
their contribution to moving the Regular Process forward,
1. Endorses the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the
Regular Process;3
2. Requests the Secretary-General to explore, in consultation with the Group of Experts
on the Regular Process, the establishment of appropriate means to address the communication
requirements of the Regular Process, having in mind the need to avoid duplication of efforts, and
to report on the findings as soon as practicable;
3. Requests the secretariat of the Regular Process, with the assistance of the Group of
Experts, to inventory, on a preliminary basis, capacity-building for assessments and types of
experts for workshops and to report on these issues at the next meeting of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, upon the request of the Group of Experts and in line
with paragraph 211 of resolution 65/37 A of 7 December 2010, to facilitate the use of appropriate
data handling and information schemes within the United Nations system, drawing on
the experiences, existing systems and support of other United Nations specialized agencies
and programmes;
5. Invites States to provide comments on the possible outline for the first global
integrated assessment of the state of the marine environment, including socio-economic aspects,4
the draft criteria for the appointment of experts and the draft guidelines for workshops by 30 April
2011,5 and requests the Group of Experts to prepare, by 30 May 2011, revised versions of those
draft documents so as to reflect the comments of States, for further discussion and adoption at the
next meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole;
6. Requests the Group of Experts, in consultation with the secretariat of the Regular
Process and with the assistance of the members of UN-Oceans, to explore means of leveraging
existing systems to manage the information that comprises the foundation of the global marine
assessment and to report its findings by 30 May 2011 for the consideration of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole at its next meeting;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to convene within existing resources the second
meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on 27 and 28 June 2011 to address
_______________
1

Resolution 65/37, in section I of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 65/37 A.
2
See A/65/759.
3
Ibid., annex.
4
See annex C to the Set of Options.
5
Available from www.un.org/depts/los/global_reporting/global_reporting.htm.

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

outstanding issues identified in the report of the first meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the
Whole,2 with a view to enabling the first cycle of the first global integrated assessment to proceed,
and to provide recommendations to the General Assembly for consideration at its
sixty-sixth session.
RESOLUTION 65/263
AR
/ ES6/52/63

Adopted at the 74th plenary meeting, on 14 January 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.26/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Ghana, Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Hungary, Ireland, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
Vanuatu, Viet Nam

65/263. Cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/18 of 10 November 1978, 50/3 of 16 October 1995, 52/2 of
17 October 1997, 54/25 of 15 November 1999, 56/45 of 7 December 2001, 57/43 of
21 November 2002, 59/22 of 8 November 2004, 61/7 of 20 October 2006 and 63/236 of
22 December 2008, as well as its decision 53/453 of 18 December 1998,
Recalling also its resolutions 61/266 of 16 May 2007 and 63/306 of 9 September 2009
on multilingualism,
Considering that the International Organization of la Francophonie, which is made up of
seventy-two States Members of the United Nations, representing more than one third of
the members of the General Assembly, is promoting multilateral cooperation in areas of
common interest,
Bearing in mind the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations which encourage the
promotion of the purposes and principles of the United Nations through regional cooperation,
Bearing in mind also that, according to the Charter of la Francophonie adopted on
23 November 2005 at the Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie, held in Antananarivo, the
objectives of the International Organization of la Francophonie are to assist in the establishment
and development of democracy, the prevention, management and settlement of conflicts, support
for the rule of law and for human rights, the intensification of dialogue between cultures and
civilizations, the establishment of closer ties among peoples through mutual knowledge, the
strengthening of their solidarity through multilateral cooperation activities with a view to
promoting the growth of their economies, and the promotion of education and training,
Welcoming the steps taken by the International Organization of la Francophonie to
strengthen its ties with the organizations of the United Nations system and with international and
regional organizations with a view to attaining its objectives,
Affirming the importance of a balanced and effective multilateral system that is
representative of today’s world, one that is based upon a strong and renewed United Nations,
Noting with satisfaction the commitment of the International Organization of la Francophonie
to multilateral cooperation for peace, democratic governance and the rule of law, economic
governance and solidarity, the environment, sustainable development, and climate change,

4

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting with satisfaction also the commitments made at the High-level Plenary Meeting of
the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in New York from
20 to 22 September 2010, and reaffirmed by the Heads of State and Government of countries
using French as a common language at the thirteenth Summit of la Francophonie, held in
Montreux, Switzerland, from 22 to 24 October 2010, and their determination to work together to
bring about, through targeted action, added value in these areas,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 63/236,6
Noting with satisfaction the substantial progress achieved in cooperation between the United
Nations, the specialized agencies and other United Nations bodies and programmes and the
International Organization of la Francophonie,
Convinced that strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie serves the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Noting the desire of the two organizations to consolidate, develop and strengthen the ties that
exist between them in the political, economic, social and cultural fields,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,6 and welcomes the strengthened and
fruitful cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie;
2. Notes with satisfaction that, in accordance with the declaration adopted by Heads of
State and Government of countries using French as a common language at the thirteenth Summit
of la Francophonie, the International Organization of la Francophonie participates actively in the
work of the United Nations whose purposes, as set forth in its Charter, include to achieve
international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or
humanitarian character and to be a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment
of common ends;
3. Notes with great satisfaction the recent strengthening of cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of la Francophonie in the area of human rights,
and commends the initiatives taken by the International Organization of la Francophonie in the
areas of crisis and conflict prevention, the promotion of peace, support for democracy and the rule
of law, in accordance with the commitments set forth in the Bamako Declaration on an African
Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation, Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and Light
Weapons7 and reaffirmed at the Ministerial Conference of la Francophonie on Conflict Prevention
and Human Security, held on 13 and 14 May 2006 in Saint Boniface, Canada;
4. Welcomes the genuine contribution of the International Organization of la
Francophonie, in cooperation with the United Nations, in Haiti, the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
Burundi, Madagascar, the Niger, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, the Central
African Republic and Chad;
5. Also welcomes the cooperation between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie, with the participation of other regional and subregional
organizations, as well as non-governmental organizations, in the fields of early warning and crisis
and conflict prevention, and encourages the pursuit of this initiative with a view to formulating
practical recommendations to facilitate the establishment of relevant operational mechanisms,
where necessary;
6. Further welcomes the new impetus given to the participation of States members of the
International Organization of la Francophonie in peacekeeping operations, while recalling that it is
_______________
6
7

See A/65/382-S/2010/490, sect. II.
A/CONF.192/PC/23, annex.

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

up to the United Nations to preserve the multilingualism of these operations, and draws attention
to the strengthened cooperation between the International Organization of la Francophonie and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the Secretariat with a view to increasing the number of
French-speaking personnel in United Nations peacekeeping operations;
7. Encourages the continuation of efforts by the States members of the International
Organization of la Francophonie and by the Organization itself, taking into account the authority
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to increase the supply of French-speaking civilian
and military contingents on missions to francophone countries and to build their capacities,
including access by French-speaking personnel to leadership positions in peacekeeping operations
in francophone countries;
8. Welcomes the participation of the International Organization of la Francophonie in the
Peacebuilding Commission’s work on Burundi, the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau,
and strongly encourages the International Organization of la Francophonie and the Peacebuilding
Commission to continue to cooperate actively;
9. Notes with satisfaction the continued collaboration between the United Nations and
the International Organization of la Francophonie in the area of electoral monitoring and
assistance, and encourages the strengthening of cooperation between the two Organizations
in that area;
10. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for including the International
Organization of la Francophonie in the periodic meetings he holds with heads of regional
organizations, and invites him to continue to do so, taking into account the role played by the
International Organization of la Francophonie in conflict prevention and support for democracy
and the rule of law;
11. Welcomes the fact that the thirteenth Summit of la Francophonie led to a concrete
commitment by States members of the International Organization of la Francophonie to take
action by pursuing efforts aimed at:
(a) Mobilizing with a view to achieving the Millennium Development Goals, in particular
with regard to education;
(b) Taking into account the needs of the most vulnerable States, in particular in the areas
of sustainable development, food security, the environment and biodiversity;
(c)

Reforming financial regulations and the international monetary system;

(d) Combating
and sustainability;

cross-cutting

threats

which

compromise

international

peace

12. Invites the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system,
as well as the regional commissions, including the Economic Commission for Africa, to
collaborate to this end with the Secretary-General of la Francophonie by identifying new synergies
in favour of development, in particular in the areas of poverty elimination, energy, sustainable
development, education, training and the development of new information technologies, in
particular with a view to meeting the Millennium Development Goals;
13. Expresses its gratitude to the International Organization of la Francophonie for the
steps it has taken in recent years to promote cultural and linguistic diversity and dialogue between
cultures and civilizations;
14. Welcomes the establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), and encourages the International Organization of la
Francophonie to work in synergy with UN-Women in the spirit of the Francophone Declaration
on Violence against Women adopted on 1 March 2010;
15. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of la Francophonie for their sustained efforts to strengthen cooperation and
6

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

coordination between the two Organizations, thereby serving their mutual interests in the political,
economic, social and cultural fields;
16. Welcomes the involvement of the countries that use French as a common language,
particularly through the International Organization of la Francophonie, in the preparation for,
conduct of and follow-up to international conferences organized under the auspices of the
United Nations;
17. Also welcomes the high-level meetings held periodically between the Secretariat of the
United Nations and the Secretariat of the International Organization of la Francophonie, and
requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, acting in cooperation with the SecretaryGeneral of la Francophonie, to encourage the holding of periodic meetings between their
representatives in order to promote the exchange of information, coordination of activities and
identification of new areas of cooperation;
18. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations to take the steps necessary, in
consultation with the Secretary-General of la Francophonie, to continue to promote cooperation
between the two Organizations;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
20. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session the sub-item
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie”.
RESOLUTION 65/264
AR
/ ES6/52/64

Adopted at the 75th plenary meeting, on 28 January 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.59 and Add.1, sponsored by: Japan, Mexico, Russian Federation, Yemen (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China)

65/264. International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural
disasters, from relief to development
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991, the annex to which contains the
guiding principles for the strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance
of the United Nations system, as well as all its resolutions on international cooperation on
humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development, and recalling
the resolutions of the humanitarian segments of the substantive sessions of the Economic and
Social Council,
Reaffirming also the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence for the
provision of humanitarian assistance,
Reaffirming further the Hyogo Declaration,8 the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015:
Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters9 and the common statement of
the special session on the Indian Ocean disaster: risk reduction for a safer future,10 as adopted
by the World Conference on Disaster Reduction, held in Kobe, Hyogo, Japan, from 18 to
22 January 2005,

_______________
8

A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, chap. I, resolution 1.
Ibid., resolution 2.
10
A/CONF.206/6 and Corr.1, annex II.
9

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Looking forward to the third session of the Global Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction, to
be held in Geneva from 8 to 13 May 2011, the report of the forthcoming Hyogo Framework
for Action midterm review and the Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction,
due in 2011,
Emphasizing that the affected State has the primary responsibility in the initiation,
organization, coordination and implementation of humanitarian assistance within its territory and
in the facilitation of the work of humanitarian organizations in mitigating the consequences of
natural disasters,
Emphasizing also the responsibility of all States to undertake disaster risk reduction,
including through preparedness, as well as response and early recovery efforts, in order to
minimize the impact of natural disasters, while recognizing the importance of international
cooperation in support of the efforts of affected countries which may have limited capacities in
this regard,
Expressing its deep concern at the increasing challenges to Member States and to the United
Nations humanitarian response capacity to deal with the consequences of natural disasters, given
the effects of global challenges, including the impact of climate change, the global financial and
economic crisis, and the humanitarian implications of the global food crisis and continuing
food insecurity,
Concerned about the challenges posed by the magnitude of some natural disasters, in
particular to the capacity and coordination of the humanitarian response system,
Expressing its deep concern that rural and urban poor communities in the developing world
are the hardest hit by the effects of increased disaster risk,
Acknowledging the impacts of rapid urbanization in the context of natural disasters and that
urban disaster preparedness and responses require appropriate disaster risk reduction strategies,
including in urban planning, early recovery strategies implemented from the initial stage of relief
operations, as well as rehabilitation and development strategies,
Noting that local communities are the first responders in most disasters, underlining the
critical role played by in-country capacities in disaster risk reduction, including preparedness, as
well as response and recovery, and acknowledging the need to support efforts of Member States to
develop and enhance national and local capacities which are fundamental to improving the overall
delivery of humanitarian assistance,
Recognizing the high numbers of persons affected by natural disasters, including in this
respect internally displaced persons, and the need to address the humanitarian needs arising from
internal displacement throughout the world owing to natural disasters,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in support of the efforts of the
affected States in dealing with natural disasters in all their phases, in particular in preparedness,
response and the early recovery phase, and of strengthening the response capacity of countries
affected by disaster,
Recognizing the progress made by the United Nations Platform for Space-based Information
for Disaster Management and Emergency Response (UN-SPIDER) in its mission, encouraging
Member States to provide all support necessary, on a voluntary basis, to UN-SPIDER, including
financial support, to enable it to carry out its workplan for 2010–2011, and reiterating the
importance of enhancing international coordination and cooperation at the global level in disaster
management and emergency response through greater access to and use of space-based services
for all countries and by facilitating capacity-building and institutional strengthening for disaster
management, in particular in developing countries,
Taking note of the proposal to establish the Global Framework for Climate Services to
develop and provide science-based climate information and prediction for climate risk
management and for adaptation to climate variability and change, and looking forward to
its implementation,
8

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the important role played by Member States, including developing countries,
that have granted necessary and continued generous assistance to countries and peoples stricken
by natural disasters,
Recognizing the significant role played by national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, as
part of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, in disaster preparedness and risk
reduction, disaster response, rehabilitation and development,
Emphasizing the need to address vulnerability and to integrate disaster risk reduction,
including preparedness, into all phases of natural disaster management, post-natural disaster
recovery and development planning,
Recognizing that efforts to achieve economic growth, sustainable development and
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, can be
adversely affected by natural disasters, and noting the positive contribution that those efforts can
make in strengthening the resilience of populations to such disasters,
Recognizing also the clear relationship between emergency response, rehabilitation and
development, and reaffirming that, in order to ensure a smooth transition from relief to
rehabilitation and development, emergency assistance must be provided in ways that will be
supportive of recovery and long-term development and that emergency measures should be seen
as a step towards sustainable development,
Emphasizing, in this context, the important role of development organizations in supporting
national efforts to mitigate the consequences of natural disasters,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;11

2. Expresses its deep concern at the increasing impact of natural disasters, resulting in
massive losses of life and property worldwide, in particular in vulnerable societies lacking
adequate capacity to mitigate effectively the long-term negative social, economic and
environmental consequences of natural disasters;
3. Calls upon States to fully implement the Hyogo Declaration8 and the Hyogo
Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to
Disasters,9 in particular those commitments related to assistance for developing countries that are
prone to natural disasters and for disaster-stricken States in the transition phase towards
sustainable physical, social and economic recovery, for risk-reduction activities in post-disaster
recovery and for rehabilitation processes;
4. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian
and development actors to accelerate the implementation of the Hyogo Framework for Action,
emphasizes the promotion and strengthening of disaster preparedness activities at all levels, in
particular in hazard-prone areas, and encourages them to increase funding and cooperation for
disaster risk reduction activities, including disaster preparedness;
5. Calls upon all States to adopt, where required, and to continue to implement
effectively, necessary legislative and other appropriate measures to mitigate the effects of natural
disasters and integrate disaster risk reduction strategies into development planning, and in this
regard requests the international community to continue to assist developing countries as well as
countries with economies in transition, as appropriate;
6. Acknowledges that global climate change, among other factors, contributes to the
increase in intensity and frequency of natural disasters, which amplify natural disaster risk, and in
this regard encourages Member States, as well as relevant regional and international organizations,
in accordance with their specific mandates, to support adaptation to the adverse effects of climate
change and to strengthen disaster risk reduction and early warning systems in order to minimize
_______________
11

A/65/356.

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the humanitarian consequences of natural disasters, including through the provision of technology
and support for capacity-building in developing countries;
7. Welcomes the initiatives at the regional and national levels related to the
implementation of the Guidelines for the Domestic Facilitation and Regulation of International
Disaster Relief and Initial Recovery Assistance, adopted at the Thirtieth International Conference
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 26 to 30 November 2007, and
encourages Member States and, where applicable, regional organizations to take further steps to
strengthen operational and legal frameworks for international disaster relief, taking into account
the Guidelines, as appropriate;
8. Also welcomes the effective cooperation among the affected States, relevant bodies of
the United Nations system, donor countries, regional and international financial institutions and
other relevant organizations, such as the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement,
and civil society, in the coordination and delivery of emergency relief, and stresses the need to
continue such cooperation and delivery throughout relief operations and medium- and long-term
rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts, in a manner that reduces vulnerability to future
natural hazards;
9. Reiterates the commitment to support, as a matter of priority, the efforts of countries,
in particular developing countries, to strengthen their capacities at all levels in order to reduce
risks, prepare for and respond rapidly to natural disasters and mitigate their impact;
10. Urges Member States to develop, update and strengthen early warning systems,
disaster preparedness and risk reduction measures at all levels, in accordance with the Hyogo
Framework for Action, taking into account their own circumstances and capacities and in
coordination with relevant actors, as appropriate, and encourages the international community and
relevant United Nations entities to continue to support national efforts in this regard;
11. Encourages Member States to consider elaborating and presenting to the International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction secretariat their national platforms for disaster reduction in
accordance with the Hyogo Framework for Action, and also encourages States to cooperate with
each other to reach this objective;
12. Stresses that, to increase further the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, particular
international cooperation efforts should be undertaken to enhance and broaden further the
utilization of national and local capacities and, where appropriate, of regional and subregional
capacities for disaster preparedness and response, which may be made available in closer
proximity to the site of a disaster, and more efficiently and at lower cost;
13. Also stresses, in this context, the importance of strengthening international
cooperation, particularly through the effective use of multilateral mechanisms, in the timely
provision of humanitarian assistance through all phases of a disaster, from relief and recovery to
development, including the provision of adequate resources;
14. Encourages all Member States to facilitate, to the extent possible, the transit of
emergency humanitarian assistance and development assistance, provided in the context of
international efforts, including in the phase from relief to development, in full accordance with the
provisions of resolution 46/182 and the annex thereto, and in full respect of the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence, and their obligations under
international law, including international humanitarian law;
15. Takes note of the recommendation of the Secretary-General,12 and decides that the
Central Register of Disaster Management Capacities should be discontinued;

_______________
12

10

Ibid., para. 84.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Reaffirms the important role of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs of the Secretariat as the focal point within the overall United Nations system for advocacy
for and coordination of humanitarian assistance among United Nations humanitarian
organizations and other humanitarian partners;
17. Welcomes, so as to increase further the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance, the
incorporation of experts from developing countries that are prone to natural disasters into the
United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination system, and the work of the International
Search and Rescue Advisory Group in assisting such countries in strengthening urban search and
rescue capacities and establishing mechanisms for improving their coordination of national and
international response in the field;
18. Recalls its resolution 57/150 of 16 December 2002 entitled “Strengthening the
effectiveness and coordination of international urban search and rescue assistance”, and welcomes
the holding of the first global meeting of the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group, in
Kobe, Japan, from 14 to 16 September 2010;
19. Urges Member States, the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to
consider the specific and differentiated consequences of natural disasters both in rural and urban
areas, when designing and implementing disaster risk reduction, preparedness, humanitarian
assistance and early recovery strategies, giving special emphasis to addressing the needs of those
living in rural and urban poor areas prone to natural disasters;
20. Recognizes that information and telecommunication technology can play an important
role in disaster response, encourages Member States to develop emergency response
telecommunication capacities, and encourages the international community to assist the efforts of
developing countries in this area, where needed, including in the recovery phase;
21. Encourages Member States that have not acceded to or ratified the Tampere
Convention on the Provision of Telecommunication Resources for Disaster Mitigation and Relief
Operations,13 to consider doing so;
22. Encourages the further use of space-based and ground-based remote-sensing
technologies, including as provided by UN-SPIDER, as well as the sharing of geographical data,
for the prevention, mitigation and management of natural disasters, where appropriate, and invites
Member States to continue to provide their support to the consolidation of the United Nations
capability in the area of satellite-derived geographical information for early warning,
preparedness, response and early recovery;
23. Encourages Member States, relevant United Nations organizations and international
financial institutions to enhance the global capacity for sustainable post-disaster recovery in areas
such as coordination with traditional and non-traditional partners, identification and dissemination
of lessons learned, development of common tools and mechanisms for recovery needs
assessment, strategy development and programming, and incorporation of risk reduction into all
recovery processes, and welcomes the ongoing efforts to this end;
24. Encourages Member States and the United Nations system to support national
initiatives that address the possible differentiated impacts of natural disasters on the affected
population, including through the collection and analysis of data disaggregated, inter alia, by sex,
age and disability, using, inter alia, the existing information provided by States, and through the
development of tools, methods and procedures that will result in more timely and useful initial
needs assessments;
25. Calls upon United Nations humanitarian organizations, in consultation with Member
States, as appropriate, to strengthen the evidence base for humanitarian assistance by further
developing common mechanisms to improve the quality, transparency and reliability of, and make
_______________
13

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2296, No. 40906.

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

further progress towards, common humanitarian needs assessments, to assess their performance in
assistance and to ensure the most effective use of humanitarian resources by these organizations;
26. Stresses the importance of the full and equal participation of women in decisionmaking and of gender mainstreaming in developing and implementing disaster risk reduction,
preparedness, response and recovery strategies, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General
to continue ensuring that gender mainstreaming is better taken into account in all aspects of
humanitarian responses and activities;
27. Encourages Member States and relevant regional and international organizations to
identify and improve the dissemination of best practices for improving disaster preparedness,
response and early recovery and to scale up successful local initiatives, as appropriate;
28. Requests the United Nations system to improve its coordination of disaster recovery
efforts, from relief to development, inter alia, by strengthening institutional, coordination and
strategic planning efforts in disaster recovery, in support of national authorities;
29. Calls upon relevant United Nations humanitarian and development organizations to
continue efforts to ensure continuity and predictability in their response and to further improve
coordination in recovery processes in support of the efforts of national authorities;
30. Calls upon the United Nations system and other humanitarian actors to improve the
dissemination of tools and services to support enhanced disaster risk reduction, in particular
preparedness, and early recovery;
31. Calls upon relevant United Nations humanitarian and development organizations, in
consultation with Member States, to strengthen tools and mechanisms to ensure that early
recovery needs and support are integrated into the planning and implementation of disaster
preparedness, humanitarian response and development cooperation activities, as appropriate;
32. Acknowledges that early recovery should receive further funding, and encourages the
provision of timely, flexible and predictable funding for early recovery, including through
established humanitarian instruments;
33. Encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian and
development actors to support humanitarian coordinators and resident coordinators, in order to
strengthen their capacity, inter alia, to support the host Government in implementing preparedness
measures and to coordinate preparedness activities of country teams in support of national efforts,
and also encourages the United Nations system and other relevant humanitarian actors to further
strengthen the ability to quickly and flexibly deploy humanitarian professionals to support
Governments and country teams in the immediate aftermath of a disaster;
34. Emphasizes the need to mobilize adequate, flexible and sustainable resources for
recovery, preparedness and disaster risk reduction activities in order to ensure predictable and
timely access to resources for humanitarian assistance in emergencies resulting from disasters
associated with natural hazards;
35. Welcomes the achievements of the Central Emergency Response Fund and its
contribution to the promotion and enhancement of early humanitarian response, calls upon all
Member States and invites the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions to
consider increasing voluntary contributions to the Fund, including, when possible, through multiyear and early commitments, and emphasizes that contributions should be additional to current
commitments to humanitarian programming and not to the detriment of resources made available
for international cooperation for development;
36. Invites Member States, the private sector and all concerned individuals and institutions
to consider voluntary contributions to other humanitarian funding mechanisms;
37. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve the international response to
natural disasters and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, and to
include in his report recommendations on how to ensure that humanitarian assistance is provided
12

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

in ways supportive of the transition from relief to development, as well as on the lessons learned
on strengthening the coordination and response capacity when facing natural disasters of
large magnitude.
RESOLUTION 65/265
AR
/ ES6/52/65

Adopted at the 76th plenary meeting, on 1 March 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.60 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Belgium,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay

65/265. Suspension of the rights of membership of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in the
Human Rights Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, in particular paragraph 8, which states
that the General Assembly may suspend the rights of membership in the Human Rights Council of
a member of the Council that commits gross and systematic violations of human rights,
Noting Human Rights Council resolution S-15/1 of 25 February 2011,14
Welcoming the statement issued by the League of Arab States on 22 February 2011 and the
communiqué issued by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union on 23 February 2011,
Expressing deep concern about the human rights situation in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
1. Decides to suspend the rights of membership in the Human Rights Council of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya;
2.

Decides also to review the matter, as appropriate.
RESOLUTION 65/266

AR
/ ES6/52/66

Adopted at the 77th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2011, without a vote, on the basis of the note by the
Secretary-General (A/65/768)

65/266. Revision of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 48/162 of 20 December 1993, 50/8 of 1 November 1995 and
53/223 of 7 April 1999,
1. Decides, subject to the concurrence of the Conference of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, that the members of the Executive Board of the World Food
Programme shall be elected for a term of three years from among the States included in the lists15
set out in the Basic Texts of the World Food Programme, in accordance with the following
distribution of seats, it being understood that this allocation of seats creates no precedent for the
composition of other United Nations bodies of limited membership:
_______________
14
15

A/HRC/S-15/2, chap. I.
Reproduced in E/1998/L.1/Add.4, annex II.

13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(a) Eight members from the States included in list A, four members to be elected by the
Economic and Social Council and four by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations;
(b) Seven members from the States included in list B, four members to be elected by the
Economic and Social Council and three by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations;
(c) Five members from the States included in list C, two members to be elected by the
Economic and Social Council and three by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations;
(d) Twelve members from the States included in list D, six members to be elected by the
Economic and Social Council and six by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations;
(e) Three members from the States included in list E, two members to be elected by the
Economic and Social Council and one by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations;
(f) One additional member rotating among the States included in lists A, B and C to be
elected by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; the pattern
of rotation shall be as follows:
(i) A State from list A to be elected to occupy the additional seat every other term, starting
from 1 January 2012;
(ii) A State from list B to be elected to occupy the additional seat every fourth term,
starting from 1 January 2015;
(iii) A State from list C to be elected to occupy the additional seat every fourth term,
starting from 1 January 2021;
2. Also decides that the rotating seat shall henceforth rotate on a permanent basis among
the States included in lists A, B and C, as described in paragraph 1 (f) above, without the need for
a further review, unless such a review is requested by a majority of the Executive Board members
and, in any event, not before the completion of one full rotation scheme of four terms;
3. Further decides that, subject to the concurrence of the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the revised General Regulations shall enter into
force on 1 January 2012.
RESOLUTION 65/267
AR
/ ES6/52/67

Adopted at the 78th plenary meeting, on 15 March 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.63, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

65/267. Organization of the High-level Meeting on Youth
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/134 of 18 December 2009, by which it proclaimed the year
commencing on 12 August 2010 the International Year of Youth: Dialogue and Mutual
Understanding and decided to organize, under the auspices of the United Nations, a world youth
conference as the highlight of the Year,
Recalling also its resolutions 50/81 of 14 December 1995 and 62/126 of 18 December 2007,
by which it adopted the World Programme of Action for Youth, as contained in the annexes
thereto, and acknowledging that the Programme of Action provides Member States with a useful
policy framework and practical guidelines for improving the situation of youth,

14

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Bearing in mind that youth represent a significant proportion of the world’s population and
that the way in which the challenges and potential of young people are addressed will influence
social and economic conditions and the well-being and livelihood of future generations,
Recognizing that the International Year of Youth provides an important opportunity to
enhance dialogue and mutual understanding among youth worldwide, to promote youth
participation at all levels, and to increase the commitment and investment from Governments and
the international community in addressing the challenges that hinder youth,
1. Decides that the world youth conference shall take the form of a high-level meeting of
the General Assembly, to be held at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 25 and 26 July
2011, and shall be funded within existing resources and through voluntary contributions;
2. Also decides that the High-level Meeting shall have as its overarching theme “Youth:
dialogue and mutual understanding”;
3. Calls upon Member States to pay due attention to relevant internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and relevant outcomes and
programmes of action, including the World Programme of Action for Youth and General
Assembly resolution 62/126;
4. Decides that the organizational arrangements for the High-level Meeting shall be
as follows:
(a) The High-level Meeting will comprise plenary meetings and two consecutive informal
interactive round tables, with the round tables to be chaired by Member States at the invitation of
the President of the General Assembly and to address the following themes:
(i) Round table 1: Strengthening international cooperation regarding youth and enhancing
dialogue, mutual understanding and active youth participation as indispensable elements of
efforts towards achieving social integration, full employment and the eradication of poverty;
(ii) Round table 2: Challenges to youth development and opportunities for poverty
eradication, employment and sustainable development;
(b) The opening plenary meeting will feature statements by the President of the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General and an eminent person actively engaged in youth issues, and a
youth representative of non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic
and Social Council, both of whom will be chosen by the President of the Assembly;
(c) The Chairs of the round tables will present summaries of the discussions at the closing
plenary meeting;
(d) In order to promote interactive and substantive discussions, participation in each round
table will include Member States, observers and representatives of entities of the United Nations
system, civil society, youth organizations and the private sector, without a list of speakers being
maintained in this regard;
5. Also decides that the High-level Meeting shall result in a concise action-oriented
outcome document, and requests the President of the General Assembly to produce a draft text, in
consultation with Member States, taking into account input from youth-led organizations, and to
convene informal consultations at an appropriate date in order to enable sufficient consideration
and agreement by Member States prior to the Meeting;
6. Invites Member States and observers to be represented at a high level at the
High-level Meeting;
7. Invites the Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, and Palestine, in its capacity as
observer, to participate in the preparatory activities and in the High-level Meeting;

15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

8. Calls upon Member States to consider including in their delegation to the High-level
Meeting young people who suitably and broadly represent youth in their countries, bearing in
mind the principles of gender balance and non-discrimination;
9. Invites the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of representatives of
non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council who
may participate in the High-level Meeting;
10. Also invites the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of representatives
of other non-governmental organizations, relevant civil society organizations and the private
sector who may participate in the High-level Meeting, taking into account the principle of
equitable geographical representation, and to submit the list to Member States for consideration on
a no-objection basis;
11. Encourages all Member States, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations, private sector entities, and other relevant stakeholders to consider supporting the
participation of representatives from developing countries, in particular youth delegates and
representatives of non-governmental organizations and civil society organizations from those
countries, including by making voluntary contributions to the United Nations Youth Fund, in order
to ensure the broadest possible participation, and requests the Secretary-General to take all
necessary measures in this regard;
12. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in consultation with Member States,
to finalize the organizational arrangements of the meetings, taking into account the length of the
meetings, the identification of the eminent person and the youth representative to speak at the
opening plenary meeting and the identification of Chairs for the round tables, bearing in mind the
level of representation as well as equitable geographical representation.
RESOLUTION 65/271
AR
/ ES6/52/71

Adopted at the 85th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.67 and Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Fiji, Finland, France,
Ghana, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Luxembourg, Malta, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United States
of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

65/271. International Day of Human Space Flight
The General Assembly,
Deeply convinced of the common interest of mankind in promoting and expanding the
exploration and use of outer space, as the province of all mankind, for peaceful purposes and in
continuing efforts to extend to all States the benefits derived therefrom,
Attaching great importance to international cooperation in peaceful space activities, for
which the United Nations should continue to provide a focal point,
Recalling that 12 April 1961 was the date of the first human space flight, carried out by
Mr. Yuri Gagarin, a Soviet citizen born in Russia, and acknowledging that this historic event
opened the way for space exploration for the benefit of all mankind,
Welcoming the fact that the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space will celebrate at
its fifty-fourth session the fiftieth anniversary of the first session of the Committee and the fiftieth
anniversary of human space flight,

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Declares 12 April as the International Day of Human Space Flight to celebrate each year at
the international level the beginning of the space era for mankind, reaffirming the important
contribution of space science and technology in achieving sustainable development goals and
increasing the well-being of States and peoples, as well as ensuring the realization of their
aspiration to maintain outer space for peaceful purposes.
RESOLUTION 65/273
AR
/ ES6/52/73

Adopted at the 86th plenary meeting, on 18 April 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.70 and Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Croatia,
Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain,
Suriname, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania (on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), United
States of America

65/273. Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria
in developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2015
The General Assembly,
Recalling that the period 2001–2010 was proclaimed the Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa, by the General Assembly,16 and that combating
HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other diseases is included in the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
Recalling also the malaria-related goals and commitments in the outcome document of the
High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals,17
Recalling further its resolution 64/79 of 7 December 2009 and all previous resolutions
concerning the struggle against malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
Recalling resolution 60.18, adopted by the World Health Assembly on 23 May 2007, urging
a broad range of national and international actions to scale up malaria control programmes,18 and
resolution 61.18 of 24 May 2008 on monitoring of the achievement of health-related Millennium
Development Goals,19
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council relating to the
struggle against malaria and diarrhoeal diseases, in particular resolution 1998/36 of 30 July 1998,
Taking note of all declarations and decisions on health issues, in particular those related to
malaria, adopted by the Organization of African Unity and the African Union, including the Abuja
call for accelerated action towards universal access to HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
services in Africa, issued by the Heads of State and Government of the African Union at the
special summit of the African Union on HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, held in Abuja
from 2 to 4 May 2006, and taking note of the decision adopted by the Assembly of the African
Union at its fifteenth ordinary session, held in Kampala from 25 to 27 July 2010, to extend the
Abuja call to 2015 to coincide with the Millennium Development Goals,20

_______________
16

See resolution 55/284.
See resolution 65/1.
18
See World Health Organization, Sixtieth World Health Assembly, Geneva, 14–23 May 2007, Resolutions and
Decisions, Annexes (WHASS1/2006-WHA60/2007/REC/1).
19
See World Health Organization, Sixty-first World Health Assembly, Geneva, 19–24 May 2008, Resolutions and
Decisions, Annexes (WHA61/2008/REC/1).
20
See African Union, document Assembly/AU/Dec.291 (XV). Available from www.africa-union.org.
17

17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Welcoming the leadership provided by the African Leaders Malaria Alliance and the
continued commitment to help to achieve the 2015 targets, and encouraging them to continue to
provide political leadership at the highest level in the fight against malaria in Africa,
Welcoming also the Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s
Health, undertaken by a broad coalition of partners, in support of national plans and strategies, in
order to significantly reduce the number of maternal, newborn and under-five child deaths as a
matter of immediate concern by scaling up a priority package of high-impact interventions and
integrating efforts in sectors such as health, education, gender equality, water and sanitation,
poverty reduction and nutrition,
Recognizing the linkages in efforts being made to reach the targets set at the Extraordinary
Summit of Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held in Abuja on
24 and 25 April 2000, as necessary and important for the attainment of the “Roll Back Malaria”
goal21 and the targets of the Millennium Development Goals by 2010 and 2015, respectively,
and welcoming in this regard the commitment of Member States to respond to the specific needs
of Africa,
Recognizing also that malaria-related ill health and deaths throughout the world can be
substantially reduced with political commitment and commensurate resources if the public is
educated and sensitized about malaria and appropriate health services are made available,
particularly in countries where the disease is endemic,
Recognizing further that malaria control interventions have a positive impact on overall
child and maternal mortality rates and could help African countries to reach Millennium
Development Goals 4 and 5 of reducing child mortality and improving maternal health,
respectively, by 2015,
Acknowledging the progress made in parts of Africa in reversing the high burden of malaria
through political engagement and sustainable national malaria control programmes, as well as the
progress being made towards achieving by 2015 the goals concerning malaria control set by the
World Health Assembly and the Roll Back Malaria Partnership,
Recognizing that, despite the fact that increased global and national investments in malaria
control have yielded significant results in decreasing the burden of malaria in many countries, and
that some countries are moving towards elimination of malaria, many countries continue to have
unacceptably high burdens of malaria and in order to reach internationally agreed development
goals, including the health-related Millennium Development Goals, must rapidly increase malaria
prevention and control efforts, which rely heavily on medicines and insecticides whose utility is
continuously threatened by the development of resistance in humans to antimalarial agents, as
well as resistance of mosquitoes to insecticides,
Recognizing also the challenges relating to counterfeit and substandard medicines, as well as
poor malaria microscopy services,
Expressing concern about the continued morbidity, mortality and debility attributed to
malaria, and recalling that more efforts are needed if the Abuja malaria targets and the malaria and
Millennium Development Goal targets for 2015 are to be reached on time,
Emphasizing the importance of strengthening health systems to effectively sustain malaria
control and elimination,
Commending the efforts of the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria, the World Bank and other partners to fight malaria over the years,

_______________
21

18

See A/55/240/Add.1, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking note with appreciation of the Global Malaria Action Plan developed by the Roll
Back Malaria Partnership,
1. Welcomes the report prepared by the World Health Organization,22 and calls for
support for the recommendations contained therein;
2. Encourages Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system,
international institutions, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and civil society to
continue to observe World Malaria Day in order to raise public awareness of and knowledge about
the prevention, control and treatment of malaria as well as the importance of meeting the
Millennium Development Goals, and stresses the importance of engaging local communities in
this regard;
3. Encourages the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Malaria to continue
raising the issue in collaboration with other United Nations organizations already working on
those issues on the international political and development agendas and to work with national and
global leaders to help to secure the political will, the partnerships and the funds to drastically
reduce malaria deaths by 2015 through increased access to prevention, diagnosis and treatment,
especially in Africa;
4. Welcomes the increased funding for malaria interventions and for research and
development of preventive, diagnostic and control tools from the international community,
through funding from multilateral and bilateral sources and from the private sector, as well as by
making predictable financing available through appropriate and effective aid modalities and incountry health financing mechanisms aligned with national priorities, which are key to
strengthening health systems, including malaria surveillance, and promoting universal and
equitable access to high-quality malaria prevention, diagnostic and treatment services, and notes in
this regard that a high level of external assistance per person at risk for malaria is associated with a
decrease in the incidence of the disease;
5. Urges the international community, together with United Nations agencies and private
organizations and foundations, to support the implementation of the Global Malaria Action Plan,
including through support for programmes and activities at the country level in order to achieve
internationally agreed targets on malaria;
6. Calls upon the international community to continue to support the secretariat of the
Roll Back Malaria Partnership and partner organizations, including the World Health
Organization, the World Bank and the United Nations Children’s Fund, as vital complementary
sources of support for the efforts of malaria-endemic countries to combat the disease;
7. Appeals to the international community to work in a spirit of cooperation towards
effective, increased, harmonized, predictable and sustained bilateral and multilateral assistance to
combat malaria, including support for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
in order to assist States, in particular malaria-endemic countries, to implement sound national
health and sanitation plans, including malaria control strategies and integrated management of
childhood illnesses, in a sustained and equitable way that, inter alia, contributes to strengthening
health system development approaches at the district level;
8. Appeals to the malaria partners to resolve the financial supply chain and delivery
bottlenecks that are responsible for stock-outs of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets, rapid
diagnostic tests and artemisinin-based combination therapies at the national level, whenever they
occur, including through the strengthening of malaria programme management at the
country level;
9. Welcomes the contribution to the mobilization of additional and predictable resources
for development by voluntary innovative financing initiatives taken by groups of Member States,
_______________
22

See A/65/210.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and in this regard notes the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID, the International
Finance Facility for Immunization, the advance market commitments for vaccines, the Global
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization and phase one of the Affordable Medicines Facility for
Malaria, and takes note of the work of the Leading Group on Innovative Financing
for Development and its special task force on innovative financing for health which was
set up recently;
10. Urges malaria-endemic countries to work towards financial sustainability, to increase,
to the extent possible, domestic resource allocation to malaria control and to create favourable
conditions for working with the private sector in order to improve access to good-quality
malaria services;
11. Urges Member States to assess and respond to the needs for integrated human
resources at all levels of the health system, in order to achieve the targets of the Abuja Declaration
on Roll Back Malaria in Africa21 and the internationally agreed development goals, including the
Millennium Development Goals, to take actions, as appropriate, to effectively govern the
recruitment, training and retention of skilled health personnel, and to give particular focus to the
availability of skilled personnel at all levels to meet technical and operational needs as increased
funding for malaria control programmes becomes available;
12. Calls upon the international community, inter alia, by helping to meet the financial
needs of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and through country-led
initiatives with adequate international support, to intensify access to affordable, safe and effective
antimalarial combination treatments, intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancies, adequate
diagnostic facilities, long-lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets, including, where appropriate,
through the free distribution of such nets and, where appropriate, to insecticides for indoor residual
spraying for malaria control, taking into account relevant international rules, including the
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants23 standards and guidelines;
13. Requests relevant international organizations, in particular the World Health
Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund, to assist efforts of national Governments to
provide universal access to malaria control interventions to address all at-risk populations, in
particular young children and pregnant women, in malaria-endemic countries, particularly in
Africa, as rapidly as possible, with due regard to ensuring proper use of those interventions,
including long-lasting insecticide nets, and sustainability through full community participation and
implementation through the health system;
14. Calls upon Member States, in particular malaria-endemic countries, with the support
of the international community, to establish and/or strengthen national policies and operational
plans, with a view to scaling up efforts to achieve internationally agreed malaria targets for 2015,
in accordance with the technical recommendations of the World Health Organization;
15. Commends those African countries that have implemented the recommendations of
the Abuja Summit in 2000 to reduce or waive taxes and tariffs for nets and other products needed
for malaria control,21 and encourages other countries to do the same;
16. Calls upon United Nations agencies and their partners to continue to provide the
technical support necessary to build and enhance the capacity of Member States to implement the
Global Malaria Action Plan and meet the internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals;
17. Expresses its concern about the increase in resistant strains of malaria in several
regions of the world, and calls upon Member States, with support from the World Health
Organization and other partners, to implement the Organization’s Global Plan for Artemisinin
Resistance Containment to strengthen and implement surveillance systems for drug and
_______________
23

20

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2256, No. 40214.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

insecticide resistance, and upon the World Health Organization to coordinate a global network for
the monitoring of drug and insecticide resistance and ensure that drug and insecticide testing is
fully operational in order to enhance the use of current insecticide- and artemisinin-based
combination therapies, and stresses that the data gathered should be utilized for further research
and development of safe and effective therapies;
18. Urges all Member States to prohibit the marketing and use of oral artemisinin-based
monotherapies and to replace them with oral artemisinin-based combination therapies, as
recommended by the World Health Organization, and to develop the necessary financial,
legislative and regulatory mechanisms in order to introduce artemisinin combination therapies at
affordable prices in both public and private facilities;
19. Recognizes the importance of the development of safe and cost-effective vaccines and
new medicines to prevent and treat malaria and the need for further and accelerated research,
including into safe, effective and high-quality therapies, using rigorous standards, including by
providing support to the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases24 and
through effective global partnerships, such as the various malaria vaccine initiatives and the
Medicines for Malaria Venture, where necessary stimulated by new incentives to secure their
development and through effective and timely support towards pre-qualification of new
antimalarials and their combinations;
20. Calls upon the international community, including through existing partnerships, to
increase investment in and efforts towards research to optimize current tools, develop and validate
new, safe and affordable malaria-related medicines, products and technologies, such as vaccines,
rapid diagnostic tests, insecticides and delivery modes, to prevent and treat malaria, especially for
at-risk children and pregnant women, and testing opportunities for integration in order to enhance
effectiveness and delay the onset of resistance;
21. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries to assure favourable conditions for research
institutions, including allocation of adequate resources and development of national policies and
legal frameworks, where appropriate, with a view to, inter alia, informing policy formulation and
strategic interventions on malaria;
22. Reaffirms the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World
Trade Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS
Agreement),25 the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health,26 the decision of
the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 30 August 2003 on the implementation of
paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health,27 and, when
formal acceptance procedures are completed, the amendment to article 31 of the Agreement,28
which provide flexibilities for the protection of public health, and in particular to promote access
to medicines for all and to encourage the provision of assistance to developing countries in this
regard, and calls for broad and timely acceptance of the amendment to article 31 of the
Agreement, as proposed by the General Council of the World Trade Organization in its decision of
6 December 2005;28
23. Calls upon the international community to support ways to expand access to
affordable and safe products and treatments, such as vector control measures, including indoor
residual spraying, long-lasting insecticide-treated nets, including through the free distribution of
such nets, adequate diagnostic facilities, intermittent preventive treatment in pregnancies and
_______________
24

A joint programme of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the
World Bank and the World Health Organization.
25
See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, done at
Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994–7).
26
World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
27
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/540 and Corr.1. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
28
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/641. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

artemisinin-based combination therapy for populations at risk of falciparum malaria infection in
endemic countries, particularly in Africa, including through additional funds and innovative
mechanisms, inter alia, for the financing and scaling up of artemisinin production and
procurement, as appropriate, to meet the increased need;
24. Welcomes the increased level of public-private partnerships for malaria control and
prevention, including the financial and in-kind contributions of private sector partners and
companies operating in Africa, as well as the increased engagement of non-governmental
service providers;
25. Encourages the producers of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets to accelerate
technology transfer to developing countries, and invites the World Bank and regional development
funds to consider supporting malaria-endemic countries in establishing factories to scale up
production of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets;
26. Calls upon Member States and the international community, including malariaendemic countries, in accordance with existing guidelines and recommendations of the World
Health Organization and the requirements of the Stockholm Convention related to the use of DDT,
to become fully knowledgeable about the Organization’s technical policies and strategies and the
provisions in the Stockholm Convention, including for indoor residual spraying, long-lasting
insecticide-treated nets and case management, intermittent preventive treatment for pregnant
women and monitoring of in vivo resistance studies to artemisinin-based combination therapy
treatment, as well as to increase capacity for the safe, effective and judicious use of indoor residual
spraying and other forms of vector control, including quality control measures, in accordance with
international rules, standards and guidelines;
27. Requests the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and
donor agencies to provide support to those countries which choose to use DDT for indoor residual
spraying so as to ensure that it is implemented in accordance with international rules, standards
and guidelines, and to provide all possible support to malaria-endemic countries to manage the
intervention effectively and prevent the contamination, in particular, of agricultural products with
DDT and other insecticides used for indoor residual spraying;
28. Encourages the World Health Organization and its member States, with the support of
the parties to the Stockholm Convention, to continue to explore possible alternatives to DDT as a
vector control agent;
29. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries to encourage regional and intersectoral
collaboration, both public and private, at all levels, especially in education, health, agriculture,
economic development and the environment, to advance malaria control objectives;
30. Calls upon the international community to support the strengthening of health systems,
national pharmaceutical policies and national drug regulatory authorities, to monitor and fight
against the trade in counterfeit and substandard antimalarial medicines and prevent their
distribution and use, and to support coordinated efforts, inter alia, by providing technical
assistance to improve surveillance, monitoring and evaluation systems and their alignment with
national plans and systems so as to better track and report changes in coverage, the need for
scaling up recommended interventions and the subsequent reductions in the burden of malaria;
31. Urges Member States, the international community and all relevant actors, including
the private sector, to promote the coordinated implementation and enhance the quality of malariarelated activities, including via the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, in accordance with national
policies and operational plans that are consistent with the technical recommendations of the World
Health Organization and recent efforts and initiatives, including, where appropriate, the Paris

22

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action, adopted during the Third
High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, held in Accra from 2 to 4 September 2008;29
32. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the Director-General of the
World Health Organization and in consultation with Member States, to report to the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth session on implementation of the present resolution, and specifically on
progress towards achieving the 2015 targets of the Abuja Declaration and those of the Global
Malaria Action Plan and Millennium Development Goal 6, including identification of best
practices and successes, as well as specific challenges limiting the achievement of the targets,
and, taking these into account, to provide recommendations to ensure that the targets are reached
by 2015.
RESOLUTION 65/274
AR
/ ES6/52/74

Adopted at the 86th plenary meeting, on 18 April 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.68 and Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, New Zealand, Niger (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

65/274. Cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations,30
Recalling the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as its
resolutions 55/218 of 21 December 2000, 56/48 of 7 December 2001, 57/48 of 21 November 2002,
59/213 of 20 December 2004, 61/296 of 17 September 2007 and 63/310 of 14 September 2009,
Recalling also the principles enshrined in the Constitutive Act of the African Union adopted
in 2000 in Lomé,31
Recalling further the decisions and declarations adopted by the Assembly of the African
Union at all its ordinary and extraordinary sessions,
Welcoming the adoption of the framework for the ten-year capacity-building programme for
the African Union set out in the declaration on enhancing United Nations-African Union
cooperation, signed in Addis Ababa on 16 November 2006 by the Secretary-General and the Chair
of the African Union Commission,32 which highlights the key areas for cooperation between the
African Union and the United Nations,
Acknowledging the decision of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union at its
sixty-eighth meeting, held on 14 December 2006, on the establishment of a coordination and
consultation mechanism between the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the
United Nations Security Council, welcoming the June 2007 agreement to hold joint meetings at
least once a year,33 noting that such meetings offer an important platform for dialogue, in this
regard welcoming the fourth consultative meeting between members of the United Nations
_______________
29

A/63/539, annex.
A/65/382-S/2010/490.
31
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2158, No. 37733.
32
A/61/630, annex.
33
See S/2007/386, annex.
30

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, held at United Nations
Headquarters on 9 July 2010, and welcoming also the first joint consultative meeting between the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the Peacebuilding Commission, held on
8 July 2010,
Recalling the adoption, at the fourth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union,
of the African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence Pact,34 as an instrument to reinforce
cooperation among States members of the African Union in the areas of defence and security and,
in particular, to contribute to the work of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
its cooperation with the United Nations,
Welcoming, while taking into account the role of the General Assembly, the statements by
the President of the Security Council of 19 November 2004 on the institutional relationship with
the African Union,35 of 28 March 2007 on the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union, in the maintenance of international peace
and security36 and of 18 March 2009 on peace and security in Africa,37 as well as Council
resolution 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 and all subsequent related resolutions,
Welcoming also the efforts to enhance cooperation between the peace and security structure
of the United Nations and the peace and security architecture of the African Union in the realms of
conflict prevention and resolution, early warning, mediation, crisis management, peacekeeping,
security sector reform and post-conflict peacebuilding in Africa, including efforts to implement the
African Union Framework for Post-conflict Reconstruction and Development,
Acknowledging the significant contribution made by the African Union towards preventing
and combating terrorism, and noting the centrality of the international partnership and cooperation
among the African Union, the relevant United Nations organs and the wider international
community in the global fight against terrorism,
Recognizing the need to enhance the strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union, as a basis for a more effective partnership embodying the principles of mutual
respect when addressing issues of mutual concern,
Welcoming the efforts of the African Union and the United Nations, together with other
international partners, to provide effective support for peacekeeping missions undertaken in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations by regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, with reference to start-up funding, equipment, logistics and longterm capacity-building, as reflected in Security Council resolution 1809 (2008),
Noting that, on the occasion of the special session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union on the consideration and resolution of conflicts in Africa, held
in Tripoli on 31 August 2009, the Heads of State and Government of the African Union adopted
the Tripoli Declaration on the Elimination of Conflicts in Africa and the Promotion of Sustainable
Peace and the Plan of Action38 and declared 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security on the
Continent, under the general slogan “Make peace happen”, and commending the efforts being
made by the African Union and various partners in this regard,
Bearing in mind the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development,39 recalled in various relevant resolutions adopted since 2002,40

_______________
34

Available from www.africa-union.org.
S/PRST/2004/44; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2004–31 July 2005.
36
S/PRST/2007/7; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2006–31 July 2007.
37
S/PRST/2009/3; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2008–31 July 2009.
38
See S/2009/461, annexes I and II.
39
See resolution 57/2.
40
Resolutions 57/7, 58/233, 59/254, 60/222 and 61/229.
35

24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the pivotal need to bring Africa into the mainstream of the global economy and
to strengthen the global partnership to address the special development needs of Africa, in
particular the eradication of poverty, and in this regard welcoming the political declaration adopted
on 22 September 2008, on the occasion of the high-level meeting on the theme “Africa’s
development needs: state of implementation of various commitments, challenges and the way
forward”,41 and reaffirming the importance of its implementation and the responsibilities of the
States members of the African Union and of the United Nations in this regard, as well as the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,42
Stressing the need to extend the scope of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources in Africa,
Emphasizing the importance of the effective, coordinated and integrated implementation of
the United Nations Millennium Declaration,43 the Doha Development Agenda,44 the Monterrey
Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for Development,45 the Doha Declaration
on Financing for Development: outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on
Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus,46 the
Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation”)47 and the 2005 World Summit Outcome,48
Noting the adoption of the Revised African Maritime Transport Charter34 by the Assembly
of the African Union at its fifteenth ordinary session, held in Kampala from 25 to 27 July 2010, as
an instrument that can help to enhance international trade and development,
Emphasizing the importance of the 1995 World Summit for Social Development, at which
the Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development was adopted,49 the 1995 Fourth World
Conference on Women and the outcomes of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”,50 and stressing the importance for all Member States of the full and effective
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action51 and the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population and Development,52
Recalling the African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption34 and the
Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in
Africa,34 both adopted in Maputo on 11 July 2003,
Recommitting to improving the effectiveness of development assistance, including the
fundamental principles of ownership, alignment, harmonization, managing for results and mutual
accountability, and calling for a continuing dialogue to improve the effectiveness of aid, including
_______________
41

See resolution 63/1.
A/57/304, annex.
43
See resolution 55/2.
44
See A/C.2/56/7, annex.
45
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
46
Resolution 63/239, annex.
47
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September
2002 (United Nations publication, Sales. No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 2, annex.
48
See resolution 60/1.
49
Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I; see also resolution 63/152.
50
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
51
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.
52
Report of the International Conference on Population and Development, Cairo, 5–13 September 1994 (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
42

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the full implementation of the Accra Agenda for Action53 by countries and organizations that
commit to it,
Acknowledging the contribution of the United Nations Office to the African Union in Addis
Ababa in strengthening coordination and cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union in the areas of peace and security, and recognizing the efforts made to consolidate the
Office so as to enhance its performance in view of the expanding scope for cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union in those areas,
Convinced that strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union will contribute to the advancement of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
the principles of the Constitutive Act of the African Union and the development of Africa,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General,30 calls for the
implementation of the declaration on enhancing United Nations-African Union cooperation and
the framework for the ten-year capacity-building programme for the African Union,32 and in this
regard takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the review of the ten-year capacitybuilding programme for the African Union,54 and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take appropriate measures to strengthen the capacity of the Secretariat and to implement its
mandate with respect to meeting the special needs of Africa in accordance with the established
United Nations procedures;
2. Recalls that the Security Council has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and requests the United Nations system to intensify its assistance
to the African Union, as appropriate, in strengthening the African peace and security architecture,
including the institutional and operational capacity of its Peace and Security Council, and in
coordinating with other international partners when needed;
3. Emphasizes the need to pursue the ongoing measures to improve the effectiveness and
efficiency of cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, and in this regard
welcomes the establishment of the United Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa,
integrating the United Nations Liaison Office to the African Union, and also welcomes the
appointment of an Assistant Secretary-General to head the Office with a view to intensifying,
improving and better coordinating United Nations engagement with the African Union in existing
and emerging areas of cooperation in peace and security and political and humanitarian affairs,
and recommends speedy implementation to ensure the adequate handling of the responsibilities
related to coordinating the United Nations system in those areas, including implementing relevant
aspects of the ten-year capacity-building programme, in order to enhance the strategic and
operational partnership between the United Nations and the African Union and its subregions;
4. Welcomes the establishment of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
and encourages the Regional Office and the United Nations Office for West Africa to deepen their
relationships with the Economic Community of Central African States and the Economic
Community of West African States, respectively, in order to further strengthen United NationsAfrican Union cooperation;
5. Recognizes the need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing for regional organizations, including the African Union, when they undertake
peacekeeping operations under a United Nations mandate, and notes the determination of the
Security Council to continue working on this issue in accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations;
6. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on support to African Union
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United Nations55 and the related statement by the
_______________
53

A/63/539, annex.
A/65/716-S/2011/54.
55
A/65/510-S/2010/514.
54

26

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

President of the Security Council of 22 October 201056 as important steps towards the further
strengthening of the partnership between the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union;
7. Notes with appreciation the ongoing efforts of the African Union to address the issue
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict and in the context of peacekeeping operations, and
encourages the African Union to continue those efforts;
8. Welcomes the launching, in New York on 25 September 2010, of the United NationsAfrican Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security as an important framework for furthering
the strategic partnership on peace and security between the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, and calls for the full implementation of the agreed terms of reference of
the Task Force;
9. Stresses the urgent need for the United Nations and the African Union to develop close
cooperation and concrete programmes aimed at addressing the problems posed by landmines,
illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons and transnational organized crime, in particular
trafficking in persons and drugs, within the framework of the relevant declarations and resolutions
adopted by the two organizations;
10. Calls upon the United Nations system, the African Union and the international
community to intensify their cooperation in the global fight against terrorism through the
implementation of the relevant international and regional treaties and protocols and, in particular,
the African Plan of Action adopted in Algiers on 14 September 2002, as well as their support for
the operation of the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism, inaugurated in Algiers
in October 2004;
11. Calls upon the United Nations system to intensify its efforts, in collaboration with
the African Union, in combating the illegal exploitation of natural resources, in particular in
conflict areas, in accordance with relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and
the African Union;
12. Also calls upon the United Nations system to continue its support for the African
Union and its member States in their efforts to implement the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and requests the Secretary-General and the
international community to fulfil the commitments that they undertook during the high-level event
on the Millennium Development Goals, held in New York on 25 September 2008, and the Highlevel Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in
New York from 20 to 22 September 2010;
13. Urges the organizations of the United Nations system to coordinate closely with the
African Union Commission and its structures relating to the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development,42 in particular through the Regional Coordination Mechanism, in order to enhance
overall coordination, monitoring and evaluation of all development programmes and projects of
all international development stakeholders;
14. Stresses the need for closer cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
system and the African Union, in accordance with the Cooperation Agreement57 and other
relevant memorandums of understanding between the two organizations, in particular in the
implementation of the commitments contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration43
and the 2005 World Summit Outcome48 and as regards achieving the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, at the national, subregional
and regional levels;

_______________
56
57

S/PRST/2010/21; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2010–31 July 2011.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1580, No. 1044.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

15. Urges the United Nations system to increase its support for Africa in the
implementation of the declaration of the extraordinary summit meeting of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity on HIV/AIDS, malaria,
tuberculosis and other related infectious diseases, held in Abuja in April 2001,58 and to extend that
support until 2015 to coincide with the date envisaged for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals, and in the implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS,59 so as to eradicate or control the spread of those diseases, inter alia, through sound
capacity-building in human resources;
16. Invites the United Nations system to enhance its support for African countries in their
efforts to implement the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation47 and to support efforts aimed at
strengthening cooperation among the African Union Commission, the African Development Bank
and the Economic Commission for Africa to address the development challenges of Africa,
including the efforts for the eradication of mother-to-child transmission of HIV/AIDS, as decided
by the Assembly of the African Union at its fifteenth ordinary session, held in Kampala from 25 to
27 July 2010;
17. Notes the establishment on 11 October 2010 of a joint secretariat for the African Union
Commission, the African Development Bank and the Economic Commission for Africa, to be
based at the headquarters of the Economic Commission in Addis Ababa, to enhance coherence,
cooperation and information-sharing, as well as to build stronger links among the departments and
divisions of the three institutions in support of the development agenda of Africa;
18. Encourages the United Nations to take special measures, as appropriate, to address the
challenges of poverty eradication through the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
noting the importance of addressing, inter alia, debt cancellation, enhanced official development
assistance, increases in flows of foreign direct investment and voluntary transfer of technology, the
World Food Programme, the agriculture partnership to combat hunger, universal primary
education initiatives, gender equality programmes, improved maternal health programmes and
HIV/AIDS education;
19. Encourages the deepening of collaboration between the United Nations and the
African Union, recalling the African Union Framework for Post-conflict Reconstruction and
Development and the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission to enhance international support
for African countries on the agenda of the Commission, and reiterates the need for enhanced
coordination and consultations between the Commission and the African Union on assistance for
countries emerging from conflict;
20. Invites the Secretary-General to request all relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes to intensify their efforts to support cooperation with the African Union, including
through the implementation of the protocols to the Constitutive Act of the African Union31 and the
Treaty establishing the African Economic Community,60 and, in cooperation with other
international partners, to assist in harmonizing the programmes of the African Union with those of
the African regional economic communities with a view to enhancing regional economic
cooperation and integration;
21. Encourages the United Nations system to effectively support the efforts of the African
Union by urging the international community to strive for the successful and timely completion of
the Doha round of trade negotiations, including negotiations aimed at substantial improvements
in areas such as trade-related measures, including market access, to promote sustainable growth
in Africa;

_______________
58

Organization of African Unity, document OAU/SPS/ABUJA/3.
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
60
A/46/651, annex.
59

28

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

22. Calls upon the United Nations system to accelerate the implementation of the Plan of
Action contained in the document entitled “A world fit for children”, adopted on 10 May 2002 at
the twenty-seventh special session of the General Assembly on children,61 and to provide
assistance, as appropriate, to the African Union and its member States in this regard, welcomes the
ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of the rights of children, and in this
regard recalls the adoption of the Call for accelerated action on the implementation of the Plan of
Action towards Africa Fit for Children (2008–2012);62
23. Calls upon the United Nations system and the African Union to develop a coherent
and effective strategy, including through joint programmes and activities, for the promotion and
protection of human rights in Africa, within the framework of the implementation of regional and
international treaties, resolutions and plans of action adopted by the two organizations;
24. Requests the United Nations system to cooperate with the African Union and its
member States in the implementation of appropriate policies for the promotion of the culture of
democracy, including the effective application of the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance,34 as well as the promotion of good governance, respect for human rights and the
rule of law, and the strengthening of democratic institutions, and in this regard notes that the
sixteenth ordinary session of the Assembly of the African Union, held on 30 and 31 January 2011,
had as its theme “Towards greater unity and integration through shared values”;
25. Urges the United Nations system to continue to implement General Assembly
resolutions 58/149 of 22 December 2003 and 63/149 of 18 December 2008 on assistance to
refugees, returnees and displaced persons in Africa and to effectively support African countries in
their efforts to incorporate the problems of refugees into national and regional development plans,
and in this regard recalls the Plan of Action for the implementation of the outcome of the 2009
Special Summit of Heads of State and Government of the African Union on Refugees, Returnees
and Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, and the adoption of the African Union Convention
for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, adopted on
23 October 2009;34
26. Welcomes and supports the ongoing efforts of the African Union to support gender
equality, the empowerment of women and social development, and recalls in this regard the
declaration of the African Women’s Decade by the Assembly of the African Union in February
2009,63 and the African Union Gender Policy, the Social Policy Framework for Africa and the
Windhoek Declaration on Social Development, adopted by the Executive Council of the African
Union in January 2009;
27. Welcomes the creation of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the appointment of an Under-Secretary-General for
UN-Women;
28. Encourages the United Nations to work with the African Union and its partners to
ensure more effective implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions and statements
by the President of the Council relating to women and peace and security, including resolutions
1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of 30 September
2009, 1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009 and 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010;
29. Recalls its resolution 63/250 of 24 December 2008 on human resources management,
and urges the Secretary-General to encourage the United Nations system to work, within existing
rules and regulations, towards ensuring the effective and equitable representation of African men
and women at senior and policy levels at the respective headquarters of its organizations and in
their regional fields of operation;
_______________
61

Resolution S-27/2, annex.
A/62/653, annex.
63
See A/63/848, annex II, decision Assembly/AU/Dec.229 (XII).
62

29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

30. Encourages the United Nations and the African Union to pursue joint initiatives for
partnerships in Africa through, inter alia, the United Nations Office to the African Union, the
Office of the Special Adviser on Africa and the United Nations Office for Partnerships;
31. Takes note of the comprehensive report on “Africa’s development needs: state of
implementation of various commitments, challenges and the way forward”,64 including
recommendations, submitted by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly pursuant to
paragraph 39 of its resolution 63/1 of 22 September 2008, and in this regard looks forward to the
formulation, by the end of the sixty-seventh session of the Assembly, of a mechanism to review
the full and timely implementation of all commitments related to the development of Africa,
building on existing mechanisms, to ensure that Member States remain seized of the issue of
addressing the special development needs of Africa;
32. Calls upon the Secretary-General and the Chair of the African Union Commission,
working in collaboration, to review every two years the progress made in the cooperation between
the two organizations, and requests the Secretary-General to include the results of the review in his
next report;
33. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 65/275
AR
/ ES6/52/75

Adopted at the 88th plenary meeting, on 3 May 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.72 and Add.1, sponsored by: Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Czech Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, Georgia, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Italy,
Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Luxembourg, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

65/275. International Day of Friendship
The General Assembly,
Recalling the goals and objectives of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace,65 and the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children
of the World (2001–2010), and all its relevant resolutions,
Recognizing the relevance and importance of friendship as a noble and valuable sentiment in
the lives of human beings around the world,
Bearing in mind that friendship between peoples, countries, cultures and individuals can
inspire peace efforts and presents an opportunity to build bridges between communities,
honouring cultural diversity,
Affirming that friendship can contribute to the efforts of the international community, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, towards the promotion of dialogue among
civilizations, solidarity, mutual understanding and reconciliation,
Convinced of the importance of involving youth and future leaders in community activities
aimed at the inclusion of and respect between different cultures, while promoting international

_______________
64
65

30

A/64/208.
See resolutions 53/243 A and B.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

understanding, respect for diversity and a culture of peace, in accordance with the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace,
Noting that friendship-related activities, events and initiatives are observed each year in
many countries,
1.

Decides to designate 30 July as the International Day of Friendship;

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other
international and regional organizations, as well as civil society, including non-governmental
organizations and individuals, to observe the International Day of Friendship in an appropriate
manner, in accordance with the culture and other appropriate circumstances or customs of their
local, national and regional communities, including through education and public awarenessraising activities;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of all
Member States and organizations of the United Nations system.
RESOLUTION 65/276
AR
/ ES6/52/76

Adopted at the 88th plenary meeting, on 3 May 2011, by a recorded vote of 180 to none, with
2 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/65/L.64/Rev.1, as orally revised, sponsored by: Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against: None
Abstaining: Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe

65/276. Participation of the European Union in the work of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the role and authority of the General Assembly as a principal organ of the
United Nations and the importance of its effectiveness and efficiency in fulfilling its functions
under the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing that the current interdependent international environment requires the
strengthening of the multilateral system in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and the principles of international law,
31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing also the importance of cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, as well as the benefits to the United Nations of such cooperation,
Acknowledging that it is for each regional organization to define the modalities of its
external representation,
Recalling its resolution 3208 (XXIX) of 11 October 1974, by which it granted observer
status to the European Economic Community,
Recalling also that, consistent with the relevant legal provisions, the European Union has
replaced the European Community and is a party to many instruments concluded under the
auspices of the United Nations and an observer or participant in the work of several specialized
agencies and bodies of the United Nations,
Noting that the States members of the European Union have entrusted the external
representation of the European Union, previously performed by the representatives of the member
State holding the rotating Presidency of the Council of the European Union, to the following
institutional representatives: the President of the European Council, the High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, the European Commission, and European Union
delegations, which have assumed the role of acting on behalf of the European Union in the
exercise of the competences conferred by its member States,
Mindful of the modalities for the participation of observer States and entities, and other
observers in the work of the United Nations, as set out in the respective resolutions,
1. Reaffirms that the General Assembly is an intergovernmental body whose membership
is limited to States that are Members of the United Nations;
2. Decides to adopt the modalities set out in the annex to the present resolution for the
participation of the representatives of the European Union, in its capacity as observer, in the
sessions and work of the General Assembly and its committees and working groups, in
international meetings and conferences convened under the auspices of the Assembly and in
United Nations conferences;
3. Recognizes that, following a request on behalf of a regional organization that has
observer status in the General Assembly and whose member States have agreed arrangements that
allow that organization’s representatives to speak on behalf of the organization and its member
States, the Assembly may adopt modalities for the participation of that regional organization’s
representatives, such as those set out in the annex to the present resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly during its sixty-fifth
session on the implementation of the modalities set out in the annex to the present resolution.
Annex
Participation of the European Union in the work of the United Nations
1. In accordance with the present resolution, the representatives of the European Union, in order
to present positions of the European Union and its member States as agreed by them, shall be:
(a) Allowed to be inscribed on the list of speakers among representatives of major groups,
in order to make interventions;
(b) Invited to participate in the general debate of the General Assembly, in accordance
with the order of precedence as established in the practice for participating observers and the level
of participation;
(c) Permitted to have its communications relating to the sessions and work of the General
Assembly and to the sessions and work of all international meetings and conferences convened
under the auspices of the Assembly and of United Nations conferences, circulated directly, and
without intermediary, as documents of the Assembly, meeting or conference;

32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(d) Also permitted to present proposals and amendments orally as agreed by the States
members of the European Union; such proposals and amendments shall be put to a vote only at
the request of a Member State;
(e) Allowed to exercise the right of reply regarding positions of the European Union as
decided by the presiding officer; such right of reply shall be restricted to one intervention per item.
2.

The representatives of the European Union shall be ensured seating among the observers.

3. The representatives of the European Union shall not have the right to vote, to co-sponsor
draft resolutions or decisions, or to put forward candidates.
4. A precursory explanation or recall of the present resolution shall be made only once by the
President of the General Assembly at the start of each session.
RESOLUTION 65/277
AR
/ ES6/52/77

Adopted at the 95th plenary meeting, on 10 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.77, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

65/277. Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate
HIV and AIDS
The General Assembly
Adopts the political declaration on HIV and AIDS annexed to the present resolution.
Annex
Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to Eliminate
HIV and AIDS
1. We, Heads of State and Government and representatives of States and Governments
assembled at the United Nations from 8 to 10 June 2011 to review progress achieved in realizing
the 2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS66 and the 2006 Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS,67 with a view to guiding and intensifying the global response to HIV and AIDS by
promoting continued political commitment and engagement of leaders in a comprehensive
response at the community, local, national, regional and international levels to halt and reverse the
HIV epidemic and mitigate its impact;
2. Reaffirm the sovereign rights of Member States, as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, and the need for all countries to implement the commitments and pledges in the present
Declaration consistent with national laws, national development priorities and international
human rights;
3. Reaffirm the 2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the 2006 Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS and the urgent need to scale up significantly our efforts towards the
goal of universal access to comprehensive prevention programmes, treatment, care and support;
4. Recognize that, although HIV and AIDS are affecting every region of the world, each
country’s epidemic is distinctive in terms of drivers, vulnerabilities, aggravating factors and the
populations that are affected, and therefore the responses from both the international community
and the countries themselves must be uniquely tailored to each particular situation, taking into
account the epidemiological and social context of each country concerned;

_______________
66
67

Resolution S-26/2, annex.
Resolution 60/262, annex.

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Acknowledge the significance of this high-level meeting, which marks three decades since
the first report of AIDS, ten years since the adoption of the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and its time-bound measurable goals and targets, and five years since the adoption of
the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS and its commitment to urgently scale up responses
towards achieving the goal of universal access to comprehensive prevention programmes,
treatment, care and support by 2010;
6. Reaffirm our commitment to the achievement of all the Millennium Development Goals, in
particular Goal 6, and, recognizing the importance of rapidly scaling up efforts to integrate HIV
and AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support with efforts to achieve those Goals, in this
regard welcome the outcome document of the 2010 High-level Plenary Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals”;68
7. Recognize that HIV and AIDS constitute a global emergency, pose one of the most
formidable challenges to the development, progress and stability of our respective societies and
the world at large and require an exceptional and comprehensive global response that takes into
account the fact that the spread of HIV is often a consequence and a cause of poverty;
8. Note with deep concern that, despite substantial progress over the three decades since AIDS
was first reported, the HIV epidemic remains an unprecedented human catastrophe inflicting
immense suffering on countries, communities and families throughout the world, that more than
30 million people have died from AIDS, with another estimated 33 million people living with
HIV, that more than 16 million children have been orphaned because of AIDS, that over 7,000
new HIV infections occur every day, mostly among people in low- and middle-income countries,
and that less than half of the people living with HIV are believed to be aware of their infection;
9. Reiterate with profound concern that Africa, in particular sub-Saharan Africa, remains the
worst-affected region and that urgent and exceptional action is required at all levels to curb the
devastating effects of this epidemic, and recognize the renewed commitment of African
Governments and regional institutions to scale up their own HIV and AIDS responses;
10. Express deep concern that HIV and AIDS affect every region of the world and that the
Caribbean continues to have the highest prevalence outside sub-Saharan Africa, while the number
of new HIV infections is increasing in Eastern Europe, Central Asia, North Africa, the Middle
East and parts of Asia and the Pacific;
11. Welcome the leadership and commitment shown in every aspect of the HIV and AIDS
response by Governments, people living with HIV, political and community leaders, parliaments,
regional and subregional organizations, communities, families, faith-based organizations,
scientists, health professionals, donors, the philanthropic community, the workforce, the business
sector, civil society and the media;
12. Welcome the exceptional efforts at the national, regional and international levels to
implement the 2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the 2006 Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS and the important progress being made, including a more than
25 per cent reduction in the rate of new HIV infections in over 30 countries, the significant
reduction in mother-to-child transmission of HIV and the unprecedented expansion of access to
HIV antiretroviral treatment to over 6 million people, resulting in the reduction of AIDS-related
deaths by more than 20 per cent in the past five years;
13. Recognize that the worldwide commitment to the global HIV epidemic has been
unprecedented since the 2001 Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the 2006 Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS, represented by an over eight-fold increase in funding from 1.8 billion

_______________
68

34

See resolution 65/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

United States dollars in 2001 to 16 billion dollars in 2010, the largest amount dedicated to
combating a single disease in history;
14. Express deep concern that funding devoted to HIV and AIDS responses is still not
commensurate with the magnitude of the epidemic either nationally or internationally and that the
global financial and economic crisis continues to have a negative impact on the HIV and AIDS
response at all levels, including the fact that, for the first time, international assistance has not
increased from the levels in 2008 and 2009, and in this regard welcome the increased resources
that are being made available as a result of the establishment by many developed countries of
timetables to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for official development
assistance by 2015, stressing also the importance of complementary innovative sources of
financing, in addition to traditional funding, including official development assistance, to support
national strategies, financing plans and multilateral efforts aimed at combating HIV and AIDS;
15. Stress the importance of international cooperation, including the role of North-South, SouthSouth and triangular cooperation, in the global response to HIV and AIDS, bearing in mind that
South-South cooperation is not a substitute for, but rather a complement to, North-South
cooperation, and recognize the shared but differentiated responsibilities and respective capacities
of Governments and donor countries, as well as civil society, including the private sector, while
noting that national ownership and leadership are absolutely indispensable in this regard;
16. Commend the secretariat and the Co-sponsors of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS for their leadership role on HIV and AIDS policy and coordination and for the support
they provide to countries through the Joint Programme;
17. Commend the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria for the vital role it is
playing in mobilizing and providing funding for national and regional HIV and AIDS responses
and in improving the predictability of financing over the long term, and welcome the commitment
of over 30 billion dollars in funding from donors to date, including the significant pledges made
by donors at the Global Fund replenishment conference held on 4 and 5 October 2010; note with
concern that, while these pledges represent an increase in financing, they fall short of the amounts
targeted by the Global Fund to further accelerate progress towards universal access, and recognize
that to reach that goal it is imperative that the work of the Global Fund be supported and also that
it be adequately funded;
18. Commend the work of the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID, based
on innovative financing and focusing on accessibility, quality and price reductions of
antiretroviral drugs;
19. Welcome the Secretary General’s Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health,
undertaken by a broad coalition of partners in support of national plans and strategies, to
significantly reduce the number of maternal, newborn and under-five child deaths, as a matter of
immediate concern, including by scaling up a priority package of high-impact interventions and
integrating efforts in sectors such as health, education, gender equality, water and sanitation,
poverty reduction and nutrition;
20. Recognize that agrarian economies are heavily affected by HIV and AIDS, which debilitate
their communities and families with negative consequences for poverty eradication, that people
die prematurely from AIDS because, inter alia, poor nutrition exacerbates the impact of HIV on
the immune system and compromises its ability to respond to opportunistic infections and
diseases, and that HIV treatment, including antiretroviral treatment, should be complemented with
adequate food and nutrition;
21. Remain deeply concerned that, globally, women and girls are still the most affected by the
epidemic and that they bear a disproportionate share of the caregiving burden, and that the ability
of women and girls to protect themselves from HIV continues to be compromised by
physiological factors, gender inequalities, including unequal legal, economic and social status,
insufficient access to health care and services, including for sexual and reproductive health, and all
forms of discrimination and violence, including sexual violence and exploitation;
35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

22. Welcome the establishment of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) as a new stakeholder that can play an important role in
global efforts to combat HIV by promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women,
which are fundamental for reducing the vulnerability of women to HIV, and the appointment of
the first Executive Director of UN-Women;
23. Welcome the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,69 and
recognize the need to take into account the rights of persons with disabilities as set forth in that
Convention, in particular with regard to health, education, accessibility and information, in the
formulation of our global response to HIV and AIDS;
24. Note with appreciation the efforts of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in supporting national
parliaments to ensure an enabling legal environment supportive of effective national responses to
HIV and AIDS;
25. Express grave concern that young people between the ages of 15 and 24 years account for
more than one third of all new HIV infections, with some 3,000 young people becoming infected
with HIV each day, and note that most young people still have limited access to good quality
education, decent employment and recreational facilities, as well as limited access to sexual and
reproductive health programmes that provide the information, skills, services and commodities
they need to protect themselves, that only 34 per cent of young people possess accurate
knowledge of HIV, and that laws and policies in some instances exclude young people from
accessing sexual health-care and HIV-related services, such as voluntary and confidential HIV
testing, counselling and age-appropriate sex and HIV-prevention education, while also
recognizing the importance of reducing risk-taking behaviour and encouraging responsible sexual
behaviour, including abstinence, fidelity and correct and consistent use of condoms;
26. Note with alarm the rise in the incidence of HIV among people who inject drugs and that,
despite continuing increased efforts by all relevant stakeholders, the drug problem continues to
constitute a serious threat to, among other things, public health and safety and the well-being of
humanity, in particular children and young people and their families, and recognize that much
more needs to be done to effectively combat the world drug problem;
27. Recall our commitment that prevention must be the cornerstone of the global HIV and AIDS
response, but note that many national HIV-prevention programmes and spending priorities do not
adequately reflect this commitment, that spending on HIV prevention is insufficient to mount a
vigorous, effective and comprehensive global HIV-prevention response, that national prevention
programmes are often not sufficiently coordinated and evidence-based, that prevention strategies
do not adequately reflect infection patterns or sufficiently focus on populations at higher risk of
HIV, and that only 33 per cent of countries have prevalence targets for young people and only
34 per cent have specific goals in place for condom programming;
28. Note with concern that national prevention strategies and programmes are often too generic
in nature and do not adequately respond to infection patterns and the disease burden; for example,
where heterosexual sex is the dominant mode of transmission, married or cohabitating individuals,
including those in sero-discordant relationships, account for the majority of new infections but are
not sufficiently targeted with testing and prevention interventions;
29. Note that many national HIV-prevention strategies inadequately focus on populations that
epidemiological evidence shows are at higher risk, specifically men who have sex with men,
people who inject drugs and sex workers, and further note, however, that each country should
define the specific populations that are key to its epidemic and response, based on the
epidemiological and national context;

_______________
69

36

Resolution 61/106, annex I.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

30. Note with grave concern that, despite the near elimination of mother-to-child transmission of
HIV in high-income countries and the availability of low-cost interventions to prevent
transmission, approximately 370,000 infants were estimated to have been infected with HIV
in 2009;
31. Note with concern that prevention, treatment, care and support programmes have not been
adequately targeted or made accessible to persons with disabilities;
32. Recognize that access to safe, effective, affordable, good quality medicines and commodities
in the context of epidemics such as HIV is fundamental to the full realization of the right of
everyone to enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health;
33. Express grave concern that the majority of low- and middle-income countries did not meet
their universal access to HIV treatment targets, despite the major achievement of expansion in
providing access to antiretroviral treatment to over 6 million people living with HIV in low- and
middle-income countries, that there are at least 10 million people living with HIV who are
medically eligible to start antiretroviral treatment now, that discontinued treatment is a threat to
treatment efficacy, and that the sustainability of providing life-long HIV treatment is threatened by
factors such as poverty, lack of access to treatment and insufficient and unpredictable funding and
by the fact that the number of new HIV infections is outpacing the number of people starting HIV
treatment by a factor of two to one;
34. Recognize the pivotal role of research in underpinning progress in HIV prevention,
treatment, care and support, and welcome the extraordinary advances in scientific knowledge
about HIV and its prevention and treatment, but note with concern that most new treatments are
not available or accessible in low- and middle-income countries and that even in developed
countries there are often significant delays in accessing new HIV treatments for people not
responding to currently available treatment, and affirm the importance of social and operational
research in improving our understanding of factors that influence the epidemic and actions that
address it;
35. Recognize the critical importance of affordable medicines, including generics, in scaling up
access to affordable HIV treatment, and further recognize that protection and enforcement
measures for intellectual property rights should be compliant with the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement)70 and
should be interpreted and implemented in a manner supportive of the right of Member States to
protect public health and, in particular, to promote access to medicines for all;
36. Note with concern that regulations, policies and practices, including those that limit
legitimate trade in generic medicines, may seriously limit access to affordable HIV treatment and
other pharmaceutical products in low- and middle-income countries, and recognize that
improvements can be made, inter alia through national legislation, regulatory policy and supply
chain management, noting that reductions in barriers to affordable products could be explored in
order to expand access to affordable and good quality HIV prevention products, diagnostics,
medicine and treatment commodities for HIV, including for opportunistic infections
and co-infections;
37. Recognize that there are additional means to reverse the global epidemic and avert millions
of HIV infections and AIDS-related deaths, and in this context also recognize that new and
potential scientific evidence is available that could contribute to the effectiveness and scaling up of
prevention, treatment, care and support programmes;
38. Reaffirm the commitment to fulfil obligations to promote universal respect for and the
observance and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all in accordance
_______________
70

See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, done at
Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994–7).

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

with the Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights71 and other instruments relating to
human rights and international law; and emphasize the importance of cultural, ethical and
religious values, the vital role of the family and the community and, in particular, of people living
with and affected by HIV, including their families, and the need to take into account the
particularities of each country in sustaining national HIV and AIDS responses, reaching all people
living with HIV, delivering HIV prevention, treatment, care and support and strengthening health
systems, in particular primary health care;
39. Reaffirm that the full realization of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all is an
essential element in the global response to the HIV epidemic, including in the areas of prevention,
treatment, care and support, recognize that addressing stigma and discrimination against people
living with, presumed to be living with or affected by HIV, including their families, is also a
critical element in combating the global HIV epidemic, and recognize also the need,
as appropriate, to strengthen national policies and legislation to address such stigma
and discrimination;
40. Recognize that close cooperation with people living with HIV and populations at higher risk
of HIV infection will facilitate the achievement of a more effective HIV and AIDS response, and
emphasize that people living with and affected by HIV, including their families, should enjoy
equal participation in social, economic and cultural activities, without prejudice and
discrimination, and that they should have equal access to health care and community support as all
members of the community;
41. Recognize that access to sexual and reproductive health has been and continues to be
essential for HIV and AIDS responses and that Governments have the responsibility to provide for
public health, with special attention to families, women and children;
42. Recognize the importance of strengthening health systems, in particular primary health care
and the need to integrate the HIV response into it, and note that weak health systems, which
already face many challenges, including a lack of trained health workers and a lack of retention of
skilled health workers, are among the biggest barriers to accessing HIV and AIDS-related services;
43. Reaffirm the central role of the family, bearing in mind that in different cultural, social and
political systems various forms of the family exist, in reducing vulnerability to HIV, inter alia in
educating and guiding children, and take account of cultural, religious and ethical factors to reduce
the vulnerability of children and young people by ensuring access of both girls and boys to
primary and secondary education, including HIV and AIDS in curricula for adolescents, ensuring
safe and secure environments, especially for young girls, expanding good quality youth-friendly
information and sexual health education and counselling services, strengthening reproductive and
sexual health programmes, and involving families and young people in planning, implementing
and evaluating HIV and AIDS prevention and care programmes, to the extent possible;
44. Recognize the role that community organizations play, including those run by people living
with HIV, in sustaining national and local HIV and AIDS responses, reaching all people living
with HIV, delivering prevention, treatment, care and support services and strengthening health
systems, in particular the primary health-care approach;
45. Acknowledge that the current trajectory of costs of HIV programmes is not sustainable and
that programmes must become more cost-effective and evidence-based and deliver better value
for money, and that poorly coordinated and transaction-heavy responses and a lack of proper
governance and financial accountability impede progress;
46. Note with concern that evidence-based responses, which must be informed by data
disaggregated by incidence and prevalence, including by age, sex and mode of transmission,

_______________
71

38

Resolution 217 A (III).

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

continue to require stronger measuring tools, data management systems and improved monitoring
and evaluation capacity at the national and regional levels;
47. Note the relevant strategies on HIV and AIDS of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS and the World Health Organization;
48. Recognize that the deadlines for achieving key targets and goals set out in the 2001
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the 2006 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS have
now expired, while noting with deep concern that many countries have been unable to fulfil their
pledges to achieve them, and stress the urgent need to recommit to those targets and goals and
commit to new, ambitious and achievable targets and goals building on the impressive advances of
the past ten years and addressing barriers to progress and new challenges through a revitalized and
enduring HIV and AIDS response;
49. Therefore, we solemnly declare our commitment to end the epidemic with renewed political
will and strong, accountable leadership and to work in meaningful partnership with all
stakeholders at all levels to implement bold and decisive actions as set out below, taking into
account the diverse situations and circumstances in different countries and regions throughout
the world;
Leadership: uniting to end the HIV epidemic
50. Commit to seize this turning point in the HIV epidemic and, through decisive, inclusive and
accountable leadership, to revitalize and intensify the comprehensive global HIV and AIDS
response by recommitting to the commitments made in the 2001 Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the 2006 Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS and by fully implementing the
commitments, goals and targets contained in the present Declaration;
51. Commit to redouble efforts to achieve, by 2015, universal access to HIV prevention,
treatment, care and support as a critical step towards ending the global HIV epidemic, with a view
to achieving Millennium Development Goal 6, in particular to halt and begin to reverse, by 2015,
the spread of HIV;
52. Reaffirm our determination to achieve all the Millennium Development Goals, in particular
Goal 6, and recognize the importance of rapidly scaling up efforts to integrate HIV prevention,
treatment, care and support with efforts to achieve these goals;
53. Pledge to eliminate gender inequalities and gender-based abuse and violence, increase the
capacity of women and adolescent girls to protect themselves from the risk of HIV infection,
principally through the provision of health care and services, including, inter alia, sexual and
reproductive health, as well as full access to comprehensive information and education, ensure
that women can exercise their right to have control over, and decide freely and responsibly on,
matters related to their sexuality, including their sexual and reproductive health, free of coercion,
discrimination and violence, in order to increase their ability to protect themselves from HIV
infection, and take all necessary measures to create an enabling environment for the
empowerment of women and to strengthen their economic independence, and, in this context,
reiterate the importance of the role of men and boys in achieving gender equality;
54. Commit to update and implement, by 2012, through inclusive, country-led and transparent
processes, multisectoral national HIV and AIDS strategies and plans, including financing plans,
which include time-bound goals to be reached in a targeted, equitable and sustained manner, to
accelerate efforts to achieve universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support by
2015, and address unacceptably low prevention and treatment coverage;
55. Commit to increase national ownership of HIV and AIDS responses, while calling upon the
United Nations system, donor countries, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria, the business sector and international and regional organizations to support Member States
in ensuring that nationally driven, credible, costed, evidence-based, inclusive and comprehensive

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

national HIV and AIDS strategic plans are, by 2013, funded and implemented with transparency,
accountability and effectiveness in line with national priorities;
56. Commit to encouraging and supporting the active involvement and leadership of young
people, including those living with HIV, in the fight against the epidemic at the local, national and
global levels, and agree to work with these new leaders to help to develop specific measures to
engage young people about HIV, including in communities, families, schools, tertiary institutions,
recreation centres and workplaces;
57. Commit to continue engaging people living with and affected by HIV in decision-making
and planning, implementing and evaluating the response, and to partner with local leaders and
civil society, including community-based organizations, to develop and scale up community-led
HIV services and to address stigma and discrimination;
Prevention: expanding coverage, diversifying approaches and intensifying efforts to end
new HIV infections
58. Reaffirm that prevention of HIV must be the cornerstone of national, regional and
international responses to the HIV epidemic;
59. Commit to redouble HIV-prevention efforts by taking all measures to implement
comprehensive, evidence-based prevention approaches, taking into account local circumstances,
ethics and cultural values, including through, but not limited to:
(a) Conducting public awareness campaigns and targeted HIV education to raise public
awareness about HIV;
(b)

Harnessing the energy of young people in helping to lead global HIV awareness;

(c) Reducing risk-taking behaviour and encouraging responsible sexual behaviour,
including abstinence, fidelity and consistent and correct use of condoms;
(d) Expanding access to essential commodities, particularly male and female condoms
and sterile injecting equipment;
(e) Ensuring that all people, particularly young people, have the means to exploit the
potential of new modes of connection and communication;
(f) Significantly expanding and promoting voluntary and confidential HIV testing and
counselling and provider-initiated HIV testing and counselling;
(g) Intensifying national testing promotion campaigns for HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections;
(h) Giving consideration, as appropriate, to implementing and expanding risk- and harmreduction programmes, taking into account the WHO, UNODC, UNAIDS Technical Guide for
Countries to Set Targets for Universal Access to HIV Prevention, Treatment and Care for Injecting
Drug Users,72 in accordance with national legislation;
(i) Promoting medical male circumcision where HIV prevalence is high and male
circumcision rates are low;
(j) Sensitizing and encouraging the active engagement of men and boys in promoting
gender equality;
(k)

Facilitating access to sexual and reproductive health-care services;

(l) Ensuring that women of childbearing age have access to HIV-prevention-related
services and that pregnant women have access to antenatal care, information, counselling and
_______________
72

40

Available from www.who.int/hiv/pub/idu/targetsetting/en/index.html.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

other HIV services, and increasing the availability of and access to effective treatment for women
living with HIV and infants;
(m) Strengthening evidence-based health sector prevention interventions, including in rural
and hard-to-reach places;
(n) Deploying new biomedical interventions as soon as they are validated, including
female-initiated prevention methods such as microbicides, HIV treatment prophylaxis, earlier
treatment as prevention and an HIV vaccine;
60. Commit to ensure that financial resources for prevention are targeted to evidence-based
prevention measures that reflect the specific nature of each country’s epidemic by focusing on
geographic locations, social networks and populations vulnerable to HIV infection, according to
the extent to which they account for new infections in each setting, in order to ensure that
resources for HIV prevention are spent as cost-effectively as possible and to ensure that particular
attention is paid to women and girls, young people, orphans and vulnerable children, migrants and
people affected by humanitarian emergencies, prisoners, indigenous people and people with
disabilities, depending on local circumstances;
61. Commit to ensure that national prevention strategies comprehensively target populations at
higher risk and that systems of data collection and analysis about these populations are
strengthened, and to take measures to ensure that HIV services, including voluntary and
confidential HIV testing and counselling, are accessible to these populations so that they are
encouraged to access HIV prevention, treatment, care and support;
62. Commit to working towards reducing sexual transmission of HIV by 50 per cent by 2015;
63. Commit to working towards reducing transmission of HIV among people who inject drugs
by 50 per cent by 2015;
64. Commit to working towards the elimination of mother-to-child transmission of HIV and
substantially reducing AIDS-related maternal deaths by 2015;
Treatment, care and support: eliminating AIDS-related illness and death
65. Pledge to intensify efforts that will help to increase the life expectancy and quality of life of
all people living with HIV;
66. Commit to accelerate efforts to achieve the goal of universal access to antiretroviral
treatment for those eligible based on World Health Organization HIV treatment guidelines that
indicate timely initiation of quality assured treatment for its maximum benefit, with the target of
working towards having 15 million people living with HIV on antiretroviral treatment by 2015;
67. Commit to support the reduction of unit costs and improve HIV treatment delivery, through,
inter alia, provision of good quality, affordable, effective, less toxic and simplified treatment
regimens that avert drug resistance, simple, affordable diagnostics at point of care, cost reductions
for all major elements of treatment delivery, mobilization and capacity-building of communities to
support treatment scale-up and patient retention, programmes that support improved treatment
adherence, directing particular efforts towards hard-to-reach populations far from physical healthcare facilities and programmes and those in informal settlement settings and other locations where
health-care facilities are inadequate and recognizing the supplementary prevention benefits from
treatment alongside other prevention efforts;
68. Commit to develop and implement strategies to improve infant HIV diagnosis, including
through access to diagnostics at point of care, significantly increase and improve access to
treatment for children and adolescents living with HIV, including access to prophylaxis and
treatments for opportunistic infections, as well as increased support to children and adolescents
through increased financial, social and moral support for their parents, families and legal
guardians, and promote a smooth transition from paediatric to young adult treatment and related
support and services;
41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

69. Commit to promote services that integrate prevention, treatment and care of co-occurring
conditions, including tuberculosis and hepatitis and improve access to quality, affordable primary
health care, comprehensive care and support services, including those which address physical,
spiritual, psychosocial, socio-economic and legal aspects of living with HIV, and palliative
care services;
70. Commit to take immediate action at the national and global levels to integrate food and
nutritional support into programmes directed to people affected by HIV in order to ensure access
to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to enable people to meet their dietary needs and food
preferences, for an active and healthy life as part of a comprehensive response to HIV and AIDS;
71. Commit to remove before 2015, where feasible, obstacles that limit the capacity of low- and
middle-income countries to provide affordable and effective HIV prevention and treatment
products, diagnostics, medicines and commodities and other pharmaceutical products, as well as
treatment for opportunistic infections and co-infections, and to reduce costs associated with lifelong chronic care, including by amending national laws and regulations, as deemed appropriate by
respective Governments, so as to optimize:
(a) The use, to the full, of existing flexibilities under the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights specifically geared to promoting access to and trade in
medicines, and, while recognizing the importance of the intellectual property rights regime in
contributing to a more effective AIDS response, ensure that intellectual property rights provisions
in trade agreements do not undermine these existing flexibilities, as confirmed in the Doha
Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health,73 and call for early acceptance of the
amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement adopted by the General Council of the World
Trade Organization in its decision of 6 December 2005;74
(b) Addressing barriers, regulations, policies and practices that prevent access to
affordable HIV treatment by promoting generic competition in order to help to reduce costs
associated with life-long chronic care and by encouraging all States to apply measures and
procedures for enforcing intellectual property rights in such a manner as to avoid creating barriers
to the legitimate trade in medicines, and to provide for safeguards against the abuse of such
measures and procedures;
(c) Encouraging the voluntary use, where appropriate, of new mechanisms such as
partnerships, tiered pricing, open-source sharing of patents and patent pools benefiting all
developing countries, including through entities such as the Medicines Patent Pool, to help to
reduce treatment costs and encourage development of new HIV treatment formulations, including
HIV medicines and point-of-care diagnostics, in particular for children;
72. Urge relevant international organizations, upon request and in accordance with their
respective mandates, such as, where appropriate, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World Trade
Organization and the World Health Organization, to provide national Governments of developing
countries with technical and capacity-building assistance for the efforts of those Governments to
increase access to HIV medicines and treatment, in accordance with the national strategies of each
Government, consistent with, and including through the use of, existing flexibilities under the
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, as confirmed by the Doha
Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health;
73. Commit by 2015 to address factors that limit treatment uptake and contribute to treatment
stock-outs and delays in drug production and delivery, inadequate storage of medicines, patient
dropout, including inadequate and inaccessible transportation to clinical sites, lack of accessibility
_______________
73
74

42

World Trade Organization, document WT/MIN(01)/DEC/2. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.
See World Trade Organization, document WT/L/641. Available from http://docsonline.wto.org.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of information, resources and sites, especially for persons with disabilities, sub-optimal
management of treatment-related side effects, poor adherence to treatment, out-of-pocket
expenses for non-drug components of treatment, loss of income associated with clinic attendance
and inadequate human resources for health care;
74. Call upon pharmaceutical companies to take measures to ensure timely production and
delivery of affordable, good quality and effective antiretroviral medicines so as to contribute to
maintaining an efficient national system of distribution of these medicines;
75. Expand efforts to combat tuberculosis, which is a leading cause of death among people
living with HIV, by improving tuberculosis screening, tuberculosis prevention, access to diagnosis
and treatment of tuberculosis and drug-resistant tuberculosis and access to antiretroviral therapy,
through more integrated delivery of HIV and tuberculosis services in line with the Global Plan to
Stop TB 2011–2015, and commit by 2015 to work towards reducing tuberculosis deaths among
people living with HIV by 50 per cent;
76. Commit to reduce the high rates of HIV and hepatitis B and C co-infection by developing,
as soon as practicable, an estimate of the global treatment need, increasing efforts towards the
development of a vaccine for hepatitis C and rapidly expanding access to appropriate vaccination
for hepatitis B and to diagnostics and treatment of HIV and hepatitis co-infections;
Advancing human rights to reduce stigma, discrimination and violence related to HIV
77. Commit to intensify national efforts to create enabling legal, social and policy frameworks
in each national context in order to eliminate stigma, discrimination and violence related to HIV
and promote access to HIV prevention, treatment, care and support and non-discriminatory access
to education, health care, employment and social services, provide legal protections for people
affected by HIV, including inheritance rights and respect for privacy and confidentiality, and
promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms, with particular attention to all
people vulnerable to and affected by HIV;
78. Commit to review, as appropriate, laws and policies that adversely affect the successful,
effective and equitable delivery of HIV prevention, treatment, care and support programmes to
people living with and affected by HIV and to consider their review in accordance with relevant
national review frameworks and time frames;
79. Encourage Member States to consider identifying and reviewing any remaining HIV-related
restrictions on entry, stay and residence in order to eliminate them;
80. Commit to national HIV and AIDS strategies that promote and protect human rights,
including programmes aimed at eliminating stigma and discrimination against people living with
and affected by HIV, including their families, including by sensitizing the police and judges,
training health-care workers in non-discrimination, confidentiality and informed consent,
supporting national human rights learning campaigns, legal literacy and legal services, as well as
monitoring the impact of the legal environment on HIV prevention, treatment, care and support;
81. Commit to ensuring that national responses to HIV and AIDS meet the specific needs of
women and girls, including those living with and affected by HIV, across their lifespan, by
strengthening legal, policy, administrative and other measures for the promotion and protection of
women’s full enjoyment of all human rights and the reduction of their vulnerability to HIV
through the elimination of all forms of discrimination, as well as all types of sexual exploitation of
women, girls and boys, including for commercial reasons, and all forms of violence against
women and girls, including harmful traditional and customary practices, abuse, rape and other
forms of sexual violence, battering and trafficking in women and girls;
82. Commit to strengthen national social and child protection systems and care and support
programmes for children, in particular for the girl child, and adolescents affected by and
vulnerable to HIV, as well as their families and caregivers, including through the provision of
equal opportunities to support the development to their full potential of orphans and other children
43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

affected by and living with HIV, especially through equal access to education, the creation of safe
and non-discriminatory learning environments, supportive legal systems and protections,
including civil registration systems, and the provision of comprehensive information and support
to children and their families and caregivers, especially age-appropriate HIV information, to assist
children living with HIV as they transition through adolescence, consistent with their
evolving capacities;
83. Commit to promoting laws and policies that ensure the full realization of all human rights
and fundamental freedoms for young people, particularly those living with HIV and those at
higher risk of HIV infection, so as to eliminate the stigma and discrimination they face;
84. Commit to address, according to national legislation, the vulnerabilities to HIV experienced
by migrant and mobile populations and support their access to HIV prevention, treatment, care
and support;
85. Commit to mitigate the impact of the epidemic on workers, their families, their dependants,
workplaces and economies, including by taking into account all relevant conventions of the
International Labour Organization, as well as the guidance provided by the relevant International
Labour Organization recommendations, including the Recommendation on HIV and AIDS and
the World of Work, 2010 (No. 200), and call upon employers, trade and labour unions, employees
and volunteers to eliminate stigma and discrimination, protect human rights and facilitate access to
HIV prevention, treatment, care and support;
Resources for the AIDS response
86. Commit to working towards closing, by 2015, the global HIV and AIDS resource gap,
currently estimated by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS to be 6 billion dollars
annually, through greater strategic investment and continued domestic and international funding to
enable countries to access predictable and sustainable financial resources and through sources of
innovative financing and by ensuring that funding flows through country finance systems, where
appropriate and available, and is aligned with accountable and sustainable national HIV and AIDS
and development strategies that maximize synergies and deliver sustainable programmes that are
evidence-based and implemented with transparency, accountability and effectiveness;
87. Commit to breaking the upward trajectory of costs through the efficient utilization of
resources, addressing barriers to the legal trade in generics and other low-cost medicines,
improving the efficiency of prevention by targeting interventions to deliver more efficient,
innovative and sustainable programmes for the HIV and AIDS response, in accordance with
national development plans and priorities, and ensuring that synergies are exploited between the
HIV and AIDS response and the efforts to achieve the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals;
88. Commit, by 2015, through a series of incremental steps and through our shared
responsibility, to reach a significant level of annual global expenditure on HIV and AIDS, while
recognizing that the overall target estimated by the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS is between 22 billion and 24 billion dollars in low- and middle-income countries, by
increasing national ownership of HIV and AIDS responses through greater allocations from
national resources and traditional sources of funding, including official development assistance;
89. Strongly urge those developed countries that have pledged to achieve the target of
0.7 per cent of their gross national product for official development assistance by 2015, and urge
those developed countries that have not yet done so, to make additional concrete efforts to fulfil
their commitments in this regard;
90. Strongly urge African countries that adopted the Abuja Declaration and Framework for
Action for the fight against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and Other Related Infectious Diseases75 to
_______________
75

44

See Organization of African Unity, document OAU/SPS/ABUJA/3.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

take concrete measures to meet the target of allocating at least 15 per cent of their annual budget to
the improvement of the health sector, in accordance with the Abuja Declaration and Framework
for Action;
91. Commit to enhance the quality of aid by strengthening national ownership, alignment,
harmonization, predictability, mutual accountability and transparency, and results orientation;
92. Commit to supporting and strengthening existing financial mechanisms, including the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria and relevant United Nations organizations,
through the provision of funds in a sustained and predictable manner, in particular to those
countries with low and middle incomes with a high disease burden or a large number of people
living with and affected by HIV;
93. Recommit to fully implementing the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
and agree to cancel all eligible bilateral official debts of qualified countries within the Initiative
that reach the completion point under the Initiative, in particular the countries most affected by
HIV and AIDS, and urge the use of debt service savings, inter alia, to finance poverty eradication
programmes, particularly for prevention, treatment, care and support for HIV and AIDS and
other infections;
94. Commit to scaling up new, voluntary and additional innovative financing mechanisms to
help to address the shortfall of resources available for the global HIV and AIDS response and to
improving the financing of the HIV and AIDS response over the long term, and to accelerating
efforts to identify innovative financing mechanisms that will generate additional financial
resources for HIV and AIDS to complement national budgetary allocations and official
development assistance;
95. Appreciate that the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria is a pivotal
mechanism for achieving universal access to prevention, treatment, care and support by 2015,
recognize the programme for reform of the Global Fund, and encourage Member States, the
business community, including foundations, and philanthropists to provide the highest level of
support for the Global Fund, taking into account the funding targets to be identified at the 2012
midterm review of the Global Fund replenishment process;
Strengthening health systems and integrating HIV and AIDS with broader health
and development
96. Commit to redouble efforts to strengthen health systems, including primary health care,
particularly in developing countries, through measures such as allocating national and
international resources, appropriate decentralization of HIV and AIDS programmes to improve
access for communities, including rural and hard-to-reach populations, integration of HIV and
AIDS programmes into primary health care, sexual and reproductive health-care services and
specialized infectious disease services, improving planning for institutional, infrastructure and
human resource needs, improving supply chain management within health systems and increasing
human resource capacity for the response, including by scaling up the training and retention of
human resources for health policy and planning, health-care personnel, consistent with the World
Health Organization voluntary Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health
Personnel,76 community health workers and peer educators, with support from and in partnership
with international and regional organizations, the business sector and civil society, as appropriate;
97. Support and encourage, through domestic and international funding and the provision of
technical assistance, the substantial development of human capital, development of national and
international research infrastructures, laboratory capacity and improved surveillance systems, and
data collection, processing and dissemination, and training of basic and clinical researchers, social
_______________
76

See World Health Organization, Sixty-third World Health Assembly, Geneva, 17–21 May 2010, Resolutions and
Decisions, Annexes (WHA63/2010/REC/1).

45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

scientists and technicians, with a focus on those countries most affected by HIV and/or
experiencing or at risk of a rapid expansion of the epidemic;
98. Commit, by 2015, to working with partners to direct resources to and strengthen the
advocacy, policy and programmatic links between HIV and tuberculosis responses, primary
health-care services, sexual and reproductive health, maternal and child health, hepatitis B and C,
drug dependence, non-communicable diseases and overall health systems, leveraging health-care
services to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV, strengthening the interface between HIV
services, related sexual and reproductive health care and services and other health services,
including maternal and child health, eliminating parallel systems for HIV-related services and
information where feasible and strengthening linkages among national and global efforts
concerned with human and national development, including poverty eradication, preventative
health care, enhanced nutrition, access to safe and clean drinking water, sanitation, education and
the improvement of livelihoods;
99. Commit to supporting all national, regional and global efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals, including those undertaken through North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation, to improve comprehensive and integrated HIV prevention, treatment, care and
support programmes, as well as tuberculosis, sexual and reproductive health, malaria and maternal
and child health care;
Research and development: the key to preventing, treating and curing HIV
100. Commit to investing in accelerated basic research on the development of sustainable and
affordable HIV and tuberculosis diagnostics and treatments for HIV and its associated coinfections, microbicides and other new prevention technologies, including female-controlled
prevention methods, rapid diagnostic and monitoring technologies, as well as biomedical
operations and social, cultural and behavioural and traditional medicine research, and continuing
to build national research capacity, especially in developing countries, through increased funding
and public-private partnerships, and creating a conducive environment for research and
ensuring that it is based on the highest ethical and scientific standards, and strengthening national
regulatory authorities;
101. Commit to accelerate research and development for a safe, affordable, effective and
accessible vaccine and for a cure for HIV, while ensuring that sustainable systems for vaccine
procurement and equitable distribution are also developed;
Coordination, monitoring and accountability: maximizing the response
102. Commit to having effective evidence-based operational monitoring and evaluation and
mutual accountability mechanisms between all stakeholders to support multisectoral national
strategic plans for HIV and AIDS to fulfil the commitments in the present Declaration, with the
active involvement of people living with, affected by and vulnerable to HIV, and other relevant
civil society and private sector stakeholders;
103. Commit to revise by the end of 2012 the recommended framework of core indicators that
reflect the commitments made in the present Declaration and to develop additional measures,
where necessary, to strengthen national, regional and global coordination and monitoring
mechanisms of HIV and AIDS responses through inclusive and transparent processes with the full
involvement of Member States and other relevant stakeholders, with the support of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS;
Follow-up: sustaining progress
104. Encourage and support the exchange among countries and regions of information, research,
evidence and experiences for implementing the measures and commitments related to the global
HIV and AIDS response, in particular those contained in the present Declaration, facilitate
intensified North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation, as well as subregional, regional
46

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

and interregional cooperation and coordination, and in this regard continue to encourage the
Economic and Social Council to request the regional commissions, within their respective
mandates and resources, to support periodic, inclusive reviews of national efforts and progress
made in their respective regions to combat HIV;
105. Request the Secretary-General to provide to the General Assembly an annual report on
progress achieved in realizing the commitments made in the present Declaration and, with support
from the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, to report to the Assembly on progress in
accordance with global reporting on the Millennium Development Goals at the 2013 review of the
Goals and subsequent reviews.
RESOLUTION 65/278
AR
/ ES6/52/78

Adopted at the 96th plenary meeting, on 13 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.62/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Argentina (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Australia, Croatia, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Montenegro, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America

65/278. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of Conflict
and the Promotion of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,77 its resolution 53/92
of 7 December 1998 and subsequent annual resolutions, including resolutions 60/223 of
23 December 2005, 61/230 of 22 December 2006, 62/275 of 11 September 2008, 63/304 of
23 July 2009 and 64/252 of 8 February 2010, as well as its resolutions 62/179 of 19 December
2007, 63/267 of 31 March 2009 and 64/258 of 16 March 2010 on the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, and 59/213 of 20 December 2004, 61/296 of 17 September 2007 and
63/310 of 14 September 2009 on cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union,
Recalling also, in this context, Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 on
peace and security in Africa, 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000 and 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008 on
women and peace and security, 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001 on the role of the Council in the
prevention of armed conflicts, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005 on children and armed conflict,
1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005 on strengthening the effectiveness of the role of the Council in
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa, and 1631 (2005) of 17 October 2005 on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining
international peace and security,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,78 through which world leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to addressing the special needs of Africa, and its resolution 60/265 of
30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the political declaration on Africa’s development needs adopted at the highlevel meeting on Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008,79
Recalling the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium
Development Goals and its outcome document,80
_______________
77

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/56/45).
See resolution 60/1.
79
See resolution 63/1.
80
See resolution 65/1.
78

47

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that development, peace, security and human rights are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing,
Stressing that the responsibility for peace and security in Africa, including the capacity to
address the root causes of conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner, lies primarily with
African countries, while recognizing the need for support from the international community and
the United Nations, taking into account the responsibilities of the United Nations in this regard
according to the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing, in particular, the importance of strengthening the capacity of the African Union
and subregional organizations to address the causes of conflict in Africa,
Noting that, despite the positive trends and advances in obtaining durable peace in Africa,
the conditions required for sustainable development have yet to be consolidated throughout the
continent and that there is therefore an urgent need to continue developing African human and
institutional capacities, particularly in countries emerging from conflict,
Noting also that conflict prevention and the consolidation of peace would benefit from the
coordinated, sustained and integrated efforts of the United Nations system and Member States and
regional and subregional organizations, as well as international and regional financial institutions,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen the synergy between Africa’s economic and social
development programmes and its peace and security agenda,
Underlining the need to address the negative implications of the illegal exploitation of
natural resources in all its aspects for peace, security and development in Africa, and condemning
the illicit trade in natural resources that fuels armed conflict and the illicit trade in and proliferation
of arms, especially small arms and light weapons,
Reaffirming the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission as a dedicated mechanism to
address, within its existing mandate and in an integrated manner, the special needs of countries
emerging from conflict towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction and to assist them in
laying the foundation for peace and sustainable development, taking into consideration the
principle of national ownership,
Welcoming the establishment of the United Nations Office to the African Union to enhance
the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union, particularly in the areas of
peace, security and political and humanitarian affairs, and reaffirming the need to ensure
coordination and increase cost-effectiveness among relevant entities of the United Nations system
involved in the implementation of the ten-year capacity-building programme, in particular the
Economic Commission for Africa and the United Nations Office to the African Union, whose
efforts are critical,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the review of the implementation
of the recommendations contained in his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,81 and underlines the progress made and the
challenges faced in addressing such causes;
2. Welcomes the progress made, in particular by the African Union and subregional
organizations, in the prevention, management and resolution of conflict and in post-conflict
peacebuilding in a number of African countries, and calls for intensified efforts and a coordinated
approach among national Governments, the African Union, subregional organizations, the United
Nations system and partners, with a view to achieving further progress towards the goal of a
conflict-free Africa;
3. Also welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations
to strengthen their peacekeeping capacity and to take the lead in peacekeeping operations on the
_______________
81

48

A/65/152-S/2010/526.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

continent, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and in close
coordination with the United Nations, through the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, as well as ongoing efforts to develop a continental early warning system, response
capacity, such as the African Standby Force, and enhanced mediation capacity, including through
the Panel of the Wise;
4. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the peace
consolidation mechanisms and processes, including the Panel of the Wise, the African Union PostConflict Reconstruction and Development Framework and the continental early warning system,
including its subregional components, as well as the operationalization of the African
Standby Force;
5. Calls upon Member States to support relevant United Nations bodies, including the
Peacebuilding Commission, and to assist post-conflict countries, at their request, in achieving a
smooth transition from relief to development;
6. Stresses the importance of creating an environment conducive to national
reconciliation and social and economic recovery in countries emerging from conflict;
7. Invites the United Nations and the donor community to increase efforts to support
ongoing regional efforts to build African mediation and negotiation capacity;
8. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the African
Union in its effort to effectively integrate training in international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, with particular emphasis on the rights of women and children, into
the training of civilian and military personnel of national standby contingents at both the
operational and tactical levels, as set out in article 13 of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment
of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union;82
9. Recognizes that international and regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate
peace in Africa should be channelled towards the sustainable development of Africa and the
human and institutional capacity-building of African countries and organizations, particularly in
priority areas identified at the continental level;
10. Recalls the signing of the declaration on enhancing cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in Addis Ababa on 16 November 200683 and the ongoing efforts in
this regard, underlines the importance of the implementation of the ten-year capacity-building
programme for the African Union, in particular the operationalization of the African Standby
Force, urges all stakeholders to support the full implementation of the ten-year capacity-building
programme in all its aspects, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the progress made in
this regard;
11. Stresses the critical importance of a regional approach to conflict prevention, in
particular with respect to cross-border issues such as transnational organized crime, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, prevention of the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and trafficking in high value commodities and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons in all its aspects, and emphasizes in this regard the central role of the African Union and
subregional organizations in addressing such issues;
12. Notes with concern that violence against women and children continues and often
increases, even as armed conflicts draw to an end, urges further progress in the implementation of
policies and guidelines relating to the protection of and assistance to women and children in
conflict and post-conflict situations in Africa, notes the adoption by the Security Council of its
resolution 1820 (2008) on women and peace and security, welcomes the appointment of the

_______________
82
83

Available from www.africa-union.org.
A/61/630, annex.

49

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and invites
support for the implementation of her mandate in Africa;
13. Also notes with concern the tragic plight of children in conflict situations in Africa, in
particular the phenomenon of child soldiers, as well as other grave violations against children, and
stresses the need for the protection of children in armed conflicts, post-conflict counselling,
rehabilitation and education, with due regard for the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council;
14. Calls for the enhancement of the role of women in conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and post-conflict peacebuilding, consistent with Security Council resolutions
1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008);
15. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of the
rights of women in conflict and post-conflict situations, recalls in this regard the adoption and
entry into force of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the
Rights of Women in Africa,82 and the Solemn Declaration on Gender Equality in Africa82 and the
African Union Gender Policy,82 as well as the Southern African Development Community
Protocol on Gender and Development, stresses the significance of those instruments for all
countries in Africa for strengthening the role of women in peace and conflict prevention on the
continent, and strongly urges the United Nations and all parties to redouble their efforts and
support in this regard;
16. Takes note of the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa82 and the Kampala Declaration on Refugees, Returnees and
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa;
17. Calls for the safeguarding of the principle of refugee protection in Africa and the
resolution of the plight of refugees, including through support for efforts aimed at addressing the
causes of refugee movement and bringing about the voluntary, dignified, safe and sustainable
return and reintegration of those populations, and calls upon the international community,
including States and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
relevant United Nations organizations, within their respective mandates, to take concrete action to
meet the protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to
contribute generously to projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight, facilitating
durable solutions for refugees and displaced persons and supporting vulnerable local
host communities;
18. Welcomes African-led initiatives to strengthen political, economic and corporate
governance such as the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance82 and the
African Peer Review Mechanism and encourages even more African countries to participate in
this process, and calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to assist African
Member States and regional and subregional organizations in their efforts to enhance good
governance, including the promotion of the rule of law and the holding of free and fair elections;
19. Recognizes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring that national
ownership of the peacebuilding process in countries emerging from conflict is observed and that
nationally identified priorities are at the core of international and regional efforts in post-conflict
peacebuilding in the countries under consideration, notes the important steps taken by the
Commission in engaging with Sierra Leone, Burundi, Guinea-Bissau, the Central African
Republic and Liberia through integrated peacebuilding strategies, calls for sustained regional and
international commitment to the implementation of those strategies, and looks forward to the
development of an integrated peacebuilding strategy for Guinea;
20. Calls upon the United Nations system and invites Member States to assist African
countries emerging from conflict in their efforts to build national capacities, including through the
rehabilitation of the security sector, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants, provision for the safe return of internally displaced persons and refugees, the launch

50

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

of income-generation activities, particularly for youth and women, and the delivery of basic
public services;
21. Stresses the importance of effectively addressing challenges that continue to hamper
the achievement of peace, stability and sustainable development on the continent, inter alia, the
food, fuel and financial crises, the increased prevalence of infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS,
the effects of global warming and climate change, the extremely high rates of youth
unemployment, social exclusion, corruption, human trafficking, rapid urbanization and city slums,
massive displacements of people, the emergence of terrorist networks, maritime security and the
increased activity of transnational organized crime, including drug trafficking, and in this regard
encourages the United Nations system and Member States to assist African countries in effectively
addressing these challenges;
22. Calls upon the United Nations system and bilateral and multilateral partners, as well as
new partners, to deliver expeditiously on commitments and to ensure the full and speedy
implementation of the provisions of the political declaration on Africa’s development needs,79 as
well as the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;84
23. Stresses the need to promote socio-economic development on the continent, and in this
context takes note of the Declaration on Employment and Poverty Alleviation in Africa, adopted
by the African Union in 2004,82 as well as the recommendations of the Millennium Development
Goals Africa Steering Group, which were endorsed by the African Union in July 2008 and cover
such critical areas as agriculture and food security, education, health, infrastructure and trade
facilitation and the national statistical system;
24. Encourages African Governments to strengthen structures and policies to create an
environment conducive to attracting foreign direct investment and to promote socio-economic
development and social justice, calls upon African Member States and regional and subregional
organizations to assist the African countries concerned, at their request, by enhancing their
capacity to devise and improve their national natural resources and public revenue management
structures, and in this regard invites the international community to assist in that process by
providing adequate financial and technical assistance, as well as by renewing its commitment to
efforts aimed at combating the illegal exploitation of the natural resources of those countries, in
conformity with international law;
25. Notes the completion of the review of the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the 1998 report of the Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-General to
develop, in consultation with relevant partners, policy proposals on issues identified in his report;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor and report to the General
Assembly on an annual basis on persistent and emerging challenges to the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa, as well as on the approach and support of the United
Nations system.
RESOLUTION 65/279
AR
/ ES6/52/79

Adopted at the 96th plenary meeting, on 13 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.76, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

_______________
84

A/57/304, annex.

51

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

65/279. Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/148 of 18 December 2009, in which it, inter alia, called for the
commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and
Related Intolerance,85
Recalling also its resolution 65/240 of 24 December 2010, in which it decided to hold a oneday high-level meeting of the General Assembly, at the level of Heads of State and Government,
on the second day of the general debate of the sixty-sixth session, on the theme “Victims
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance: recognition, justice
and development”,
1. Decides that the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action will be
held on Thursday, 22 September 2011, and consist of an opening plenary meeting from 9 a.m. to
11 a.m., two consecutive round tables from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., and a
closing plenary meeting from 6 p.m. to 7 p.m., and also decides that the morning meeting of the
general debate on that day will be held from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and that that arrangement does not
constitute a precedent;
2. Also decides that the speakers at the opening plenary will be the President of the
General Assembly, the Secretary-General, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Head of State of South Africa, one speaker from each regional group and a
representative of a non-governmental organization active in the field of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
3. Further decides that the organizational arrangements of the round tables will be
as follows:
(a) The round tables will address the overall theme of “Victims of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance: recognition, justice and development”;
(b) Each round table will be co-chaired by two Heads of State or Government to be
invited by the President of the General Assembly after consultations with the regional groups;
(c) In order to promote a substantive and constructive dialogue, participation in each
round table will include Member States, observers, representatives of entities of the United
Nations system and experts, as well as selected representatives of civil society organizations and
non-governmental organizations that are active in the field of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance;
(d) Accredited delegates, observers and selected non-governmental organizations that are
active in the field of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance will be able
to follow the proceedings of the round-table sessions in the overflow room;
(e)

The proceedings of the round tables shall be webcast;

4. Invites the Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, Palestine, in its capacity as
observer, and the European Union, in its capacity as observer, to participate in the preparatory
activities and in the high-level meeting;
5. Invites the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of representatives of
civil society organizations, including non-governmental organizations active in the field of racism,
_______________
85

52

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

racial discrimination, xenophobia and related forms of intolerance and, taking into account the
principle of equitable geographical representation, to submit the list to Member States for
consideration on a no-objection basis, for participation in the high-level meeting;
6. Reiterates its call for States to be represented at the high-level meeting, at the highest
possible political level, including at the level of Heads of State and Government;
7. Decides that the closing plenary meeting will comprise the presentation of summaries
of the discussions by the co-chairs of the round tables and the adoption of a short and concise
political declaration aimed at mobilizing political will.
RESOLUTION 65/280
AR
/ ES6/52/80

Adopted at the 100th plenary meeting, on 17 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.75, sponsored by Argentina (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are
members of the Group of 77 and China)

65/280. Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/227 of 19 December 2008, in which it decided to convene the
Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries at a high level in 2011, as
well as its resolutions 64/213 of 21 December 2009 and 65/171 of 20 December 2010,
1. Expresses its profound gratitude to the Government and the people of the Republic of
Turkey for hosting the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries in
Istanbul from 9 to 13 May 2011, and for providing all the necessary support;
2. Endorses the Istanbul Declaration86 and the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,87 adopted by the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries, and calls upon all the relevant stakeholders to
commit to implementing the Programme of Action.
RESOLUTION 65/281
AR
/ ES6/52/81

Adopted at the 100th plenary meeting, on 17 June 2011, by a recorded vote of 154 to 4, with no
abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/65/L.78, submitted by the President of the General
Assembly
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav

_______________
86
87

A/CONF.219/7, chap. I.
Ibid., chap. II.

53

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining: None

65/281. Review of the Human Rights Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006 establishing the Human Rights Council,
and in particular paragraphs 1 and 16 thereof,
Recalling also its resolution 62/219 of 22 December 2007,
Recognizing that peace and security, development and human rights are the pillars of the
United Nations system and the foundations for collective security and well-being,
Reaffirming that the Human Rights Council was created with the aim of ensuring effective
enjoyment by all of all human rights, civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including
the right to development, and that the Council is responsible for promoting universal respect for
the protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction of any
kind and in a fair and equal manner,
Recalling the competencies of the Third and Fifth Committees as the Main Committees of
the General Assembly tasked with social, humanitarian and cultural issues and administrative and
budgetary issues, respectively,
Taking note of Human Rights Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011 containing the
text entitled “Outcome of the review of the work and functioning of the Human Rights
Council”,88
Recalling all its previous decisions on the allocation of the agenda item entitled “Report of
the Human Rights Council”,
Recalling also its resolution 63/263 of 24 December 2008 which endorses the relevant
conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on the consideration of the financial requirements arising from resolutions and
decisions of the Human Rights Council,
1.

Reaffirms its resolution 60/251;

2.

Decides that the present resolution shall supplement its resolution 60/251;

3. Decides also to maintain the status of the Human Rights Council as a subsidiary body
of the General Assembly and to consider again the question of whether to maintain this status at an
appropriate moment and at a time no sooner than ten years and no later than fifteen years;
4. Decides further that from 2013, the Human Rights Council will start its yearly
membership cycle on 1 January;
5. Decides that, as a transitional measure, the period of office of members of the Human
Rights Council ending in June 2012, June 2013 and June 2014 will exceptionally be extended
until the end of the respective calendar year;
6. Decides also to continue its practice of allocating the agenda item entitled “Report of
the Human Rights Council” to the plenary of the General Assembly and to the Third Committee,
in accordance with its decision 65/503 A, with the additional understanding that the President of
the Council will present the report in her or his capacity as President to the plenary of the General
_______________
88

54

See A/HRC/16/2.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Assembly and the Third Committee and that the Third Committee will hold an interactive
dialogue with the President of the Council at the time of her or his presentation of the report of the
Council to the Third Committee;
7. Decides further that the annual report of the Human Rights Council shall cover the
period from 1 October to 30 September, including the regular September session of the Council;
8. Decides to consider through its Fifth Committee all financial implications emanating
from the resolutions and decisions contained in the annual report of the Human Rights Council,
including those emanating from its September session;
9. Recognizes the need to provide adequate financing to fund unforeseen and
extraordinary expenses arising from resolutions and decisions of the Human Rights Council, and
in this regard requests the Secretary-General to present a report with options for consideration by
the Fifth Committee at the main part of the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, taking
into account the relevant conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;
10. Adopts the text entitled “Outcome of the review of the work and functioning of the
Human Rights Council” annexed to the present resolution.
Annex
Outcome of the review of the work and functioning of the Human Rights Council
I.

Universal periodic review89

A.

Basis, principles and objectives of the review

1. The basis, principles and objectives of the universal periodic review as set forth
in paragraphs 1 to 4 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 200790 shall
be reaffirmed.
B.

Periodicity and order of the review

2.

The second cycle of the review shall begin in June 2012.

3. The periodicity of the review for the second and subsequent cycles will be four and a half
years. This will imply the consideration of forty-two States per year during three sessions of the
Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review.
4. The order of review established for the first cycle of the review shall be maintained for the
second and subsequent cycles.
C.

Process and modalities of the review

1.

Focus and documentation

5. The review during the second and subsequent cycles will continue to be based on the three
documents identified in paragraph 15 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 5/1.
6. The second and subsequent cycles of the review should focus on, inter alia, the
implementation of the accepted recommendations and the developments in the human rights
situation in the State under review.

_______________
89

Changes to the universal periodic review contained in section I of the present text shall be applicable as of the
second cycle of the review.
90
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/62/53), chap. IV,
sect. A.

55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7. The general guidelines for universal periodic review reports adopted by the Council in its
decision 6/102 of 27 September 200791 shall be adjusted to the focus of the second and subsequent
cycles before the eighteenth session of the Council.
8. Other relevant stakeholders are encouraged to include in their contributions information on
the follow-up to the preceding review.
9. The summary of the information provided by other relevant stakeholders should contain,
where appropriate, a separate section for contributions by the national human rights institution of
the State under review that is accredited in full compliance with the principles relating to the status
of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (“the Paris Principles”),
contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution 48/134 of 20 December 1993. Information
provided by other accredited national human rights institutions will be reflected accordingly, as
well as information provided by other stakeholders.
2.

Modalities

10. The role of the group of three rapporteurs (troika) shall be maintained as set forth in the
annex to Council resolution 5/1 and in the President’s statement PRST/8/1.92
11. Following the extension of the review cycle to four and a half years and within existing
resources and workload, the duration of the Working Group meeting for the review will be
extended from the present three hours and the modalities will be agreed upon at the seventeenth
session of the Council, including the list of speakers, which shall be based on the modalities as
appear in the Appendix.
12. The final outcome of the review will be adopted by the plenary of the Council. The
modalities for the organization of the one-hour consideration of the outcome shall be in
accordance with the President’s statement PRST/9/2.93
13. The national human rights institution of the State under review, consistent with the Paris
Principles, shall be entitled to intervene immediately after the State under review during the
adoption of the outcome of the review by the Council plenary.
14. The Universal Periodic Review voluntary trust fund to facilitate the participation of States,
established by the Council in its resolution 6/17 of 28 September 2007,94 should be strengthened
and operationalized in order to encourage a significant participation of developing countries,
particularly least developing countries and small island developing States, in their review.
D.

Outcome of the review

15. The recommendations contained in the outcome of the review should preferably be
clustered thematically with the full involvement and consent of the State under review and the
States that made the recommendations.
16. The State under review should clearly communicate to the Council, in a written format,
preferably prior to the Council plenary meeting, its positions on all received recommendations, in
accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 27 and 32 of the annex to Council resolution 5/1.

_______________
91

Ibid., Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I, sect. B.
Ibid., chap. III, sect. C.
93
Ibid., Supplement No. 53A (A/63/53/Add.1), chap. III.
94
Ibid., Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I, sect. A.
92

56

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

E.

Follow-up to the review

17. While the outcome of the review, as a cooperative mechanism, should be implemented
primarily by the State concerned, States are encouraged to conduct broad consultations with all
relevant stakeholders in this regard.
18. States are encouraged to provide the Council, on a voluntary basis, with a midterm update
on follow-up to accepted recommendations.
19. The voluntary fund for financial and technical assistance, established by the Council in its
resolution 6/17, should be strengthened and operationalized in order to provide a source of
financial and technical assistance to help countries, in particular least developed countries and
small island developing States, to implement the recommendations emanating from their review.
A board of trustees should be established in accordance with the rules of the United Nations.
20. States may request the United Nations representation at the national or regional level to
assist them in the implementation of follow-up to their review, bearing in mind the provisions of
paragraph 36 of the annex to Council resolution 5/1. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights may act as a clearing house for such assistance.
21. Financial and technical assistance for the implementation of the review should support
national needs and priorities, as may be reflected in national implementation plans.
II.

Special procedures

A.

Selection and appointment of mandate holders

22. To further strengthen and enhance transparency in the selection and appointment process of
mandate holders envisaged in the annex to Council resolution 5/1, the following provisions
will apply:
(a) In addition to entities specified in paragraph 42 of the annex to Council resolution 5/1,
national human rights institutions in compliance with the Paris Principles may also nominate
candidates as special procedure mandate holders;
(b) Individual candidates and candidates nominated by entities shall submit an application
for each specific mandate, together with personal data and a motivation letter no longer than 600
words. The Office of the High Commissioner shall prepare a public list of candidates who applied
for each vacancy;
(c) The consultative group established pursuant to paragraph 47 of the annex to Council
resolution 5/1 will consider, in a transparent manner, candidates having applied for each specific
mandate. However, under exceptional circumstances and if a particular post justifies it, the group
may consider additional candidates with equal or more suitable qualifications for the post. The
group shall interview shortlisted candidates to ensure equal treatment of all candidates;
(d) In implementing paragraph 52 of the annex to Council resolution 5/1, the President
shall justify his or her decision if he or she decides not to follow the order of priority proposed by
the consultative group.
B.

Working methods

23. In line with Council resolution 5/2 of 18 June 2007,90 States should cooperate with and assist
special procedures mandate holders in the performance of their tasks and it is incumbent on
mandate holders to exercise their functions in accordance with their mandates and in compliance
with the code of conduct.
24. The integrity and independence of the special procedures mandate holders and the principles
of cooperation, transparency and accountability are integral to ensuring a robust system of special
procedures that would enhance the capacity of the Council to address human rights situations on
the ground.
57

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25. The special procedures mandate holders shall continue to foster a constructive dialogue with
States. The special procedures mandate holders shall also endeavour to formulate their
recommendations in a concrete, comprehensive and action-oriented way and pay attention to the
technical assistance and capacity-building needs of States in their thematic and country mission
reports. The comments of the State concerned shall be included as an addendum to country
mission reports.
26. States are urged to cooperate with and assist special procedures mandate holders by
responding in a timely manner to requests for information and visits, and to study carefully the
conclusions and recommendations addressed to them by the special procedures mandate holders.
27. The Council should streamline its requests to special procedures mandate holders, in
particular with regard to reporting, to ensure a meaningful discussion of their reports. The Council
should remain a forum for open, constructive and transparent discussion on cooperation between
States and special procedures mandate holders, allowing for the identification and exchange of
good practices and lessons learned.
28. The national human rights institution, consistent with the Paris Principles, of the country
concerned shall be entitled to intervene immediately after the country concerned during the
interactive dialogue, following the presentation of a country mission report by a special
procedures mandate holder.
29. The Office of the High Commissioner will continue to maintain information on special
procedures, such as mandates, mandate holders, invitations and country visits and responses
thereto, as well as reports presented to the Council and the General Assembly, in a comprehensive
and easily accessible manner.
30. The Council strongly rejects any act of intimidation or reprisal against individuals and
groups who cooperate or have cooperated with the United Nations, its representatives and
mechanisms in the field of human rights, and urges States to prevent and ensure adequate
protection against such acts.
C.

Resources and funding

31. The Council recognizes the importance of ensuring the provision of adequate and equitable
funding, with equal priority accorded to civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural
rights, including the right to development, to support all special procedures mandate holders
according to their specific needs, including additional tasks entrusted to them by the General
Assembly. This should be achieved through the regular budget of the United Nations.
32. The Council therefore requests the Secretary-General to ensure the availability of adequate
resources within the regular budget of the Office of the High Commissioner to support the full
implementation by special procedures mandate holders of their mandates.
33. The Council also recognizes the continued need for extrabudgetary funding to support the
work related to the special procedures, and welcomes further voluntary contributions by Member
States, emphasizing that these contributions should be, to the extent possible, non-earmarked.
34. The Council highlights the need for full transparency in the funding of the special procedures.
III. Human Rights Council Advisory Committee
35. The Council shall, within existing resources, strengthen its interaction with the Human
Rights Council Advisory Committee and engage more systematically with it through work
formats such as seminars, panels, working groups and sending feedback to the inputs of
the Committee.
36. The Council shall endeavour to clarify specific mandates given to the Advisory Committee
under relevant resolutions, including indicating thematic priorities, and provide specific guidelines
for the Advisory Committee with a view to triggering implementation-oriented outputs.
58

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

37. In order to provide a proper setting for a better interaction between the Council and its
Advisory Committee, the first annual session of the Committee shall henceforth be convened
immediately prior to the March session of the Council, while the second session shall be held
in August.
38. The annual report of the Advisory Committee shall be submitted to the Council at its
September session, and be the subject of an interactive dialogue with the Committee Chair. The
present provision does not exclude other interaction with the Committee should such opportunities
arise and be deemed appropriate by the Council.
39. The Advisory Committee shall endeavour to enhance intersessional work between its
members in order to give effect to the provisions of paragraph 81 of the annex to Council
resolution 5/1.
IV. Agenda and framework for the programme of work
40. The agenda of the Council and the framework for the programme of work are as specified in
the annex to Council resolution 5/1.
41. Council cycles will be aligned with the calendar year and be subject to any necessary
transitional arrangements decided on by the General Assembly.
V.

Methods of work and rules of procedure

A.

Yearly panel discussion with United Nations agencies and funds

42. The Council shall hold a half-day panel discussion once a year to interact with the heads of
governing bodies and secretariats of United Nations agencies and funds within their respective
mandates on specific human rights themes, with the objective of promoting the mainstreaming of
human rights throughout the United Nations system. The present provision does not preclude
other opportunities that may arise for discussions between the Council and United Nations
agencies and funds on the mainstreaming of human rights.
43. State or regional groups may propose issues to be discussed by the panel. On the basis of
such proposals and consultation with all regional groups, the President of the Council will propose
the theme of the panel discussion for the upcoming year for approval by the Council at its relevant
organizational session.
44. The Office of the High Commissioner, in its capacity as secretariat of the Council, shall
coordinate the preparation of the documentation required for the panel discussion.
B.

Voluntary yearly calendar of resolutions

45. The Bureau shall establish a tentative yearly calendar for the thematic resolutions of the
Council in consultation with the main sponsors. The yearly calendar will be established on a
voluntary basis and without prejudice to the right of States as provided for in paragraph 117 of the
annex to Council resolution 5/1.
46. The calendar should also contemplate the appropriate synchronization of schedules for
resolutions, mandates and presentation of reports by the special procedures mandate holders,
taking into account the need for balance among them.
47. The Bureau shall present a report to the Council at its eighteenth session.
C.

Biennial and triennial thematic resolutions

48. In principle and on a voluntary basis, omnibus thematic resolutions should be considered on
a biennial or triennial basis.

59

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

49. Thematic resolutions on the same issue to be presented in-between the above-mentioned
intervals are expected to be shorter and focused on addressing the specific question or gap in
standards that justified their presentation.
D.

Transparency and extensive consultations for resolutions and decisions

50. The consultation process on, inter alia, resolutions and decisions of the Council shall observe
the principles of transparency and inclusiveness.
E.

Documentation

51. There is a need to ensure the availability of working documents in a timely manner and in all
official languages of the United Nations.
F.

Deadlines for the notification and submission of draft initiatives and information
related to programme budget implications

52. There is a need for early submission of draft resolutions and decisions by the end of the
penultimate week of the Council session.
53. Sponsors of initiatives are encouraged to contact the Office of the High Commissioner
before the second week of the session with a view to facilitating the circulation of information on
budgetary implications, if any.
G.

Establishment of an Office of the President

54. In line with the procedural and organizational roles of the President, an Office of the
President of the Human Rights Council shall be established, within existing resources, to support
the President in the fulfilment of his or her tasks and to enhance efficiency, continuity and
institutional memory in this regard.
55. The Office of the President shall be provided with adequate resources drawn from the
regular budget, including staff, office space and necessary equipment required for the fulfilment of
the tasks. The appointment of the staff of the Office shall promote equitable geographic
distribution and gender balance. The staff of the Office shall be accountable to the President.
56. The composition, modalities and financial implications of the Office of the President shall
be considered by the Council on the basis of the report of the secretariat, at its seventeenth session.
H.

Human Rights Council secretariat services

57. The secretariat services to the Council and its mechanisms should continue to be improved
to enhance the efficiency of the work of the Council.
I.

Accessibility for persons with disabilities

58. There is a need to enhance accessibility for persons with disabilities to the Council and the
work of its mechanisms, including its information and communications technology, Internet
resources and documents, in accordance with international standards on accessibility for persons
with disabilities.
J.

Use of information technology

59. The Council shall explore the feasibility of using information technology, such as
videoconferencing or videomessaging, to enhance access and participation by non-resident State
delegations, specialized agencies, other intergovernmental organizations and national human
rights institutions consistent with the Paris Principles, as well as by non-governmental
organizations in consultative status, bearing in mind the need to ensure full compliance of such
participation with the Council’s rules of procedure and rules concerning accreditation.

60

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

60. The use of modern information technology, such as electronic circulation, is encouraged in
order to reduce the circulation of paper.
K.

Task force

61. The Council decides to establish a task force to study the issues envisaged in paragraphs
57 to 60 above, in consultation with Government representatives, the Office of the High
Commissioner, the United Nations Office at Geneva and all relevant stakeholders, and to submit
concrete recommendations to the Council at its nineteenth session.
L.

Technical assistance trust fund

62. The Council will consider modalities for the establishment of a technical assistance trust
fund to support the participation of least developed countries and small island developing States in
the work of the Council at its nineteenth session.
Appendix
Modalities for establishing the list of speakers for the Working Group on the Universal
Periodic Review
The established procedures, which allow speaking time of three minutes for Member States
and two minutes for observer States, will continue to apply when all speakers can be
accommodated within the number of minutes available to Member and observer States.
Should it not be possible to accommodate all speakers within the minutes available based on
three minutes of speaking time for Member States and two minutes for observer States, the
speaking time will be reduced to two minutes for all.
If all speakers still cannot be accommodated, the speaking time will be divided among all
delegations inscribed so as to enable each and every speaker to take the floor.
Steps for drawing up the list of speakers
1. The list of speakers will open at 10 a.m. on the Monday of the week preceding the beginning
of the session of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review and remain open for a
period of four days. It will close on the Thursday at 6 p.m. A registration desk will be set up at the
Palais des Nations. The exact location will be communicated to all permanent missions by
the secretariat.
2. In all cases, regardless of speaking time, the delegations inscribed on the list of speakers will
be arranged in alphabetical order of the country names in English. On the Friday morning
preceding the beginning of the session, the President, in the presence of the Bureau, will draw by
lot the first speaker on the list. The list of speakers will continue from the State drawn onwards.
On the Friday afternoon, all delegations will be informed of the speaking order and of the
speaking time available to delegations.
3. Speaking time limits during the review will be strictly enforced. Speakers who exceed their
speaking time will have their microphones cut off. Speakers may therefore wish to deliver the
essential part of their statements at the beginning.
4. All speakers will have the possibility of swapping places on the list of speakers under
bilateral arrangement between speakers.

61

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 65/282
AR
/ ES6/52/82

Adopted at the 101st plenary meeting, on 21 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.80, sponsored by: Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
Colombia, France, Gabon, Germany, India, Israel, Kuwait, Lebanon, Nigeria, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Russian Federation, Senegal, South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

65/282. Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the recommendation contained in Security Council resolution
1987 (2011) of 17 June 2011,
Expressing its appreciation for the effective and dedicated service rendered to the United
Nations by Mr. Ban Ki-moon during his first term of office,
Appoints Mr. Ban Ki-moon Secretary-General of the United Nations for a second term of
office beginning on 1 January 2012 and ending on 31 December 2016.
RESOLUTION 65/283
AR
/ ES6/52/83

Adopted at the 102nd plenary meeting, on 22 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.79 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Nepal, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay

65/283. Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming its commitment to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of all States,
Recalling Chapter VI, including Article 33, paragraph 1, of the Charter, and other Articles
relevant to mediation,
Bearing in mind its responsibilities, functions and powers under the Charter, and thus
recalling all its relevant resolutions in matters related to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution, including through mediation,
Reaffirming its commitment to uphold the sovereign equality of all States, respect for their
territorial integrity and political independence and the duty of Member States to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force in any manner inconsistent with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations, and to uphold the resolution of disputes by peaceful means
and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, the right to
self-determination of peoples which remain under colonial domination or foreign occupation, noninterference in the internal affairs of States, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
respect for the equal rights of all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion,
international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or

62

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

humanitarian character and the fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed in accordance
with the Charter,
Bearing in mind that armed and other types of conflicts and terrorism, in all its forms and
manifestations, and hostage-taking still persist in many parts of the world,
Recalling its resolution 57/337 of 3 July 2003 on the prevention of armed conflict and the
2005 World Summit Outcome95 which recognizes the important role of the good offices of the
Secretary-General, including in the mediation of disputes, and which supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General in strengthening his capacity in this area,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 8 April 2009 on enhancing mediation
and its support activities,96
Reaffirming the respective role and authority of the General Assembly and the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the Charter,
Recalling all relevant General Assembly resolutions and Security Council presidential
statements related to mediation,
Recognizing the growing interest in and the provision of mediation, and its use as a
promising and cost-effective tool in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, without prejudice to other means mentioned in Chapter VI of the Charter, including the
use of arbitration and the roles and functions of the International Court of Justice,
Recognizing also the useful role that mediation can play in preventing disputes from
escalating into conflicts and conflicts from escalating further, as well as in advancing the
resolution of conflicts and thus preventing and/or reducing human suffering and creating
conditions conducive to lasting peace and sustainable development, and in this regard, recognizing
that peace and development are mutually reinforcing,
Emphasizing that justice is a fundamental building block of sustainable peace,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter and international
law, which are indispensable foundations of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, and
reiterating its determination to foster strict respect for them and to establish a just and lasting peace
all over the world,
Recalling that the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, in
accordance with the Charter and international law, including through mediation, remain a primary
responsibility of Member States without prejudice to Article 36 of the Charter,
Stressing the importance of mediation activities in peacebuilding and recovery processes, in
particular in preventing post-conflict countries from relapsing into conflict, and in this regard
recognizing the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting peace efforts in
countries on its agenda,
Recalling the good offices of the Secretary-General and his efforts, through the Department
of Political Affairs of the Secretariat and its Mediation Support Unit, to develop United Nations
mediation capacities in accordance with agreed mandates,
Reaffirming the role of regional and subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security as set out in Chapter VIII of the Charter, and taking note of their
important role as mediators, in many regions, acting with the consent of parties to a particular
dispute or conflict,

_______________
95
96

See resolution 60/1.
S/2009/189.

63

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing national and civil society actors active in mediation, and encouraging their
contributions, when appropriate, in this regard,
Recognizing also the necessity for cooperation and coordination among the actors involved
in a specific mediation context, as well as the need to build capacity for mediation activities,
Welcoming different initiatives for mediation, including the mediation for peace initiative, as
a step towards strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution,
Recognizing the importance of the full and effective participation of women at all levels, at
all stages and in all aspects of the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as the provision of adequate gender expertise for all mediators and their teams,
noting that further efforts are necessary to address the lack of women as chief or lead peace
mediators, and in this context reaffirming the full and effective implementation of all relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,97 and furthermore
welcoming the role of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women (UN-Women) in this respect,
1. Reiterates that all Member States should strictly adhere to their obligations as laid
down in the Charter of the United Nations, including in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution;
2. Invites Member States, as appropriate, to optimize the use of mediation and other tools
mentioned in Chapter VI of the Charter for the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution;
3. Welcomes the contributions of Member States to mediation efforts, as appropriate, and
encourages them, where appropriate, to develop national mediation capacities, as applicable, in
order to ensure coherent mediation and responsiveness;
4. Encourages Member States, in this regard, to promote equal, full and effective
participation of women in all forums and at all levels of the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution, particularly the decision-making level;
5. Also encourages Member States, as appropriate, to use the mediation capacities of the
United Nations as well as those of regional and subregional organizations, where applicable, and
to promote mediation in their bilateral and multilateral relations;
6. Invites all Member States to consider providing timely and adequate resources for
mediation, in order to assure its success, as well as for mediation capacity-building activities of the
United Nations and of regional and subregional organizations, with a view to ensuring the
sustainability and predictability of all catalytic resources;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to offer good offices, in accordance with
the Charter and relevant United Nations resolutions, and to continue to provide mediation support,
where appropriate, to special representatives and envoys of the United Nations and to enhance
partnerships with regional and subregional organizations, as well as Member States;
8. Stresses the importance of well-trained, impartial, experienced and geographically
diverse mediation process and substance experts at all levels to ensure the timely and highest
quality support to mediation efforts, supports the efforts of the Secretary-General in maintaining
an updated roster of mediators, and encourages the continuing efforts to improve its gender
balance and equitable geographical representation;

_______________
97

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

64

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

9. Encourages the Secretary-General to appoint women as chief or lead mediators in
United Nations-sponsored peace processes, as well as to ensure adequate gender expertise for all
United Nations processes;
10. Recommends that the Secretary-General, in accordance with mandates agreed upon by
Member States, continue to strengthen the mediation capacities of the United Nations system, in
particular the Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political Affairs, and its
responsiveness, in accordance with agreed mandates and fully taking into account existing United
Nations activities and structures, including in the fields of rule of law and accountability, so as to
avoid duplication;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with Member States and other relevant
actors, to develop guidance for more effective mediation, taking into account, inter alia, lessons
learned from past and ongoing mediation processes;
12. Recognizes that responsible and credible mediation requires, inter alia, the consent of
parties to a particular dispute or conflict, the impartiality of the mediators, their compliance with
agreed mandates, respect for national sovereignty, compliance with obligations of States and other
relevant actors under international law, including applicable treaties, and the operational
preparedness, including process and substantive expertise, of the mediators;
13. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General to assist Member States and relevant
regional and subregional organizations, upon request, in mediation capacity-building for the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution, and calls upon the SecretaryGeneral to continue these efforts, in accordance with agreed mandates;
14. Stresses the importance of partnerships and cooperation of international, regional and
subregional organizations with the United Nations, with each other and with civil society, and
of developing mechanisms to improve information-sharing, cooperation and coordination in order
to ensure the coherence and complementarity of efforts of actors involved in a specific
mediation context;
15. Invites relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, as well as civil
society, to develop mediation capacities and structures, as appropriate, as well as resource
mobilization, and encourages them to follow United Nations guidance for effective mediation;
16. Welcomes the efforts of the African Union in developing its mediation capacities
and structures, in particular its early warning assessment systems and prevention and
response capabilities;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present
resolution for consideration by Member States at the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly
and to include the views of Member States and other relevant actors, as well as guidance for
more effective mediation, as an annex to the report, and requests the Secretary-General to hold
regular briefings on this issue in order to promote closer consultation with Member States and
increase transparency;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session, under the item
entitled “Prevention of armed conflict”, a sub-item entitled “Strengthening the role of mediation in
the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution”.
RESOLUTION 65/284
AR
/ ES6/52/84

Adopted at the 102nd plenary meeting, on 22 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.69/Rev.1 and Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by: Argentina (on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Australia, Belgium, Finland,
France, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

65

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

65/284. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations Declaration on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and appraisal of
the United Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s and support for the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development and resolutions 58/233 of 23 December 2003, 59/254
of 23 December 2004, 60/222 of 23 December 2005, 61/229 of 22 December 2006, 62/179 of
19 December 2007, 63/267 of 31 March 2009 and 64/258 of 16 March 2010 entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support”,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,98 including the recognition of the need
to meet the special needs of Africa, and recalling also its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006,
Recalling the political declaration on Africa’s development needs, adopted at the high-level
meeting on Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008,99
Recalling also the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly on the Millennium
Development Goals and its outcome document,100 including the recognition that more attention
should be given to Africa, especially to those countries most off track to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015,
Bearing in mind that African countries have primary responsibility for their own economic
and social development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be
overemphasized, and bearing in mind also the need for their development efforts to be supported
by an enabling international economic environment, and in this regard recalling the support given
by the International Conference on Financing for Development to the New Partnership,101
Emphasizing that a favourable national and international environment for Africa’s growth
and development is important for progress in the implementation of the New Partnership,102
Stressing the need to implement all commitments by the international community regarding
the economic and social development of Africa,
1.

Welcomes the eighth consolidated report of the Secretary-General;103

2. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on a monitoring mechanism to
review commitments towards Africa’s development needs;104
3. Reaffirms its full support for the implementation of the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development;102
4. Reaffirms its commitment to the full implementation of the political declaration on
Africa’s development needs,99 as reaffirmed in the Doha Declaration on Financing for
Development, adopted as the outcome document of the Follow-up International Conference on

_______________
98

See resolution 60/1.
See resolution 63/1.
100
See resolution 65/1.
101
See Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
102
A/57/304, annex.
103
A/65/167.
104
A/65/165.
99

66

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Financing for Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in
Doha from 29 November to 2 December 2008;105
5. Recognizes the progress made in the implementation of the New Partnership as well as
regional and international support for the New Partnership, while acknowledging that much needs
to be done in its implementation;
6. Takes note of the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our Efforts to
Eliminate HIV and AIDS, adopted at the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS on 10 June 2011;106
7. Recognizes that HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases pose
severe risks for the entire world and serious challenges to the achievement of development goals;
8. Recalls, in this regard, the commitment to pursue all necessary efforts to scale up
support for nationally driven, sustainable and comprehensive responses in Africa to achieve broad
multisectoral coverage for prevention, treatment, care and support, with the full and active
participation of people living with HIV, vulnerable groups, most affected communities, civil
society and the private sector, towards achieving the goal of universal access to comprehensive
prevention programmes, treatment, care and support by 2010, in line with the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS of 2 June 2006;107
9. Reaffirms its commitment to redouble efforts to achieve universal access to HIV/AIDS
prevention, treatment, care and support services as an essential step in achieving Millennium
Development Goal 6 and as a contribution to reaching the other Millennium Development Goals;
10. Reaffirms the resolve to provide assistance for prevention and care, with the aim of
ensuring an HIV/AIDS-, malaria- and tuberculosis-free Africa, by addressing the needs of all, in
particular the needs of women, children and young people, and by achieving as closely as possible
the goal of universal access to comprehensive HIV/AIDS prevention programmes, treatment, care
and support in African countries, to accelerate and intensify efforts to expand access to affordable
and quality medicines in Africa, including antiretroviral drugs, inter alia, by encouraging
pharmaceutical companies to make drugs available, and to ensure strengthened global partnership
and increased bilateral and multilateral assistance, where possible on a grant basis, to combat
HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and other infectious diseases in Africa through the strengthening
of health systems;
11. Expresses deep concern about the ongoing adverse impacts of crises, including the
global financial and economic crisis, volatile energy and food prices and ongoing concerns over
food security, as well as the increasing challenges posed by climate change, drought, land
degradation, desertification and the loss of biodiversity, and the serious challenges these impacts
pose to the fight against poverty and hunger, which could further undermine the achievement of
the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
particularly in Africa;
12. Expresses grave concern that Africa is among the hardest hit by the impact of the
world financial and economic crisis, recognizes that, while growth is returning, there is a need to
sustain the recovery, which is fragile and uneven, and therefore reaffirms that it will continue to
support the special needs of Africa and take action to mitigate the multidimensional impacts of the
crisis on the continent;
13. Expresses concern at Africa’s disproportionately low share in the volume of
international trade, which stands at only 2 per cent, and also expresses concern that, despite an
overall increase in the nominal volume and share of official development assistance to Africa,
such assistance will likely rise by just 1 per cent a year in real terms, compared to the average
_______________
105

Resolution 63/239, annex.
Resolution 65/277, annex.
107
Resolution 60/262, annex.
106

67

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

13 per cent rate of growth over the past three years, and that, at this rate, any additional aid to
African countries will be outpaced by population growth, the increased debt burden of some
African countries, the rising unemployment rate, the fall in capital inflows and the significant fall
in remittances to the continent as a result of the world financial and economic crisis, which have a
negative impact on the hard-earned socio-economic and political gains that Africa has achieved
in recent years;
14. Notes that foreign direct investment is a major source of financing for development,
and in this regard calls upon developed countries to continue to devise source-country measures to
encourage and facilitate the flow of foreign direct investment, inter alia, through the provision of
export credits and other lending instruments, risk guarantees and business development services;
15. Calls upon developing countries and countries with economies in transition to
continue their efforts to create a domestic environment conducive to attracting investments by,
inter alia, achieving a transparent, stable and predictable investment climate with proper contract
enforcement and respect for property rights;
16. Stresses the importance of enhancing efforts to mobilize investments from all sources
in human resources and physical, environmental, institutional and social infrastructure;
17. Reaffirms the need to enhance the voice and participation of developing countries,
including African countries, in international economic decision-making and norm-setting, notes
recent steps being taken in this regard, and emphasizes in this context that the efforts to address the
ongoing impact of the world economic and financial crisis should not lead to further
marginalization of the African continent;
I
Actions by African countries and organizations
18. Welcomes the progress made by African countries in fulfilling their commitments in
the implementation of the New Partnership to deepen democracy, human rights, good governance
and sound economic management, and encourages African countries, with the participation of
stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, to continue their efforts in this regard
by developing and strengthening institutions for governance, creating an environment conducive
to involving the private sector, including small and medium-sized enterprises, in the New
Partnership implementation process and to attracting foreign direct investment for the
development of the region;
19. Also welcomes the integration of the New Partnership into the African Union
structures and processes and the establishment of its Planning and Coordinating Agency as a
technical body of the African Union;
20. Notes with appreciation the efforts exerted by the African Union and the regional
economic communities in the area of economic integration, as well as ongoing efforts by the
African Union in the operationalization of the provision contained in General Assembly
resolutions 59/213 of 20 December 2004, 61/296 of 17 September 2007 and 63/310 of
14 September 2009, and stresses the key role of the United Nations system in supporting the
African Union, in the social, economic and political fields and in the area of peace and security;
21. Welcomes the commendable progress that has been achieved in implementing the
African Peer Review Mechanism, in particular the completion of the peer review process in
thirteen countries, and welcomes the progress in implementing the national programmes of action
resulting from these reviews, and in this regard urges African States that have not yet done so
to consider joining the Mechanism process and to strengthen the Mechanism process for its
efficient performance;
22. Welcomes and appreciates the continuing and increasing efforts of African countries in
mainstreaming a gender perspective and the empowerment of women in the implementation of
the New Partnership;
68

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

23. Recognizes the need for African countries to continue to coordinate, in accordance
with their respective national strategies and priorities, all types of external support in order to
integrate effectively such assistance into their development processes;
24. Encourages African countries to accelerate the achievement of the objective of food
security in Africa, and welcomes the commitment made by African leaders to raise the share of
agriculture and rural development in their budget expenditures, and in this regard reaffirms its
support for, inter alia, the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and the
outcome of the post-Abuja meeting of the International Technical Committee of the Food Security
Summit, held in Addis Ababa in May 2007;
25. Recognizes the important role that African regional economic communities can play in
the implementation of the New Partnership, and in this regard encourages African countries and
the international community to give regional economic communities the support necessary to
strengthen their capacity;
26. Welcomes the collaboration between the African Private Sector Forum and the United
Nations Global Compact, and encourages the strengthening of this partnership in conjunction with
the African Union Commission in support of the development of the African private sector and the
promotion of public-private partnership projects and the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals, in line with the relevant executive decisions of the African Union;
27. Encourages African countries to design a coordinated and comprehensive continentwide communications and outreach strategy to further enhance public awareness of the objectives
and goals of the New Partnership;
28. Also encourages African countries to strengthen and expand local and transit
infrastructure and to continue sharing best practices with a view to strengthening regional
integration, and in this regard notes with appreciation the work of the high-level subcommittee of
the African Union on the Presidential Infrastructure Champion Initiative, which seeks to further
strengthen the development of infrastructure on the African continent in collaboration with
relevant development partners;
II
Response of the international community
29. Welcomes the efforts by development partners to strengthen cooperation with the
New Partnership;
30. Recognizes the important role that North-South, South-South and triangular
cooperation can play in supporting Africa’s development efforts, including in the implementation
of the New Partnership, while bearing in mind that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for
but rather a complement to North-South cooperation;
31. Welcomes the various important initiatives established between African countries
and their development partners, as well as other initiatives, and emphasizes in this regard
the importance of coordination in such initiatives on Africa and the need for their
effective implementation;
32. Urges continued support of measures to address the challenges of poverty eradication
and hunger, job creation and sustainable development in Africa, including, as appropriate, debt
relief, improved market access, support for the private sector and entrepreneurship, fulfilment of
commitments on official development assistance and increased flows of foreign direct investment,
and transfer of technology;
33. Recognizes that Africa, which contributes the least to climate change, is one of the
regions most vulnerable and most exposed to its adverse impacts, and in this regard calls upon the
international community, in particular developed countries, to support Africa in its adaptation and

69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

sustainable development efforts through, inter alia, the transfer and deployment of technology,
capacity-building and the provision of adequate and predictable new resources;
34. Reiterates the important role of trade as an engine of growth and development and its
contribution to the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, and emphasizes the need to
resist protectionist tendencies and to rectify any trade-distorting measures already taken that are
inconsistent with World Trade Organization rules, while recognizing the right of countries, in
particular developing countries, to fully utilize their flexibilities consistent with their World Trade
Organization commitments and obligations, and recognizes that the early and successful
conclusion of the Doha Round of trade negotiations with a balanced, ambitious, comprehensive
and development-oriented outcome would provide a much-needed impetus to international trade
and contribute to economic growth and development;
35. Also reiterates the need for all countries and relevant multilateral institutions to
continue efforts to enhance coherence in their trade policies towards African countries, and
acknowledges the importance of efforts to fully integrate African countries into the international
trading system and to build their capacity to compete through such initiatives as aid for trade and,
given the world economic and financial crisis, the provision of assistance to address the
adjustment challenges of trade liberalization;
36. Calls for a comprehensive and sustainable solution to the external debt problems of
African countries, including cancellation or restructuring, as appropriate, and on a case-by-case
basis, for heavily indebted African countries not part of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative that have unsustainable debt burdens, and emphasizes the importance of
debt sustainability;
37. Recognizes that the negative impact of the world financial and economic crisis on
development is still unfolding and entails the possibility of undoing the progress towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 and that it may threaten debt sustainability
in some developing countries, inter alia, through its impact on the real economy and through the
increase in borrowing undertaken in order to mitigate the negative impacts of the crisis;
38. Expresses deep concern at the fact that the commitment to double aid to Africa by
2010, as articulated at the Summit of the Group of Eight held at Gleneagles from 6 to 8 July 2005,
was not entirely reached, and in this regard stresses the need to make rapid progress in order
to fulfil the Gleneagles and other donors’ substantial commitments to increase aid through a
variety of means;
39. Acknowledges efforts by developed countries to increase resources for development,
including commitments by some developed countries to increase official development assistance,
and calls for the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments, including the
commitments by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national
income for official development assistance to developing countries by 2015 and to reach the level
of at least 0.5 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance by 2010, as
well as the target of 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development
assistance to least developed countries, and urges those developed countries that have not yet done
so to make concrete efforts in this regard in accordance with their reiterated commitments;
40. Welcomes the efforts of some developed countries, which are on target to meet the
commitments made in terms of increased official development assistance;
41. Also welcomes recent efforts and initiatives to enhance the quality of aid and to
increase its impact, including the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for
Action,108 and the resolve to take concrete, effective and timely action in implementing all agreed
commitments on aid effectiveness, with clear monitoring and deadlines, including by further
_______________
108

70

A/63/539, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

aligning assistance with countries’ strategies, by building institutional capacities, by reducing
transaction costs and eliminating bureaucratic procedures, by making progress on untying aid, by
enhancing the absorptive capacity and financial management of recipient countries and by
strengthening the focus on development results;
42. Recognizes the need for the international community to align its efforts more
specifically towards supporting the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme,
and in this regard takes note of the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security;109
43. Also recognizes the need for the international community to make continued efforts to
increase the flow of new and additional resources for financing for development from all sources,
public and private, domestic and foreign, to support the development of African countries;
44. Invites all of Africa’s development partners, in particular developed countries, to
support African countries in promoting and maintaining macroeconomic stability, to help African
countries to attract investments and promote policies conducive to attracting domestic and foreign
investment, for example by encouraging private financial flows, to promote investment by their
private sectors in Africa, to encourage and facilitate the transfer of the technology needed to
African countries on favourable terms, including on concessional and preferential terms, as
mutually agreed, and to assist in strengthening human and institutional capacities for the
implementation of the New Partnership, consistent with its priorities and objectives and with a
view to furthering Africa’s development at all levels;
45. Stresses that conflict prevention, management and resolution and post-conflict
consolidation are essential for the achievement of the objectives of the New Partnership, and
welcomes in this regard the cooperation and support granted by the United Nations and
development partners to the African regional and subregional organizations in the implementation
of the New Partnership;
46. Welcomes the continued efforts of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission in
assisting post-conflict countries in Africa and the strengthening of the relationship between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the African Union, and appreciates in this regard the visit by the
Chair of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Chairs of the
country-specific configurations to African Union headquarters on 9 November 2009;
47. Requests the United Nations system to continue to provide assistance to the Planning
and Coordinating Agency of the New Partnership and to African countries in developing projects
and programmes within the scope of the priorities of the New Partnership and to place greater
emphasis on monitoring, evaluation and dissemination of the effectiveness of its activities in
support of the New Partnership;
48. Welcomes the Basic Education in Africa Programme of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, which seeks to prioritize education and which
supports holistic and comprehensive reform;
49. Invites the Secretary-General, as a follow-up to the 2005 World Summit, to urge the
United Nations development system to assist African countries in implementing quick-impact
initiatives through, inter alia, the Millennium Villages Project, and requests the Secretary-General
to include in his report an assessment of those quick-impact initiatives;
50. Requests the Secretary-General to promote greater coherence in the work of the
United Nations system in support of the New Partnership, on the basis of the agreed clusters of the
Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa,110 and in this regard calls upon the United Nations
_______________
109

See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
The nine clusters include: infrastructure development; environment, population and urbanization; social and
human development; science and technology; advocacy and communications; governance; peace and security;
agriculture, food security and rural development; and industry, trade and market access.
110

71

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

system to continue to mainstream the special needs of Africa in all its normative and
operational activities;
51. Reaffirms the commitment by all States to establish a monitoring mechanism to follow
up on all commitments related to the development of Africa, as stipulated in paragraph 39 of the
political declaration on Africa’s development needs,99 and in this regard requests the President of
the General Assembly to continue informal consultations, led by Member States with the
participation of relevant stakeholders, on the nature, scope, priorities and institutional
arrangements for a monitoring mechanism that builds on existing mechanisms as well as on the
recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General,103 with a view to making it
operational by the end of the sixty-sixth session of the Assembly;
52. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take measures to strengthen the Office
of the Special Adviser on Africa in order to enable it to effectively fulfil its mandate, including
monitoring and reporting on progress related to meeting the special needs of Africa;
53. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session on the
basis of inputs from Governments, organizations of the United Nations system and other
stakeholders in the New Partnership.
RESOLUTION 65/285
AR
/ ES6
/52
/85

Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.81, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

65/285. Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the
strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,111
Recalling also its resolution 61/16 of 20 November 2006 on the strengthening of the
Economic and Social Council,
1. Takes note of the report of the President of the General Assembly on the review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council;112
2. Encourages Member States, the Economic and Social Council, the regional
commissions and other entities of the United Nations system to consider the recommendations
contained in the report;
3. Decides to review further the implementation of resolution 61/16 at its
sixty-seventh session.
RESOLUTION 65/286
AR
/ ES6
/52
/86

Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.66/Rev.1 and Add.1, sponsored by: Argentina (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), Australia, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Romania,

_______________
111
112

72

See resolution 60/1.
A/65/866, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

65/286. Implementing the smooth transition strategy for countries graduating from the list
of least developed countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 46/206 of 20 December 1991 and 59/209 of 20 December 2004,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 2006/1 of 7 February 2006,
2007/34 of 27 July 2007 and 2009/35 of 31 July 2009 as they relate to the need for monitoring the
progress of countries graduating from least developed country status, and to the importance of
taking into consideration the nature and extent of this progress in determining a smooth transition
strategy for these countries,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council decision 2004/299 of 23 July 2004, which
highlighted the proposals of the Secretary-General for concrete mechanisms to implement a
smooth transition strategy for graduating countries,113 as well as the recommendations on possible
features of a smooth transition strategy contained in the report of the Committee for Development
Policy on its tenth session,114
Recalling the Istanbul Declaration115 and the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,116 adopted at the Fourth United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries held in Istanbul, Turkey, from 9 to 13 May 2011, in which Member
States committed to assisting the least developed countries with an overarching goal of enabling
half of them to meet the criteria for graduation by 2020,
1. Reiterates the importance of ensuring that the graduation of a country from least
developed country status does not cause disruption in the development progress that country
has achieved;
2. Urges graduating countries and all bilateral and multilateral development and trading
partners to pursue or intensify their efforts, consistent with World Trade Organization rules, to
contribute to the full implementation of resolution 59/209, with a view to ensuring the smooth
transition of graduating least developed countries;
3. Looks forward, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 65/171 of
20 December 2010, to the report of the Secretary-General to the Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session on the support measures effectively provided by development and trading partners for the
countries that have graduated or will be graduating from least developed country status and on
possible ways to better ensure their smooth transition;
4. Decides that the long-standing benefit of travel-related support that has been made
available by the United Nations to the least developed countries will be extended, if requested,
within existing resources, to Cape Verde and Maldives for a period appropriate to the development
situation of the country and for a maximum of three years, beginning immediately after the
adoption of the present resolution, and that the same benefit will be granted, also if requested,
within existing resources, and for a period appropriate to the development situation of the country
and for a maximum of three years, to any other country that graduates from least developed
country status;

_______________
113

See E/2004/94.
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2008, Supplement No. 13 (E/2008/33).
115
A/CONF.219/7, chap. I.
116
Ibid., chap. II.
114

73

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Urges the Committee for Development Policy, with assistance and support from other
relevant entities, to continue its monitoring of the development progress of graduated countries as
a complement to its triennial review of the list of least developed countries, to pay particular
attention to the effectiveness of smooth transition for graduated countries, and to report thereon to
the Economic and Social Council at its substantive session.
RESOLUTION 65/287
AR
/ ES6
/52
/87

Adopted at the 105th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2011, by a recorded vote of 57 to 13, with
74 abstentions,* on the basis of draft resolution A/65/L.74, sponsored by Georgia

*

In favour: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Vanuatu
Against: Armenia, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam
Abstaining: Argentina, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Cyprus,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Gabon, Gambia, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, India, Indonesia, Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Yemen, Zambia

65/287. Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and
the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions on the protection of and assistance to internally
displaced persons, including its resolutions 62/153 of 18 December 2007, 62/249 of 15 May 2008,
63/307 of 9 September 2009, 64/162 of 18 December 2009 and 64/296 of 7 September 2010,
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions on Georgia relating to the need
for all parties to work towards a comprehensive peace and the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees to their places of origin, and stressing the importance of their full and
timely implementation,
Recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement117 as the key international
framework for the protection of internally displaced persons,
Concerned by forced demographic changes resulting from the conflicts in Georgia,
Concerned also by the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflict in August 2008,
which resulted in the further forced displacement of civilians,
Mindful of the urgent need to find a solution to the problems related to forced displacement
in Georgia,

_______________
117

74

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Underlining the importance of the discussions that commenced in Geneva on 15 October
2008 and of continuing to address the issue of the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return
of internally displaced persons and refugees on the basis of internationally recognized principles
and conflict-settlement practices,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of
resolution 64/296,118
1. Recognizes the right of return of all internally displaced persons and refugees and their
descendants, regardless of ethnicity, to their homes throughout Georgia, including in Abkhazia and
South Ossetia;
2. Stresses the need to respect the property rights of all internally displaced persons and
refugees affected by the conflicts in Georgia and to refrain from obtaining property in violation of
those rights;
3.

Reaffirms the unacceptability of forced demographic changes;

4. Underlines the urgent need for unimpeded access for humanitarian activities to all
internally displaced persons, refugees and other persons residing in all conflict-affected areas
throughout Georgia;
5. Calls upon all participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify their efforts to
establish a durable peace, to commit to enhanced confidence-building measures and to take
immediate steps to ensure respect for human rights and create favourable security conditions
conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of all internally displaced
persons and refugees to their places of origin;
6. Underlines the need for the development of a timetable to ensure the voluntary, safe,
dignified and unhindered return of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected by the
conflicts in Georgia to their homes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth
session a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security
and development”.
RESOLUTION 65/307
AR
/ ES6/53/07

Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 1 July 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.82 and Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Indonesia, Luxembourg,
New Zealand, Peru, Qatar, Turkey

65/307. Improving the effectiveness and coordination of military and civil defence assets
for natural disaster response
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991 and the guiding principles contained
in the annex thereto, other relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council and agreed conclusions of the Council,
Recalling the aim to improve the predictability and the effective use of civil and military
defence assets for natural disaster response, based on humanitarian principles, while emphasizing

_______________
118

A/65/846.

75

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, and reaffirming the leading role of
civilian organizations in implementing humanitarian assistance,
Recognizing that building national and local preparedness and response capacity is critical to
a more predictable and effective response,
Recognizing also the importance of promoting preparedness for disaster response through
regional and international partnerships,
Taking note in this regard of the letter from Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani,
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, to the President of the General
Assembly and the concept paper attached thereto, entitled “HOPEFOR initiative: a global
cooperative framework to improve the effectiveness of military and civil defence assets in
relief operations”,119
Taking note of the calls by Mr. Leonel Fernández Reyna, President of the Dominican
Republic, and Mr. Abdullah Gül, President of Turkey, at the general debate of the sixty-fifth
session of the General Assembly, on 23 September 2010, on the need to more effectively address
the issue of disaster response,120
1. Reaffirms the principles of neutrality, humanity, impartiality and independence for the
provision of humanitarian assistance;
2. Emphasizes the fundamentally civilian character of humanitarian assistance, and
reaffirms the need in situations of natural disaster in which military capacity and assets are used to
support the implementation of humanitarian assistance, for such use to be undertaken with the
consent of the affected State and in conformity with international law, including international
humanitarian law, as well as humanitarian principles;
3. Recalls in this regard the revised guidelines on the use of military and civil defence
assets in disaster relief, and stresses the value of their use and of the development by the United
Nations, in consultation with States and other relevant actors, of further guidance on civil-military
relations in the context of humanitarian activities;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the initiative of Qatar, the Dominican Republic and
Turkey, to reflect, in close coordination with the Emergency Relief Coordinator, on improving the
effectiveness and coordination of military and civil defence assets for natural disaster response;
5. Also takes note with appreciation of the HOPEFOR initiative by Qatar,119 which aims
to improve humanitarian civil-military coordination and ensure that the use of military and civil
defence assets in support of natural disaster relief operations is undertaken in an appropriate,
effective and coordinated manner, in accordance with the principles contained in paragraph 2 of
the present resolution, and as the last resort as defined in the Oslo Guidelines;
6. Takes note with interest of the decision of Qatar, the Dominican Republic and Turkey
to co-convene an international conference, to be held in Doha in 2011, to discuss the concept of
the HOPEFOR initiative and consider the options outlined in the paper thereon119 and steps for
their implementation, as appropriate, in close collaboration with Member States, regional and
international organizations and the Emergency Relief Coordinator.
RESOLUTION 65/308
AR
/ ES6/53/08

Adopted at the 108th plenary meeting, on 14 July 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.84 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,

_______________
119

See A/65/772, annex.
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Plenary Meetings, 11th and 12th meetings
(A/65/PV.11 and 12), and corrigendum.
120

76

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda (on behalf of the States Members of the
United Nations that are members of the Group of African States), Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Viet Nam

65/308. Admission of the Republic of South Sudan to membership in the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security Council of 13 July 2011 that the
Republic of South Sudan should be admitted to membership in the United Nations,121
Having considered the application for membership of the Republic of South Sudan,122
Decides to admit the Republic of South Sudan to membership in the United Nations.
RESOLUTION 65/309
AR
/ ES6/53/09

Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 19 July 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.86 and Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Andorra, Australia, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste,
Turkey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu, Viet Nam

65/309. Happiness: towards a holistic approach to development
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the purposes and principles of the United Nations, as set forth in the Charter
of the United Nations, which include the promotion of the economic advancement and social
progress of all peoples,
Conscious that the pursuit of happiness is a fundamental human goal,
Cognizant that happiness as a universal goal and aspiration embodies the spirit of the
Millennium Development Goals,
Recognizing that the gross domestic product indicator by nature was not designed to and
does not adequately reflect the happiness and well-being of people in a country,
Conscious that unsustainable patterns of production and consumption can impede
sustainable development, and recognizing the need for a more inclusive, equitable and balanced
approach to economic growth that promotes sustainable development, poverty eradication,
happiness and well-being of all peoples,
Acknowledging the need to promote sustainable development and achieve the Millennium
Development Goals,
_______________
121
122

A/65/905.
A/65/900-S/2011/418.

77

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Invites Member States to pursue the elaboration of additional measures that better
capture the importance of the pursuit of happiness and well-being in development with a view to
guiding their public policies;
2. Invites those Member States that have taken initiatives to develop new indicators, and
other initiatives, to share information thereon with the Secretary-General as a contribution to the
United Nations development agenda, including the Millennium Development Goals;
3. Welcomes the offer of Bhutan to convene during the sixty-sixth session of the General
Assembly a panel discussion on the theme of happiness and well-being;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to seek the views of Member States and relevant regional
and international organizations on the pursuit of happiness and well-being and to communicate
such views to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session for further consideration.
RESOLUTION 65/311
AR
/ ES6/53/11

Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 19 July 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.85 and Add.1, sponsored by: Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Benin, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Morocco, Niger, Panama, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Uruguay, Vanuatu

65/311. Multilingualism
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the United Nations pursues multilingualism as a means of promoting,
protecting and preserving diversity of languages and cultures globally,
Recognizing also that genuine multilingualism promotes unity in diversity and international
understanding, and recognizing the importance of the capacity to communicate to the peoples of
the world in their own languages, including in formats accessible to persons with disabilities,
Stressing the need for strict observance of the resolutions and rules establishing language
arrangements for the different bodies and organs of the United Nations,
Emphasizing the importance of multilingualism in the activities of the United Nations,
including those linked to public relations and information,
Recalling its resolution 47/135 of 18 December 1992, by which it adopted the Declaration
on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities,
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,123 in particular article 27 thereof,
concerning the rights of persons belonging to ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities,
Recalling also its resolutions 2 (I) of 1 February 1946, 2480 B (XXIII) of 21 December
1968, 42/207 C of 11 December 1987, 50/11 of 2 November 1995, 52/23 of 25 November 1997,
54/64 of 6 December 1999, 56/262 of 15 February 2002, 59/309 of 22 June 2005, 63/306 of
9 September 2009, 64/266 of 21 May 2010, 65/107 B of 10 December 2010, 65/245 of
24 December 2010 and 65/247 of 24 December 2010,

_______________
123

78

See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;124

2. Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue to develop the informal network of focal
points in order to support his activities;
3. Emphasizes the paramount importance of the equality of the six official languages of
the United Nations;
4. Underlines the need for full implementation of the resolutions establishing language
arrangements for the official languages of the United Nations and the working languages of
the Secretariat;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all language services are given equal
treatment and are provided with equally favourable working conditions and resources, with a view
to achieving maximum quality of those services, with full respect for the specificities of the six
official languages, and in that regard recalls section D, paragraph 11, of its resolution 54/248 of
23 December 1999;
6. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all
important older United Nations documents onto the United Nations website in all six official
languages on a priority basis, so that those archives are also available to Member States through
that medium;
7. Reiterates that all content-providing offices in the Secretariat should continue their
efforts to translate into all official languages all English-language materials and databases posted
on the United Nations website in the most practical, efficient and cost-effective manner;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure, through the provision of
documentation services and meeting and publishing services under conference management,
including high-quality translation and interpretation, effective multilingual communication among
representatives of Member States in intergovernmental organs and members of expert bodies of
the United Nations equally in all the official languages of the United Nations;
9. Stresses the importance of providing United Nations information, technical assistance
and training materials, whenever possible, in the local languages of the beneficiary countries;
10. Acknowledges the measures undertaken by the Secretary-General, in accordance with
its resolutions, to address the issue of the replacement of retiring staff in the language services, and
requests the Secretary-General to maintain and intensify those efforts, including through the
strengthening of cooperation with institutions that train language specialists to meet the need in the
six official languages of the United Nations;
11. Notes with satisfaction the willingness of the Secretariat to encourage staff members,
in meetings with interpretation services, to use any of the six official languages of which they have
a command;
12. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the rules concerning the
simultaneous distribution of documents in all six official languages are strictly respected as
regards both the distribution of printed copies and the posting of parliamentary documentation on
the Official Document System and the United Nations website, in keeping with section III,
paragraph 5, of its resolution 55/222 of 23 December 2000;
13. Emphasizes the importance of:
(a) Making appropriate use of all the official languages of the United Nations in all the
activities of the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat, with the aim of eliminating
the disparity between the use of English and the use of the five other official languages;

_______________
124

A/65/488.

79

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(b) Ensuring the full and equitable treatment of all the official languages of the United
Nations in all the activities of the Department of Public Information;
and, in this regard, reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the Department has
appropriate staffing capacity in all the official languages of the United Nations to undertake all
its activities;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to ensure that, in accordance
with their income-generating nature, guided tours at United Nations Headquarters are consistently
available, in particular, in all six official languages of the United Nations;
15. Encourages the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts to develop and maintain
multilingual United Nations websites, from within existing resources, including efforts to keep the
Secretary-General’s web page up to date in all the official languages of the United Nations;
16. Reaffirms the need to achieve full parity among the six official languages on United
Nations websites;
17. Also reaffirms that the United Nations website is an essential tool for Member States,
the media, educational institutions, the general public and non-governmental organizations, and
reiterates the continued need for efforts by the Department of Public Information to maintain
and improve it;
18. Further reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to ensure, while maintaining an
up-to-date and accurate website, the adequate distribution of financial and human resources within
the Department of Public Information allocated to the United Nations website among all official
languages, with full respect for the specificities of the six official languages;
19. Notes with concern that the multilingual development and enrichment of the United
Nations website in several official languages has improved at a much slower rate than expected,
and in this regard requests the Department of Public Information, in coordination with contentproviding offices, to improve the actions taken to achieve parity among the six official languages
on the United Nations website, in particular by expediting the filling of current vacant posts
in some sections;
20. Requests the Department of Public Information, in cooperation with the Office of
Information and Communications Technology of the Secretariat, to continue its efforts to ensure
that technological infrastructures and supportive applications fully support Latin, non-Latin
and bidirectional scripts in order to enhance the equality of all official languages on the United
Nations website;
21. Welcomes the cooperative arrangements undertaken by the Department of Public
Information with academic institutions in order to increase the number of web pages available in
some official languages, and requests the Secretary-General, in coordination with contentproviding offices, to extend these cooperative arrangements, in a cost-effective manner, to all the
official languages of the United Nations, bearing in mind the necessity of adherence to United
Nations standards and guidelines;
22. Urges the Secretariat to keep iSeek up to date in the two working languages of the
Secretariat, to continue its efforts to implement iSeek at all duty stations and to develop and
implement cost-neutral measures to provide Member States with secure access to the information
currently accessible only on the Intranet of the Secretariat;
23. Notes with appreciation the work carried out by the United Nations information
centres, including the United Nations Regional Information Centre, in favour of the publication of
United Nations information materials and the translation of important documents into languages
other than the official languages of the United Nations, with a view to reaching the widest possible
audience and extending the United Nations message to all corners of the world in order to
strengthen international support for the activities of the Organization, and encourages United
Nations information centres to continue their multilingual activities in the interactive and proactive
aspects of their work, especially by arranging seminars and debates to further the spread of
80

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

information and the understanding and exchange of views regarding United Nations activities at
the local level;
24. Recalls its resolution 65/247, in particular paragraphs 26 and 54 (f) thereof, in which it
reaffirmed the need to respect the equality of the two working languages of the Secretariat,
reaffirmed the use of additional working languages in specific duty stations, as mandated, and, in
that regard, requested the Secretary-General to ensure that vacancy announcements specified the
need for either of the working languages of the Secretariat, unless the functions of the post
required a specific working language;
25. Also recalls section II, paragraph 17, of its resolution 61/244 of 22 December 2006, in
which it acknowledged that the interaction of the United Nations with the local population in the
field was essential and that language skills constituted an important element of the selection
and training processes and therefore affirmed that a good command of the official language(s)
spoken in the country of residence should be taken into account as an additional asset during
those processes;
26. Further recalls its resolution 64/266, in which it endorsed the proposals,
recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;125
27. Takes note of section II.D.1 of the report of the Secretary-General,124 requests the
Secretary-General to continue his ongoing efforts in this regard, and further recalls its resolution
64/266 without prejudice to Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations;
28. Urges the Secretariat to translate all peacekeeping training documents into the six
official languages of the United Nations, within existing resources, to ensure that all Member
States can use them;
29. Stresses that the employment of staff shall continue to be carried out in strict
accordance with Article 101 of the Charter and in line with the relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolutions;
30. Invites the Secretary-General to ensure compliance with the requirement for United
Nations staff to have the ability to use one of the working languages of the Secretariat, and
encourages the Secretary-General to further implement resolution 2480 B (XXIII);
31. Also invites the Secretary-General to take the appropriate measures to consider the
linguistic specificities mentioned in vacancy announcements during the composition of interview
panels for the employment of United Nations staff;
32. Stresses that the promotion of staff in the Professional and higher categories shall be
carried out in strict accordance with Article 101 of the Charter and in line with the provisions of
resolution 2480 B (XXIII) and the relevant provisions of resolution 55/258 of 14 June 2001;
33. Encourages United Nations staff members to continue actively to use existing training
facilities to acquire and enhance their proficiency in one or more of the official languages of the
United Nations;
34. Notes with interest the cost-neutral initiatives of the Secretariat to produce publications
in several languages, increase the volume of translated publications and encourage a multilingual
acquisition policy for the libraries of the United Nations, and requests the Secretariat to continue
those initiatives;
35. Reaffirms that linguistic diversity is an important element of cultural diversity, stresses
the importance of the full and effective implementation of the Convention on the Protection and
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions,126 which entered into force on 18 March
_______________
125

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/64/19).
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Thirty-third Session, Paris, 3–21 October 2005, vol. 1 and corrigenda: Resolutions, chap. V, resolution 41.
126

81

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2007, and recalls the Recommendation concerning the Promotion and Use of Multilingualism and
Universal Access to Cyberspace of 15 October 2003;127
36. Welcomes the activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, Member States, the entities of the United Nations system and all other participating
bodies aimed at fostering respect for and the promotion and protection of all languages, in
particular endangered ones, linguistic diversity and multilingualism;
37. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session a comprehensive report on the full implementation of its resolutions on multilingualism;
38. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session the item
entitled “Multilingualism”.
RESOLUTION 65/312
AR
/ ES6/53/12

Adopted at the 111th plenary meeting, on 26 July 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution
A/65/L.87, submitted by the President of the General Assembly

65/312. Outcome document of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on Youth: Dialogue and Mutual Understanding
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/134 of 18 December 2009, in particular paragraph 3 thereof, and
its resolution 65/267 of 15 March 2011, in particular paragraph 1 thereof,
Adopts the following outcome document of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on Youth: Dialogue and Mutual Understanding:
Outcome document of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on Youth: Dialogue
and Mutual Understanding
We, Heads of State and Government, Ministers and representatives of Member States,
gathered at a high-level meeting at United Nations Headquarters in New York on 25 and 26 July
2011 on the theme “Youth: dialogue and mutual understanding”,
1. Stress the need to disseminate and foster among young people and educate them about
the ideals of peace, freedom, justice, tolerance, respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, solidarity and dedication to the objectives of progress and development;
2. Recall resolution 64/134 of 18 December 2009, by which the General Assembly
proclaimed the year commencing on 12 August 2010 the International Year of Youth: Dialogue
and Mutual Understanding, and acknowledge the significance of the High-level Meeting as the
highlight of the International Year of Youth;
3. Reaffirm the World Programme of Action for Youth, including its fifteen interrelated
priority areas, and call upon Member States to continue its implementation at the local, national,
regional and international levels;
4. Encourage Member States to develop comprehensive policies and action plans that
focus on the best interests of youth, particularly the poor and marginalized, and address all aspects
of youth development, and also encourage the international community and the United Nations
system to support national youth programmes and further develop and improve the existing
international framework on youth, including the World Programme of Action for Youth, in order
to fully address all current challenges affecting youth;
_______________
127

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Conference,
Thirty-second Session, Paris, 29 September–17 October 2003, vol. 1: Resolutions, chap. IV, recommendation 41.

82

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Also encourage Member States to promote gender equality and the empowerment of
women in all aspects of youth development, recognizing the vulnerability of girls and young
women, and the important role of boys and young men in ensuring gender equality;
6. Note with appreciation the activities, special events, contributions and inputs of
Member States and all stakeholders, including youth-led organizations, the private sector, civil
society and the media, as well as United Nations entities, and take into account the input from
youth-led organizations to the outcome document of the High-level Meeting;
7. Recognize that the ways in which young people are able to address their aspirations
and challenges and fulfil their potential will influence current social and economic conditions and
the well-being and livelihood of future generations, and stress the need for further efforts to
promote the interests of youth, including the full enjoyment of their human rights, inter alia,
by supporting young people in developing their potential and talents and tackling obstacles
facing youth;
8. Recall the commitment to achieving the internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and to implementing the outcomes of global
conferences and summits and relevant programmes;
9. Stress the important role of effective sectoral and cross-sectoral national youth
policies, reflecting youth in all its diversity, as well as of international cooperation in promoting
the achievement of the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals;
10. Invite Member States to review and evaluate the implementation of their commitments
to relevant internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development
Goals, and the relevant outcomes and programmes of action, including the World Programme of
Action for Youth, and request the United Nations regional commissions to assist Member States in
sharing information on national experiences, lessons learned and good practices in that regard;
11. Encourage Member States to continue developing, implementing, monitoring and
evaluating effective national youth policies, taking into account their cultural context regarding
youth development, as well as to promote relevant regional programmes on youth;
12. Reaffirm our determination to give priority attention to the promotion of youth and
their interests and to address the challenges that hinder youth development, in particular through
poverty eradication, the promotion of sustained economic growth, sustainable development and
full and productive employment and decent work for all, and call for increased participation of
youth and youth-led organizations in the formulation of, as appropriate, local, national, regional
and international development strategies and policies;
13. Reaffirm the need for young people to be protected from all forms of violence,
including gender-based violence, trafficking in persons, bullying and cyberbullying, as well as
from involvement and manipulation in criminal activities such as drug-related crimes, and
recognize the need for the development of safe and youth-friendly counselling and complaint and
reporting mechanisms for the redress of violations of their rights;
14. Reaffirm that the strengthening of international cooperation regarding youth, including
through the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments, the transfer of
appropriate technology, capacity-building, the enhancement of dialogue, mutual understanding
and the active participation of youth, are crucial elements of efforts towards achieving the
eradication of poverty, full employment and social integration;
15. Welcome the ongoing efforts by Member States to implement their pledges to achieve
the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and
acknowledge the contributions of Member States, the United Nations entities, civil society
organizations, including youth-led organizations, and the private sector to improve the situation of
young people; note with concern, however, that, despite these efforts, substantial numbers of
young people reside in areas where poverty constitutes a major challenge and access to basic
83

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

social services is limited, especially for girls and young women, and that youth development
remains hindered by the economic and financial crisis, as well as by challenges brought about by
the food crisis and continued food insecurity, the energy crisis and climate change; and also note
with concern that the overall progress towards achieving the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, in particular on issues relevant to youth,
has been uneven;
16. Recognize that the majority of the world’s youth live in developing countries and that
development constraints pose additional challenges to youth owing to their limited access to
resources, education and training, health care, employment and broader socio-economic
development opportunities, and therefore request United Nations entities to take into account these
development constraints when designing and implementing their programmes on youth in order to
ensure that benefits reach young people living in developing countries equally;
17. Condemn the recruitment and use of youth in armed conflict, in contravention of
applicable international law, deplore the negative consequences it has on the youth involved, and
call upon Member States, in cooperation with the United Nations entities, to take concrete
measures and continue to support programmes to ensure the effective social and economic
reintegration and rehabilitation of demobilized young people;
18. Recognize the importance of preventing and addressing youth crime, including drugrelated crime, and its impact on youth and the socio-economic development of societies, as well as
of protecting young victims and witnesses and supporting the rehabilitation, reintegration and
inclusion of young offenders in society with a view to them assuming constructive roles;
19. Invite Member States, following the celebration of the International Year of Youth, to
continue to place greater emphasis on, and expand their activities at the national, regional and
international levels in promoting, including through human rights education and learning, a
culture of dialogue and mutual understanding among and with youth, as agents of development,
social inclusion, tolerance and peace;
20. Reiterate that the full and effective participation of young people and youth-led
organizations in relevant decision-making processes through appropriate channels is key to, inter
alia, achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals, and to implementing the outcomes of global conferences and summits, as
well as the World Programme of Action for Youth;
21. Recognize the positive contribution that youth representatives make to the General
Assembly and other United Nations entities and their role in serving as an important channel of
communication between young people and the United Nations, and in this regard request the
Secretary-General to adequately support existing instruments so that they can continue to facilitate
their effective participation in meetings;
22. Encourage Member States, in cooperation with relevant actors, to promote dialogue
and mutual understanding to better address youth-related issues, particularly as regards active
youth participation, youth work, gender equality and the empowerment of women, social
integration, full employment and decent work for all, access to quality education, the development
of scientific and innovative capacities, scholarships and training, access to and safe use of
information and communications technology, in particular in the interest of the protection of
children and young people, access to health care, the elimination of discrimination, protection
from all forms of violence, intergenerational solidarity, and the impacts of financial, economic
and other crises;
23. Request the United Nations agencies, and invite the international community and civil
society, as well as the private sector, to promote the broader youth development agenda and to
strengthen international cooperation and the exchange of good practices in order to support
Member States in their efforts to achieve such progress, taking into account the fact that the
primary responsibility for ensuring youth development lies with States;

84

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

24. Urge the United Nations entities, including specialized agencies, funds and
programmes, in accordance with their mandates, to support, upon request, the strengthening of
national capacities and efforts in the development and implementation of national plans, policies
and programmes that can accelerate the achievement of internationally agreed development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals, and the relevant outcomes and programmes of
action, including the World Programme of Action for Youth;
25. Request the United Nations entities to enhance their coordination and intensify efforts
towards a more coherent, comprehensive and integrated approach to youth development through,
inter alia, the Inter-Agency Network on Youth Development, call upon the United Nations entities
and relevant partners to develop additional measures to support national, regional and international
efforts in addressing challenges hindering youth development, and in this regard encourage close
collaboration with Member States as well as other relevant stakeholders, including civil society;
26. Request the Secretary-General to submit a report, with due regard to existing reporting
obligations, to the Commission for Social Development at its fifty-first session, on national
experiences, lessons learned and good practices on how to address problems affecting youth,
which report shall also evaluate the achievements and shortcomings of ongoing United Nations
programmes related to youth and put forward concrete recommendations on how to more
effectively address the challenges hindering the development and participation of youth, including
through volunteer activities; how to improve the United Nations programmes and structures
related to youth, including their coherence; how to better foster dialogue and mutual
understanding among youth worldwide; and how to assess progress in these fields, and should be
prepared in consultation with Member States, as well as the relevant specialized agencies, funds
and programmes, and regional commissions, taking into account the work done by the United
Nations system; and also request the Secretariat to consult, as appropriate, with youth-led and
youth-focused organizations to ensure that various youth inputs are duly shared with the
Commission for Social Development during its deliberations;
27. Reiterate our request to the Secretary-General to propose a set of possible indicators
linked to the World Programme of Action for Youth and the proposed goals and targets, in order
to assist Member States in assessing the situation of youth, encouraging continued consultations
with Member States;
28. Renew our resolve to fulfil our commitments to promote youth development, dialogue
and mutual understanding, paying due attention to the relevant internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals, and relevant outcomes and programmes of
action, including the World Programme of Action for Youth. Therefore, we pledge to commit to
the following actions:
(a) Call upon the international community to continue to support the efforts of Member
States, together with civil society, including youth-led organizations, the private sector and other
parts of society, to anticipate and offset the negative social and economic consequences of
globalization and to maximize its benefits for young people;
(b) Also call upon donors, including Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, to support the efforts of Member States in the implementation of this
outcome document as well as the World Programme of Action for Youth;
(c) Address the high rates of youth unemployment, underemployment, vulnerable
employment and informal employment by developing and implementing targeted and integrated
national youth employment policies for inclusive job creation; improved employability; skill
development and vocational training to meet specific labour market needs of youth, including
young migrants; and increased entrepreneurship, including the development of networks of young
entrepreneurs at the local, national, regional and global levels, which foster knowledge among
young people about their rights and responsibilities in society; and in this regard request donors,
specialized United Nations entities and the private sector to continue to provide assistance,
including technical and funding support, as required;
85

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(d) Urge Member States to address the global challenge of youth unemployment by
developing and implementing strategies that give young people everywhere a real chance to find
decent and productive work, and, in this context, consider undertaking efforts towards the
development of a global strategy on youth employment with a focus on youth unemployment, and
encourage Member States, employers’ organizations, trade unions, the private sector, institutions
of education at all levels, youth organizations and civil society, with the support of the
international community, all relevant stakeholders, including financial institutions, and the United
Nations system, as appropriate, to develop partnerships in this regard to foster inclusive
employment opportunities in the labour market, including through the promotion of youth
entrepreneurship, taking into account regional and national particularities;
(e) Undertake appropriate measures, in cooperation with civil society, including youth-led
organizations, educational institutions and the private sector, in order to strengthen international,
regional and national partnerships to foster mutual respect, tolerance and understanding among
young people with different racial, cultural and religious backgrounds;
(f) Increase efforts to improve the quality of education and promote universal access to
education, particularly for young women, out-of-school youth, youth with disabilities, indigenous
youth, youth in rural areas, young migrants, and youth living with HIV and affected by AIDS,
without discrimination on any basis, to ensure that they can acquire the knowledge, capacities,
skills and ethical values needed, including by appropriate access to scholarships and other
mobility programmes, non-formal education, as well as technical and vocational education and
training, to develop and to participate fully in the process of social, economic and political
development, since knowledge and education are key factors for youth participation, dialogue and
mutual understanding;
(g) Promote and provide human rights education and learning for youth, taking particular
account of young women, and develop initiatives in that regard, in order to promote dialogue and
mutual understanding, tolerance and friendship among youth of all nations;
(h) Urge Member States to take effective measures in conformity with international law to
protect young people affected or exploited by terrorism and incitement;
(i) Adopt appropriate laws and develop strategies for the prevention and elimination of all
forms of violence against youth, in all settings, and to ensure the implementation of policies and
adequately resourced programmes on ending violence against youth, including initiatives to
support youth action to end violence through youth-led organizations and networks;
(j) Strengthen the use of information and communications technology to improve the
quality of life of young people, and, with the support of the United Nations system, donors, the
private sector and civil society, promote universal, non-discriminatory, equitable, safe and
affordable access to information and communications technology, especially in schools and public
places, and remove the barriers to bridging the digital divide, including through transfer of
technology and international cooperation, as well as promote the development of locally relevant
content and implement measures to equip young people with the knowledge and skills needed to
use information and communications technology appropriately and safely;
(k) Ensure that young people enjoy the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health by providing youth with access to sustainable health systems and social services without
discrimination and by paying special attention to, and raising awareness regarding, nutrition,
including eating disorders and obesity, the effects of non-communicable and communicable
diseases and sexual and reproductive health, as well as measures to prevent sexually transmitted
diseases, including HIV and AIDS;
(l) Promote youth participation in training and capacity-building for environmental
issues, including climate change adaptation and mitigation, tackling desertification and other
challenges, particularly for those who are engaged in agricultural production and play a vital role
in providing food security, which is threatened by climate change;

86

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(m) Promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, especially young people, regardless of their migration status, address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a
comprehensive and balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of
origin, transit and destination in promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants,
especially young people, and address the root causes of youth migration, while avoiding
approaches that might aggravate their vulnerability;
(n) Urge Member States to take concerted actions in conformity with international law to
remove the obstacles to the full realization of the rights of young people living under foreign
occupation to promote the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
(o) Encourage Member States, the international community, the United Nations system
and the private sector to support youth-led organizations in achieving openness and inclusiveness
and to strengthen their capacity to participate in national and international development activities;
(p) Encourage Member States to strengthen mechanisms for partnerships with civil
society, including youth-led organizations, as contributions to youth development, and create
effective channels of cooperation, dialogue and information exchange among young people,
including rural and urban youth, their national Governments and other relevant decision makers,
as appropriate;
(q) Call upon donors, including Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, to actively contribute to the United Nations Youth Fund in order to
support catalytic and innovative actions in the field of youth and to facilitate the participation
of youth representatives from developing countries in the activities of the United Nations
Programme on Youth, taking into account the need for a greater geographic balance of youth
representation, and, in this regard, request the Secretary-General to take appropriate action to
encourage contributions to the Fund as well as synergy with other youth-related funds of
United Nations entities.
RESOLUTION 65/313
AR
/ ES6/53/13

Adopted at the 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/65/L.42/Rev.1, sponsored by Argentina (on behalf of the States Members of the United
Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China)

65/313. Follow-up to the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis
and Its Impact on Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 63/303 of 9 July 2009, in which it endorsed the Outcome of the
Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, held in
New York from 24 to 30 June 2009,
Recalling also its resolution 63/305 of 31 July 2009, in which it decided to establish an
ad hoc open-ended working group of the General Assembly to follow up on the issues contained
in the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact
on Development,
Recalling further its decision of 13 September 2010 to take note of the progress report of the
Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group of the General Assembly to follow up on the issues
contained in the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its
Impact on Development,128
_______________
128

A/64/884.

87

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing deep concern about the ongoing adverse impact, particularly on development, of
the world financial and economic crisis, recognizing that global growth is returning and that there
is a need to sustain the recovery, which is fragile and uneven, and stressing the need to continue to
address systemic fragilities and imbalances,
Taking note of the important efforts undertaken nationally, regionally and internationally to
respond to the challenges posed by the financial and economic crisis, in order to ensure a full
return to growth with quality jobs, to reform and strengthen financial systems and to create strong,
sustainable and balanced global growth,
Recognizing the need to ensure proper follow-up to the outcomes of the Conference on the
World Financial and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development,
Decides to explore further, at its sixty-sixth session, the most efficient modalities for the
intergovernmental follow-up process of the Conference on the World Financial and Economic
Crisis and Its Impact on Development, and in this regard requests the President of the General
Assembly to hold open, inclusive, timely and transparent consultations with all Member States.
RESOLUTION 65/314
AR
/ ES6
/53
/14

Adopted at the 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/65/L.91, sponsored by Mexico

65/314. Modalities for the fifth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey,
Mexico, from 18 to 22 March 2002, the Follow-up International Conference on Financing for
Development to Review the Implementation of the Monterrey Consensus, held in Doha from
29 November to 2 December 2008, and its resolutions 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, 57/250 of
20 December 2002, 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, 57/272 and 57/273 of 20 December 2002, 58/230
of 23 December 2003, 59/225 of 22 December 2004, 60/188 of 22 December 2005, 61/191 of
20 December 2006, 62/187 of 19 December 2007, 63/239 of 24 December 2008, 64/193 of
21 December 2009 and 65/145 of 20 December 2010, as well as Economic and Social Council
resolutions 2002/34 of 26 July 2002, 2003/47 of 24 July 2003, 2004/64 of 16 September 2004,
2006/45 of 28 July 2006, 2007/30 of 27 July 2007, 2008/14 of 24 July 2008, 2010/26 of 23 July
2010 and 2011/38 of 28 July 2011,
1. Decides to hold its fifth High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development on 7 and
8 December 2011 at United Nations Headquarters;
2. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the proposed organization of work
of the fifth High-level Dialogue;129
3. Decides that the overall theme of the fifth High-level Dialogue will be “The
Monterrey Consensus and Doha Declaration on Financing for Development: status of
implementation and tasks ahead”;
4. Stresses the importance of the full involvement of all relevant stakeholders in the
implementation of the Monterrey Consensus130 at all levels, and also stresses the importance of
their full participation in the financing for development follow-up process, in accordance with the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly, in particular the accreditation procedures and
modalities of participation utilized at the Monterrey and Doha Conferences;
_______________
129

A/65/897.
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
130

88

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Decides that the modalities for the fifth High-level Dialogue will be the same as those
used for the fourth High-level Dialogue, as described in General Assembly resolution 64/194 of
21 December 2009;
6. Decides also that the fifth High-level Dialogue will consist of a series of plenary
and informal meetings, three interactive multi-stakeholder round tables and an informal
interactive dialogue;
7. Decides further that the themes of the round tables and of the informal interactive
dialogue will be as follows:
(a) Round table 1: The reform of the international monetary and financial system and its
implications for development;
(b) Round table 2: The impact of the world financial and economic crisis on foreign direct
investment and other private flows, external debt and international trade;
(c) Round table 3: The role of financial and technical development cooperation, including
innovative sources of development finance, in leveraging the mobilization of domestic and
international financial resources for development;
(d) Informal interactive dialogue: The link between financing for development
and achieving the internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals;
8. Decides that the fifth High-level Dialogue will result in a summary by the President of
the General Assembly, which will be issued as a document of the Assembly.
RESOLUTION 65/315
AR
/ ES6/53/15

Adopted at the 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, without a vote, on the basis of the report of
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the General Assembly (A/65/909, para. 90)

65/315. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions relating to the revitalization of its work, including
resolutions 46/77 of 12 December 1991, 47/233 of 17 August 1993, 48/264 of 29 July 1994,
51/241 of 31 July 1997, 52/163 of 15 December 1997, 55/14 of 3 November 2000, 55/285 of
7 September 2001, 56/509 of 8 July 2002, 57/300 of 20 December 2002, 57/301 of 13 March
2003, 58/126 of 19 December 2003, 58/316 of 1 July 2004, 59/313 of 12 September 2005, 60/286
of 8 September 2006, 61/292 of 2 August 2007, 62/276 of 15 September 2008, 63/309 of
14 September 2009 and 64/301 of 13 September 2010,
Stressing the importance of the implementation of resolutions of the General Assembly on
the revitalization of its work, and noting with concern their lack of implementation and impact on
the authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly,
Recognizing the role of the General Assembly in addressing issues of peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the role and authority of the General Assembly on global matters of concern to
the international community, including global governance, as set out in the Charter,
Welcoming the decision of the President of the General Assembly to designate “Reaffirming
the central role of the United Nations in global governance” as the theme of the general debate at
its sixty-fifth session,
Recognizing the need to further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of
the General Assembly,
89

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Noting the important role and the activities of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly,
Reiterating that the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly is a critical
component of the overall reform of the United Nations,
1. Welcomes the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the
General Assembly;131
2. Decides to establish, at its sixty-sixth session, an ad hoc working group on the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, open to all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency
of the Assembly, inter alia, by building on previous resolutions and evaluating the status of
their implementation;
(b)

To submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session;

3. Also decides that the Ad Hoc Working Group shall continue its review of the inventory
of General Assembly resolutions on revitalization, based on the updated annex to the report of the
Ad Hoc Working Group submitted at the sixty-third session,132 and requests the Secretary-General
to submit an update on the provisions of the Assembly resolutions on revitalization addressed to
the Secretariat for implementation that have not been implemented, with an indication of the
constraints and reasons behind any lack of implementation, for further consideration by the Ad
Hoc Working Group at the sixty-sixth session;
Role and authority of the General Assembly
4. Reaffirms the role and authority of the General Assembly, including on questions
relating to international peace and security, in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 and 35 of the
Charter of the United Nations, where appropriate, using the procedures set forth in rules 7 to 10 of
the rules of procedure of the Assembly which enable swift and urgent action by the Assembly,
bearing in mind that the Security Council has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter;
5. Stresses the need for the General Assembly to actively undertake its role and
effectively respond, in a timely manner, to emerging challenges and current events of common
concern to the international community;
6. Welcomes the holding of thematic debates on current issues of critical importance to
the international community and their interactive inclusive character, and invites the President of
the General Assembly to continue this practice and to consult with Member States on the
possibilities for achieving, where appropriate, results-oriented outcomes in such debates;
7. Recognizes the importance and benefit of a continuing interaction between the General
Assembly and international or regional forums and organizations dealing with global matters of
concern to the international community in the perspective of the revitalization of the work
of the Assembly;
8. Welcomes the continued practice of holding periodic informal briefings by the
Secretary-General on his priorities, travels and most recent activities, including his participation in
international meetings and events organized outside the United Nations, and encourages him to
continue with this practice;
9. Stresses the importance of ensuring increased cooperation, coordination and exchange
of information among the principal organs, and welcomes the holding of regular meetings of the
_______________
131
132

90

A/65/909.
A/63/959.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session with the Secretary-General and the
Presidents of the Security Council and the Economic and Social Council, as well as with the
Chairs of subsidiary bodies, and briefings to Member States on the outcomes of these meetings on
a regular basis, and encourages the continuation of such practice;
10. Welcomes the improvements that have been made in the quality of the annual reports
of the Security Council to the General Assembly, encourages the Council to make further
improvements as necessary, and takes note of the holding of informal meetings of the President of
the Council with all Member States before the preparation of the report;
11. Notes that, in accordance with Article 15 and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter,
the Security Council shall submit to the General Assembly an annual report and, when necessary,
special reports for its consideration;
12. Recognizes that non-implementation of various General Assembly resolutions, in
particular those adopted by consensus, may diminish the role and authority of the Assembly, and
underlines the important role and responsibility of Member States in their implementation;
Working methods
13. Welcomes the substantial discussion undertaken and the decision adopted on
20 December 2010 by the Second Committee of the General Assembly at the sixty-fifth session
aimed at rationalizing and streamlining its agenda and improving its working methods;
14. Requests that the General Assembly and its Main Committees, at the sixty-sixth
session, in consultation with Member States, continue consideration of and make proposals for the
further biennialization, triennialization, clustering and elimination of items on the agenda of the
Assembly, taking into account the relevant recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group,
including through the introduction of a sunset clause, with the clear consent of the sponsoring
State or States;
15. Encourages each Main Committee to discuss its working methods at the sixty-sixth
session, and invites the Chairs of the Main Committees, at the sixty-sixth session, to brief the Ad
Hoc Working Group, as appropriate, on the discussions on the working methods;
16. Notes with appreciation that the high-level meetings held at the United Nations give
more visibility to very important topics, while mindful of the need to facilitate full participation of
all Member States and to preserve the integrity of the general debate in September, and invites the
Secretary-General, the President of the General Assembly and the Chairs of the Main Committees,
in consultation with Member States, to enhance the coordination of the scheduling of high-level
meetings with a view to optimizing the number and distribution of such events;
17. Encourages Member States, United Nations bodies and the Secretariat to consult on
the consolidation of documentation in order to avoid duplication of work and to exercise the
fullest possible discipline in striving for concise resolutions, reports and other documentation, inter
alia, by referring to previous documents rather than repeating actual content;
18. Stresses the importance of further enhancing public and media awareness of the work
and decisions of the General Assembly, including through their timely issuance and distribution in
all official languages;
19. Decides that the Ad Hoc Working Group shall remain apprised of options for more
time-effective, efficient and secure balloting, reiterating the need to ascertain the credibility,
reliability and confidentiality of the balloting process, and requests the Secretariat to submit
an update in case of any new technological developments, on the understanding that the adoption
of any new balloting system in the future will require a decision of the plenary of
the General Assembly;

91

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Selection and appointment of the Secretary-General and other executive heads
20. Reaffirms its commitment to continue, in the Ad Hoc Working Group, in accordance
with the provisions of Article 97 of the Charter, its consideration of the revitalization of the role of
the General Assembly in the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General, and calls for the
full implementation of all relevant resolutions, including resolutions 11 (I) of 24 January 1946,
51/241, 60/286, in particular paragraphs 17 to 22 of the annex thereto, and 64/301;
21. Takes note of the recommendation contained in the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
on the selection and conditions of service of executive heads in the United Nations system
organizations proposing that the General Assembly conduct hearings or meetings with candidates
running for the post of Secretary-General of the United Nations;133
22. Recognizes that the process of selecting and appointing the Secretary-General differs
from the process used with regard to other executive heads in the United Nations system, given
the role of the Security Council in accordance with Article 97 of the Charter, and re-emphasizes
the need for the process of selection of the Secretary-General to be transparent and inclusive of
all Member States;
Strengthening the institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly
23. Welcomes the views expressed by the President of the General Assembly to the Ad
Hoc Working Group on the strengthening of the institutional memory of the Office of the
President of the Assembly and its relationship with the Secretariat;
24. Also welcomes the periodic briefings by the President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session to Member States on his recent activities, including official travels, and
encourages the continuation of such practice;
25. Notes that the activities of the President of the General Assembly have increased
markedly in recent years, recalls provisions regarding support for the Office of the President of the
General Assembly in previous resolutions, expresses continued interest in seeking ways to further
support the Office, in accordance with existing procedures, in particular rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, and in this context looks forward to the submission by the
Secretary-General of his proposals pursuant to paragraph 10 of resolution 64/301;
26. Requests the Secretary-General, at the sixty-sixth session, to report on the funding and
staffing of the Office of the President of the General Assembly, including on any technical,
logistical, protocol-related or financial questions;
27. Notes the concerns raised on the protocol arrangements in place for the President of
the General Assembly, and requests the Secretary-General to further endeavour to ensure, within
agreed resources, that the President is provided with proper protocol and security services and
adequate office space, with a view to enabling the President to carry out his or her functions in a
manner commensurate with the dignity and stature of the Office;
28. Emphasizes the need to ensure, within agreed resources, that the Office of the
President of the General Assembly is allocated dedicated staff within the Secretariat with
responsibility for coordinating the transition between Presidents, managing interactions between
the President of the Assembly and the Secretary-General and the retention of institutional memory,
and requests the outgoing Presidents of the Assembly to brief their successors on the lessons
learned and best practices;

_______________
133

92

See A/65/71.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

29. Notes with appreciation the contributions of Member States to the Trust Fund in
support of the Office of the President of the General Assembly, and invites Member States to
continue to contribute to the Fund.
RESOLUTION 65/316
AR
/ ES6/53/16

Adopted at the 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, without a vote, on the basis of draft
resolution A/65/L.90 and Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Finland, Georgia, Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kiribati, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New Zealand, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Portugal, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu

65/316. Cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/1 of 17 October 1994, 59/20 of 8 November 2004, 61/48 of
4 December 2006 and 63/200 of 19 December 2008,
Welcoming the ongoing efforts towards closer cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum and its associated institutions, and affirming the value of considering
ways to further strengthen this cooperation,
Recognizing the fortieth anniversary of the establishment of the Pacific Islands Forum in
1971, and noting the key role the Forum continues to play in promoting sustainable development,
environmental protection, good governance and peace and security in the Pacific through regional
cooperation, including through the implementation of the Pacific Plan which was endorsed by
leaders of the Forum in 2005,
Welcoming the first-ever participation by a Secretary-General of the United Nations at a
Pacific Islands Forum, during the forty-second Forum, held on 7 and 8 September 2011, in
Auckland, New Zealand, as well as his preceding visits to Australia, Kiribati and Solomon Islands,
and taking note of the joint statement issued by Forum leaders and the Secretary-General,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations,134
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,134 in particular paragraphs 116 to
123 on cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum, and encourages
further such cooperation;
2. Welcomes the commitment by Pacific Islands Forum leaders and the SecretaryGeneral to enhanced high-level dialogue between the members of the Pacific Islands Forum and
the United Nations, including meetings between the Secretary-General and Forum leaders at
regular intervals;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to consider ways to promote and expand cooperation and
coordination with Pacific Islands Forum members and the Forum secretariat, particularly in the
areas identified in the joint statement issued by Forum leaders and the Secretary-General on
7 September 2011;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session a report on the implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-seventh session the sub-item
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum”.
_______________
134

A/65/382-S/2010/490.

93

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

65/272.

Report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the management capacity of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East....................................................................................96

65/310.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects .....................................98

95

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 65/272
AR
/ ES6/52/72

Adopted at the 86th plenary meeting, on 18 April 2011, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/65/422/Add.1, para. 9),1 by a recorded vote of 123 to 1 with no abstentions, as follows:
In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Israel
Abstaining: None

65/272. Report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening of the management capacity
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949, by which it established the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and all subsequent
related resolutions, including its resolution 65/100 of 10 December 2010,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period from 1 January to
31 December 2009,2
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Working Group on the Financing of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East3 and the efforts
of the Working Group to assist in ensuring the financial security of the Agency,
Reiterating its deep concern about the critical financial situation of the Agency, caused in
part by the structural underfunding of the Agency, as well as its rising expenditures resulting from
the deterioration of the socio-economic and humanitarian conditions in the region and their
significant negative impact on the provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine
refugees, including its emergency-related and development programmes,
Reiterating that the effective functioning of the Agency remains essential in all fields
of operation,
_______________
1

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Algeria, Australia, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Montenegro,
Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Yemen and Palestine.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/65/13).
3
A/65/551.

96

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

Recognizing the need to maintain and extend the Agency’s management reform process in
order to enable the Agency to effectively deliver services to the Palestine refugees, most efficiently
utilize donor resources and reduce operational and administrative costs, and encouraging in this
regard the Agency’s efforts to sustain change,
Recalling its resolution 3331 B (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it decided that
expenses for salaries of international staff in the service of the Agency which would otherwise be
a charge on voluntary contributions should be financed by the regular budget of the United
Nations for the duration of the Agency’s mandate,
Recalling also the recommendation of the Working Group at its extraordinary meeting in
June 2009 that the General Assembly review, at its next session, the basis for its decision in
resolution 3331 B (XXIX) to provide funding to the Agency for international posts so as to enable
the Agency to meet contemporary demands from stakeholders and the Assembly itself,4
Stressing the need to continue supporting the institutional strengthening of the Agency,
including the need to reinforce the Agency’s resource mobilization and advocacy capacities as
well as the need for more predictable funding, through the provision of financial resources from
the regular budget of the United Nations, in accordance with the requests made in its resolutions
64/89 of 10 December 2009 and 65/100 of 10 December 2010,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the
strengthening of the management capacity of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East;5
2. Takes note of the grave financial situation faced by the Agency, including recurrent
budgetary shortfalls due to underfunding and rising costs;
3. Calls upon the Agency to continue its management reform process in order to enhance
its ability to raise and efficiently utilize resources, reduce operational and administrative costs, and
implement change for more effective delivery of services to its beneficiaries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to support the institutional strengthening
of the Agency through the provision of financial resources from the regular budget of
the United Nations;
5. Stresses that approval of funding for the biennium 2012–2013 and for future
bienniums, taking into consideration the recommendations in the report of the Secretary-General,5
is subject to justification in the context of the proposed programme budget for the relevant
bienniums and consideration thereof by the General Assembly;
6. Reiterates its appeal to all States, the specialized agencies and non-governmental
organizations to continue and to increase their contributions to the Agency in order to address the
serious financial constraints and underfunding, especially with respect to the deficit in the
Agency’s General Fund, and to support the Agency’s valuable and necessary work in assisting the
Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
7. Urges the Commissioner-General to continue his efforts to sustain and increase the
support of traditional donors and to enhance income from non-traditional donors, including
through partnerships with public and private entities;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session on the progress made with regard to the implementation of the present resolution.

_______________
4
5

A/64/115, para. 14 (d).
A/65/705.

97

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 65/310
AR
/ ES6
/53
/10

Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 19 July 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/424/Add.1, para. 6)6

65/310. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations
in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 64/266 of 21 May 2010,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
including through its peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in
the field of peacekeeping and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its
peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make
to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop- and policecontributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the
effectiveness of the work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;7

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee,
contained in paragraphs 15 to 278 of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take
all steps necessary to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the
Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to the United
Nations peacekeeping operations in years to come or participate in the future in the Special
Committee for three consecutive years as observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chair of
the Special Committee, become members at the following session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its
efforts for a comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their
aspects and shall review the implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new
proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United Nations to fulfil its responsibilities
in this field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General
Assembly at its sixty-sixth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.

_______________
6

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt,
Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
7
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/65/19).

98

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

*

65/243.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors.............................................. 101
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................ 101

65/254.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad .................................................... 103
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................ 103

65/256.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti..................................................................................... 104
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................ 104

65/257.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan ................................................................................................. 107
Resolution B ................................................................................................................................................................ 107

65/268.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011 ...........................................................111

65/269.

Capital master plan........................................................................................................................................................116

65/270.

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2010 and programme of work for 2011 ............................................................ 122

65/288.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized
by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council .................................................................................................. 125

65/289.

Cross-cutting issues...................................................................................................................................................... 126

65/290.

Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations............................... 134

65/291.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.................................................................................. 146

65/292.

Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment.................. 147

65/293.

Closed peacekeeping missions ..................................................................................................................................... 147

65/294.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire......................................................................................... 148

65/295.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus................................................................................... 151

65/296.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo............................ 154

65/297.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste............................................................................. 157

65/298.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea.................................................................................. 160

65/299.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia..................................................................................... 160

65/300.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo................................................................ 162

65/301.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia...................................................................................................... 164

65/302.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force................................................................................. 168

65/303.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon .......................................................................................... 170

_______________
*

Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chair or another officer of the Bureau of the Committee.

99

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

65/304.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara ......................................................... 173

65/305.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur................................................................ 176

65/306.

Financing of support of the African Union Mission in Somalia..................................................................................... 179

100

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 65/243 B
Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/594/Add.1, para. 6)

65/243. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 64/268 of 24 June 2010 and 65/243 A of 24 December 2010,
Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the twelvemonth period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 and the report of the Board of Auditors on the
United Nations peacekeeping operations2 and the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations
peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2010,3 as well as the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the report of the Board of
Auditors on the accounts of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period
ended 30 June 2010,4
1. Accepts the audited financial statements of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;2
2. Takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in the
report of the Board of Auditors;5
3. Also takes note of the observations and endorses the recommendations contained in
the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;4
4. Commends the Board of Auditors for the continued high quality of its report and the
streamlined format thereof;
5. Notes the enhanced coordination among the Board of Auditors, the Secretary-General
and the Advisory Committee, and welcomes the timely submission of the relevant reports on
peacekeeping operations;
6. Notes with encouragement that there were improvements in the financial and
administrative management of peacekeeping operations, and expects that these trends will be
sustained in future financial periods;
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations
for the financial period ended 30 June 2010;3
8. Recalls paragraph 7 of resolution 64/268, and reiterates the need to strengthen
administrative and institutional measures to address the root causes of recurring issues and to
minimize the ageing of the Board’s previous recommendations;
9. Notes with concern the recurrence of problems previously identified by the Board of
Auditors in regard to the management of expendable and non-expendable property;
_______________
1

Resolution 65/243, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 65/243 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/65/5 (Vol.II)).
3
A/65/719.
4
A/65/782.
5
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/65/5 (Vol.II)), chap. II.

101

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the related recommendations of the Advisory
Committee in a prompt and timely manner;
11. Stresses the importance of the Secretary-General’s stewardship of the management of
assets for peacekeeping, including expendable and non-expendable property and strategic
deployment stocks, and reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General to strengthen internal
controls in the management of those assets to ensure adequate safeguards that would prevent
waste and financial loss to the Organization;
12. Notes paragraphs 27 to 34 of the report of the Board of Auditors,5 expresses concern
over the creation of a large amount of unliquidated obligations at the end of the financial year and
the risk of applying the amount reserved during the current-year budget to the following year, and
notes with concern the increase in the cancellation of unliquidated obligations over the previous
financial year;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to adhere to the criteria for the creation and
cancellation of obligations and to strengthen internal controls in the management of these matters,
and also requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services with
assisting in that regard;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to indicate an expected time frame for
the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the priorities for their
implementation, including the office holders to be held accountable and measures taken in
that regard;
15. Recalls section D of its resolution 64/259 of 29 March 2010, and requests the
Secretary-General to reinforce his efforts to ensure that managers are effectively held accountable
for the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors through the
identification of priorities, clear time frames and an assessment of actions taken in that regard, in
the context of the assessment of managers’ performance mechanisms, including sanctions in case
of recurrent non-compliance, and to continue to report thereon in the context of the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in his next report on the implementation of
the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping
operations, a full explanation for the delays in the implementation of all outstanding
recommendations of the Board, the root causes of the recurring issues and the measures to be taken;
17. Recalls paragraph 5 of its resolution 65/243 A, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that adequate and specific plans for peacekeeping operations are in place to address matters
relating to expendable and non-expendable property in order to serve as a basis for preparations
for the implementation of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards;
18. Stresses that the leadership and commitment of senior managers to the implementation
strategy of the enterprise resource planning project, Umoja, will be critical to the successful
adoption of the International Public Sector Accounting Standards, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take all necessary measures to this end;
19. Recalls paragraphs 32 and 33 of the report of the Advisory Committee4 and
paragraph 14 of resolution 64/268, and welcomes the willingness of the Board of Auditors to
conduct performance audits;
20. Requests the Advisory Committee to request the Board of Auditors to submit to the
General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, in coordination with the Office of Internal Oversight

102

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Services and the Administration, a comprehensive proposal in this regard, including its impact
with respect to the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.6
RESOLUTION 65/254 B
AR
/ ES6/52/54B

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/653/Add.1, para. 6)

65/254. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
B7
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad for the period from 1 July 2009
to 30 June 20108 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,9
Recalling Security Council resolution 1778 (2007) of 25 September 2007, by which the
Council established in the Central African Republic and Chad a multidimensional presence,
including the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of
which was resolution 1923 (2010) of 25 May 2010, by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Mission until 31 December 2010, decided to reduce the military component of the Mission
to 2,200 military personnel and called upon the Secretary-General to complete the withdrawal of
all uniformed and civilian components, other than those required for the liquidation of the
Mission, by 31 December 2010,
Recalling also its resolution 62/233 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 65/254 A of 24 December 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 57.1 million United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only ninety-five Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;

_______________
6

ST/SGB/2003/7 and Amend.1.
Resolution 65/254, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 65/254 A.
8
A/65/638.
9
A/65/743/Add.11.
7

103

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,9 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;8
5. Decides to defer until its sixty-sixth session action on the unencumbered balance of
149,947,800 dollars as well as the other income and adjustments in the amount of 13,466,100
dollars and the increase of 1,527,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income, and
requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session updated
information on the cash position of the Mission;
6. Also decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad”.
RESOLUTION 65/256 B
AR
/ ES6
/52
/56B

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/655/Add.1, para. 6)

65/256. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
B10
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti11 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,12
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the
Council declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support
continuation of a peaceful and constitutional political process and the maintenance of a secure and
stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period
of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1944 (2010) of 14 October 2010, by which the Council
decided to extend the mandate of the Mission until 15 October 2011 and to maintain the current
overall force levels, which consist of a military component of up to 8,940 troops of all ranks and
of a police component of up to 4,391 police,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 65/256 A of 24 December 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
_______________
10

Resolution 65/256, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 65/256 A.
11
A/65/703 and Corr.1 and A/65/776.
12
A/65/743/Add.15.

104

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 129.8 million
United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only forty-six Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,12 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Affirms that qualified candidates who are of Haitian origin and are holders of other
nationalities are eligible to apply for international posts in the Mission, in compliance with the
relevant United Nations legislative mandates and guidelines on recruitment and selection;
11. Expresses deep concern over the continuing high vacancy rate in the Mission,
especially in the National temporary positions, and its negative impact on the work of the Mission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to keep under review the Mission requirements for
the “tiger team”;
13. Regrets that the share of procurement activities awarded to local vendors has
substantially decreased during the current financial year, and reiterates its request to the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that the Mission increases procurement opportunities for local vendors;
14. Recalls paragraph 41 of the report of the Advisory Committee,12 and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure the efficient, expeditious and full implementation of the total amount
allocated to quick-impact projects for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 in order, inter
alia, to contribute to the recovery effort and foster better relations with the local communities;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, in submitting his next budget proposal for the
Mission, to fully review current needs assessments on the ground regarding quick-impact projects,
taking into account the related guidelines of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations of the
Secretariat on quick-impact projects;
105

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

16. Recalls paragraph 7 of section III of resolution 64/269;
17. Reaffirms the important role of the expanded community violence reduction approach
in the post-earthquake context, in particular in assisting the displaced people and those living in
violence-affected neighbourhoods;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen coordination among the Mission, the
United Nations country team and other United Nations entities, including in addressing the root
causes of unexpected emergencies, such as the situation resulting from the cholera outbreak;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to put into effect measures
to mitigate the environmental impact of the Mission on Haiti;
20. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the
relevant provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission
is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
22. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
23. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;13
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
24. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti the amount of 844,258,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June
2012, inclusive of 793,517,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 42,997,600 dollars for
the support account for peacekeeping operations and 7,744,000 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
25. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 246,242,100 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 15 October 2011, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
26. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 25 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
6,569,900 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 5,270,400 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,062,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 237,300 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
27. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 598,016,600 dollars for the
period from 16 October 2011 to 30 June 2012 at a monthly rate of 70,354,892 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in its resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;

_______________
13

106

A/65/703 and Corr.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

28. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X),
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 27 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 15,955,400 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 12,799,600 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 2,579,500 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 576,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
29. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 25 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
26,755,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated in its resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2010,
as set out in its resolution 64/248;
30. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 26,755,500 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 29 above;
31. Also decides that the increase in the estimated staff assessment income of 85,500
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 26,755,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 29 and 30 above;
32. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
33. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
34. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
35. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 65/257 B
AR
/ ES6/52/57B

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/656/Add.1, para. 6)

65/257. Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
B14
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan15 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,16

_______________
14

Resolution 65/257, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 65/257 A.
15
A/65/630 and Corr.1 and A/65/731.
16
A/65/743/Add.10.

107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1590 (2005) of 24 March 2005, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in the Sudan for an initial period of six months as from
24 March 2005, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission, the latest of which was resolution 1978 (2011) of 27 April 2011, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 9 July 2011,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1990 (2011) of 27 June 2011, by which the
Council established the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei for an initial period of six
months from 27 June 2011,
Recalling further its resolution 59/292 of 21 April 2005 on the financing of the Mission
and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 65/257 A of
24 December 2010,
Recalling its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Trust Fund in
Support of the Peace Process in the Sudan,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan as
at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 133.1 million United
States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern
that only forty-seven Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all
other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;

108

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,16 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Reaffirms section XX of resolution 61/276, and encourages the Secretary-General,
where feasible, to enhance regional and inter-mission cooperation with a view to achieving greater
synergies in the use of the resources of the Organization and the implementation of mandates
of the missions, while bearing in mind that individual missions are responsible for the preparation
and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their own assets and
logistical operations;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget submissions contain
sufficient information, explanation and justification of the proposed resource requirements relating
to operational costs in order to allow Member States to take well-informed decisions;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Authorizes the Secretary-General to draw upon the resources approved for the Mission
in entering into commitments for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2011 for the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei and any further missions established by the Security
Council before 31 December 2011 in support of the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement;17
15. Notes the intention of the Security Council, as stated in its resolution 1978 (2011), to
establish a successor mission to the United Nations Mission in the Sudan, and authorizes the
Secretary-General to draw upon the resources approved for the Mission in entering into
commitments for a successor mission for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2011;
16. Also notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with
the terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;18
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan the amount of 513,330,150 dollars for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2011,
inclusive of 482,460,550 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 26,158,400 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,711,200 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 24,838,556 dollars for
the period from 1 to 9 July 2011, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009 and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2011,
as set out in its resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;

_______________
17
18

S/2005/78, annex.
A/65/630 and Corr.1.

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

20. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
794,816 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 663,668 dollars approved
for the Mission, the prorated share of 107,201 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 23,947 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 488,491,594 dollars for the
period from 10 July to 31 December 2011, for the administrative liquidation of the Mission, the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, a successor mission to the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan as stated in Security Council resolution 1978 (2011) and any further
missions established by the Council before 31 December 2011 in support of the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2011, as set out in
Assembly resolution 64/248;
22. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X),
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 15,631,384 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 13,052,132 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 2,108,299 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 470,953 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 19 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
52,052,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2010, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248;
24. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 52,052,100 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 23 above;
25. Also decides that the increase of 2,702,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 52,052,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 23 and 24 above;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan”.

110

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 65/268
AR
/ ES6/52/68

Adopted at the 84th plenary meeting, on 4 April 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/646/Add.2, para. 8)

65/268. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011
The General Assembly,
I
Revised estimates resulting from the entry into force of the International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on revised estimates resulting from
the entry into force of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance19 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,20
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;19

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,20 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Decides to establish one P-4 post and one General Service (Other level) post under
section 23 (Human rights) of the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011 effective
1 April 2011;
4. Also decides that an additional amount of 815,625 United States dollars (at initial
2010–2011 rates), comprising 529,400 dollars under section 2 (General Assembly and Economic
and Social Council affairs and conference management), 236,800 dollars under section 23 (Human
rights), 25,500 dollars under section 28E (Administration, Geneva), and 23,925 dollars under
section 36 (Staff assessment), to be offset by a corresponding amount under income
section 1 (Income from staff assessment), should be met from within the resources already
appropriated under the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the above, as necessary, in the context of
the second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011;
II
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices
and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly
and/or the Security Council: United Nations Office in Burundi and
United Nations Representative on the International Advisory
and Monitoring Board of the Development Fund for Iraq
Recalling its resolution 64/244 A of 24 December 2009, section VI of its resolution 64/245
of 24 December 2009, section IV of its resolution 64/260 of 29 March 2010, section XIII of its
resolution 65/259 of 24 December 2010 and its resolution 65/260 A of 24 December 2010,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Estimates in respect of
special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council: United Nations Office in Burundi and United Nations

_______________
19
20

A/65/628.
A/65/739.

111

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Representative on the International Advisory and Monitoring Board”21 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;21

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,22 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Underscores the need for a smooth transition from the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi to the United Nations Office in Burundi;
4. Takes note of paragraphs 21, 26 and 32 (a) of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;22
5. Approves the budget for the United Nations Office in Burundi in the amount
of 23,989,700 dollars gross (22,145,800 dollars net) for the period from 1 January to
31 December 2011;
6. Also approves the budget for the United Nations Representative on the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board in the amount of 24,600 dollars gross (24,600 dollars net) for the
period from 1 January to 30 June 2011, and notes that the requirements for the Representative will
be accommodated from within the overall appropriation for special political missions and reported
to the General Assembly in the context of the second performance report on the programme
budget for the biennium 2010-2011;
7. Decides to appropriate, under the provisions of its resolution 41/213 of 19 December
1986, the amount of 7,504,600 dollars under section 3 (Political affairs) and 624,800 dollars under
section 36 (Staff assessment), to be offset by an equivalent amount under income section 1 (Income
from staff assessment) of the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011, taking into
consideration the amount of 14,641,200 dollars already approved for the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi (the predecessor mission);
8. Also decides to utilize the unencumbered balance for the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi to offset part of the additional appropriation required for the United Nations
Office in Burundi for the period from 1 January to 31 December 2011, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to meet the additional requirements for the United Nations Office in Burundi from the
overall appropriation for special political missions, and to report thereon in the context of the
second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011;
III
Conditions of service and compensation for officials,
other than Secretariat officials, serving the General Assembly:
full-time members of the International Civil Service Commission
and the Chair of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions
Recalling its resolution 35/221 of 17 December 1980, section VII of its resolution 55/238 of
23 December 2000 and its resolution 58/266 of 23 December 2003,
Recalling also its resolution 3357 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974, by which the General
Assembly recognized that the salaries and allowances of the Chair and Vice-Chair of the
International Civil Service Commission should be established separately from those of the staff of
organizations for which the Commission has the power to recommend or determine such salaries

_______________
21
22

112

A/65/328/Add.6 and Corr.1.
A/65/602/Add.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and allowances and that the remuneration and status of the Chair and Vice-Chair should be such as
to permit them to speak on equal terms with executive heads,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Conditions of service and
compensation for officials, other than Secretariat officials, serving the General Assembly: full-time
members of the International Civil Service Commission and the Chair of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions”,23 as well as the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,24
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;23

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,24 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Takes note of paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;24
4. Decides to discontinue the use of the consumer price index as the basis for annual
adjustments to the annual net compensation of the Chair and Vice-Chair of the International Civil
Service Commission and of the Chair of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;
5. Also decides that the annual net compensation of the Chairs of the International Civil
Service Commission and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
shall be set at 224,833 dollars, including the special allowance, with retroactive effect from
1 January 2011, and that the pensionable remuneration shall be adjusted accordingly to
279,283 dollars;
6. Further decides that the annual net compensation of the Vice-Chair of the International
Civil Service Commission shall be set at 214,833 dollars, with retroactive effect from 1 January
2011, and that the pensionable remuneration shall be adjusted accordingly to 264,320 dollars;
7. Decides that, effective 1 January 2012, the annual net compensation of the three
officials shall be subject to a cost-of-living adjustment equivalent to the annual change in the
midpoint net base salary of the most senior officials in the Secretariat, namely the UnderSecretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General;
8. Also decides to review every four years the other elements of the conditions of service
of the three officials, including the special allowances for the Chairs of the International Civil
Service Commission and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
the education grant, the installation grant and the survivor’s benefit, with the next review to be
conducted at the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly;
9. Recalls rule 157 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and decides that,
on an exceptional basis and without setting a precedent for other agenda items, the SecretaryGeneral shall henceforth submit reports on the conditions of service of the Chair and Vice-Chair
of the International Civil Service Commission and of the Chair of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions directly to the Assembly;
IV
Standards of accommodation for air travel
Recalling its resolution 42/214 of 21 December 1987, section IV, paragraph 14, of its
resolution 53/214 of 18 December 1998, section IV of its resolution 60/255 of 8 May 2006,
_______________
23
24

A/65/676.
A/65/767.

113

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

section XV of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December 2007, section II of its resolution 63/268 of
7 April 2009 and its decision 57/589 of 18 June 2003,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on standards of accommodation for
air travel,25 the report of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on
the feasibility of harmonizing standards of travel26 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,27
Having also considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Review of travel
arrangements within the United Nations system”28 and the note by the Secretary-General
transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination thereon,29
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;25

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,27 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
3. Regrets that the Secretary-General has not presented the comprehensive report
mentioned in section II, paragraph 3, of its resolution 63/268, based on a review by the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination and specific proposals, with a view to
harmonizing standards of travel for staff of the United Nations common system, indicating the
measures that can be implemented under the authority of the Secretary-General, as well as those
that will require the approval of the General Assembly;
4. Recognizes the need for efficient and effective air travel to effectively implement the
mandates of the United Nations through the facilitation of direct contacts;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to improve, as a matter of urgency, the management of
air travel in the United Nations and to pursue a more effective and efficient utilization of resources
for air travel, including through the implementation of the measures outlined in the annex to the
present resolution;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the procurement process for all air
travel management services contracts is conducted in full compliance with the general
procurement principles set out in financial regulation 5.12, namely: (a) best value for money;
(b) fairness, integrity and transparency; (c) effective international competition; and (d) the interest
of the United Nations,30 and to ensure that the procurement process includes the option of awarding
a contract to multiple vendors to allow for greater competition among the selected vendors;
7. Stresses the importance of effective coordination among United Nations entities in
harmonizing the standards and practices of acquiring air travel services, and encourages the
Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board
for Coordination, to promote the sharing of best practices with respect to air travel across the
United Nations system;
8. Notes the increase in exceptions authorized by the Secretary-General in accordance
with resolution 42/214, and requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to better govern
the granting of such exceptions;

_______________
25

A/65/348.
A/65/386.
27
A/65/632.
28
See A/65/338.
29
A/65/338/Add.1.
30
ST/SGB/2003/7 and Amend.1.
26

114

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Decides to extend to the Deputy Secretary-General the entitlements regarding official
travel accorded to the Secretary-General in paragraph 2 of General Assembly resolution 42/214;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of a more effective and efficient
utilization of resources for air travel, to present proposals to the General Assembly at the first part
of its resumed sixty-sixth session on the conditions under which staff members below the level of
Assistant Secretary-General may travel in business class;
11. Notes with concern the lack of consolidated and comprehensive data on air travel
across the United Nations system, and stresses the need for such information to be provided to the
General Assembly in the context of the programme budget;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services of
the Secretariat to conduct a comprehensive audit of all air travel activities and related practices,
including: (a) the implementation of all provisions contained in the present resolution; (b) the
delegation of authority by the Secretary-General for the granting of exceptions for air travel;
(c) processes related to bidding on air travel services in the United Nations and their procurement;
and (d) the identification of all expenditures on air travel, using the most recent data available, for
the programme budget, including special political missions, for peacekeeping operations, and for
lump-sum payments to eligible staff members, and to carry out a cost-benefit analysis for this
option and to submit the findings of the audit and the analysis to the General Assembly at the first
part of its resumed sixty-seventh session;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the main part
of its sixty-sixth session on the projected total expenditure on air travel under the regular budget,
by budget section, including payments under lump-sum schemes, for the biennium 2010–2011,
with corresponding data for the bienniums 2008–2009 and 2006–2007;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at the first
part of its resumed sixty-sixth session on the implementation of the present resolution, including
the measures set out in the annex, and on practical steps taken to enhance the effective and
efficient utilization of resources for air travel in the United Nations;
15. Decides to consider, at the first part of its resumed sixty-sixth session, the issue of a
system for allowing United Nations staff to provide data on frequent flyer miles accrued as a result
of official air travel.
Annex
Measures for the effective and efficient utilization of resources for air travel in
the United Nations
1. The delegation to the Under-Secretary-General for Management, or any other senior
management official, of the Secretary-General’s authority to grant exceptions for air travel shall be
done with a formal non-transferable letter of appointment.
2.

In addition, the Secretary-General is requested:

(a) To make a proposal for a mechanism to allow for the effective tracking of all costs
associated with commercial air travel in the Secretariat, including with regard to peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and lump-sum payments to eligible staff members, and to
maximize cost efficiencies in the purchase of air tickets and other services related to air travel,
benefiting from best practices, including, but not limited to, those set out in the present resolution;
(b) To promote greater coordination across the United Nations system on air travel
matters, including by leveraging the experiences of existing bodies, such as the Inter-Agency
Travel Network;
(c) To implement, as a matter of priority, the planned enterprise resource planning/Umoja
travel module to facilitate and better regulate all travel activities undertaken by the United Nations,

115

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

including the collection of data necessary for negotiating global deals with airlines and
airline alliances;
(d) To introduce a set of clear and comprehensive guidelines to better regulate the
authorization of upgrades in the class of air travel on an exceptional basis, inter alia, in the case of
a medical condition, restricting such upgrades to business class at the highest, without prejudice to
instances of medical emergency, taking into account the opinion of the Director of the Medical
Services Division of the Secretariat, which was reiterated in the position paper adopted by all
medical directors in the United Nations common system in 2007, that there is no substantive
difference between business class and first class in terms of the safety of an individual with a
medical condition;
(e) To update the administrative instruction on official travel,31 taking into account, inter
alia, the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent developments in air travel, such
as new products introduced by air carriers and new classes of air travel, and to include provisions
instructing staff (a) to collect and, where possible, use frequent flyer miles to fund official travel;
(b) to not use frequent flyer miles accrued as a result of official travel for personal travel; and
(c) where possible, to purchase tickets at least two weeks in advance of travel;
(f) To continue exploring, in the context of section II, paragraph 3, of General Assembly
resolution 63/268 of 7 April 2009, all possible options, including various tools for enhancing the
effective and efficient utilization of resources for air travel across the United Nations system,
including forecasting and planning, making online and early bookings, using advance-purchase
discount tickets, using frequent flyer miles accumulated by staff members from official travel to
purchase and upgrade tickets where appropriate, making alternative arrangements for the
procurement of air travel utilizing the collective purchasing power of the United Nations and
making the most effective use possible of the lump-sum scheme, where applicable;
(g) To ensure that the Travel and Transportation Section properly performs its contract
management role by monitoring the performance of air travel vendors and their full compliance
with contract provisions, including the provision of all information requested by United Nations
management entities and oversight bodies.
RESOLUTION 65/269
AR
/ ES6/52/69

Adopted at the 84th plenary meeting, on 4 April 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/646/Add.2, para. 8)

65/269. Capital master plan
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/249 of 23 December 1999, 55/238 of 23 December 2000,
56/234 and 56/236 of 24 December 2001 and 56/286 of 27 June 2002, section II of its resolution
57/292 of 20 December 2002, its resolution 59/295 of 22 June 2005, section II of its resolution
60/248 of 23 December 2005, its resolutions 60/256 of 8 May 2006, 60/282 of 30 June 2006,
61/251 of 22 December 2006 and 62/87 of 10 December 2007, section II.B of its resolution
63/248 of 24 December 2008, its resolutions 63/270 of 7 April 2009 and 64/228 of 22 December
2009 and its decisions 58/566 of 8 April 2004 and 65/543 of 24 December 2010,
Recognizing the importance of ensuring that persons with disabilities have access to the
physical environment on an equal basis with others,

_______________
31

116

ST/AI/2006/4 and Amend.1 and 2.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the eighth annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the capital master plan,32 the report of the Secretary-General on proposals for
financing the associated costs required for the year 2011 from within the approved budget for the
capital master plan,33 the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the year
ended 31 December 2009,34 the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report on the capital master plan for the
year ended 31 December 2009,35 the relevant sections of the annual report of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 201036 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37
1. Takes note of the eighth annual progress report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the capital master plan,32 the report of the Secretary-General on proposals for
financing the associated costs required for the year 2011 from within the approved budget for the
capital master plan,33 the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the year
ended 31 December 2009,34 the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report on the capital master plan for the
year ended 31 December 2009,35 and the relevant sections of the annual report of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;36
2. Reaffirms the oversight role of the Fifth Committee in administrative and
budgetary matters;
3. Stresses the importance of effective oversight, transparency and accountability in the
management of the project;
4. Also stresses the special role of the host country Government with regard to support
for United Nations Headquarters, in New York;
5. Notes the benefits, including economic ones, accruing to host countries from the
presence of the United Nations, and the costs incurred;
6. Recalls the current practices of Governments of host countries with regard to support
for United Nations headquarters and United Nations bodies located in their territories;
7.

Reaffirms paragraphs 31 through 34 of its resolution 61/251;

8. Recalls paragraph 10 of its resolution 61/251 and paragraph 37 of its resolution 62/87,
and reaffirms that any scope options in addition to those already approved by the General
Assembly shall be submitted by the Secretary-General to the Assembly for its consideration
and approval;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,37 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution;
10. Accepts the report of the Board of Auditors on the capital master plan for the year
ended 31 December 2009;
11. Approves the recommendations of the Board of Auditors contained in its report;
12. Notes with concern the findings of the Board of Auditors as contained in its report, and
emphasizes the importance of the full implementation of the recommendations of the Board;
_______________
32

A/65/511.
A/65/511/Add.1.
34
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. V (A/65/5 (Vol. V)).
35
A/65/296, sect. III.
36
A/65/271 (Part I) and Corr.1, sect. IV.A and A/65/271 (Part I)/Add.1 and Corr.1, sect. V.B.
37
A/65/725.
33

117

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

I
Eighth annual progress report
13. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General make every effort to avoid budget
increases through sound project management practices and to ensure by all means that the capital
master plan is completed within the budget as approved in its resolution 61/251, and to report
thereon in the context of his ninth annual progress report;
Schedule
14. Recalls paragraph 7 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, and reiterates its request that the Secretary-General make every effort to
finish the project in accordance with the schedule approved in its resolution 62/87;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full accountability for delays, and all factors
contributing to delays, in the implementation of the capital master plan and the budget overrun,
and to include this information in his ninth annual progress report;
16. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to continue to update the Member States
through regular informal briefings, besides submitting annual progress reports, on all aspects of
the implementation of the capital master plan, including the current status, significant activities
carried out since the previous report and risk analysis information outlining any risks identified,
action to be taken, status and trends, and to update the relevant information on its website on a
regular basis;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his ninth annual progress report,
information on lessons learned in the implementation of the capital master plan and how they are
being utilized to improve the current and future planning and implementation of the capital
master plan;
18. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the process of the relocation of
Secretariat staff from office swing space is carried out in the most effective and timely manner,
taking full advantage of the lessons learned during the capital master plan project, and in this
regard requests him to prepare well in advance detailed office plans of the Secretariat Building in
order to avoid delays and any potential additional costs;
19. Reaffirms its support for the timely deconstruction and removal of the temporary
North Lawn Building upon the completion of the Headquarters renovation work;
Value engineering
20. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue finding efficiency gains and cost
reductions throughout the implementation of the capital master plan;
21. Emphasizes that the value engineering exercise shall not undermine the quality,
durability and sustainability of the materials used, the original design of Headquarters or the
commitment of the project to the highest standards for the safety, health and well-being of staff
and delegations, in particular with regard to the handling of asbestos;
22. Regrets that the Secretary-General did not provide detailed information on the value
engineering exercise as requested in paragraph 6 of section I of its resolution 64/228;
23. Notes that the Board of Auditors was unable to provide any assurance as to the actual
efficiency of value engineering in terms of cost reduction, and that such measures are instrumental
in bringing costs back on budget, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to reassess the
merits of value engineering, and to include detailed information thereon in his next annual
progress report;

118

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Procurement and sustainability
24. Reaffirms paragraphs 36 to 38 of its resolution 61/251, on the importance of
transparency in the procurement process, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
construction manager takes them fully into account when subcontracting and to report, in the
context of his ninth annual progress report, on the specific steps taken and progress achieved in the
context of increasing procurement opportunities for vendors from developing countries and
countries with economies in transition in the implementation of the capital master plan;
25. Reaffirms once again paragraph 38 of its resolution 61/251, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure that procurement activities conducted by the construction manager in the
implementation of the capital master plan are in compliance with United Nations rules, regulations
and procedures and General Assembly resolutions governing United Nations procurement
activities, as well as ethics policies, including post-employment restrictions,38 and that the relevant
provisions are taken fully into account by the construction manager when subcontracting;
26. Reaffirms paragraph 13 of section I of its resolution 63/270;
27. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General in its resolutions 61/276 of 29 June
2007 and 62/269 of 20 June 2008, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to explore
additional innovative ways to promote procurement from developing countries and countries with
economies in transition and to identify obstacles preventing their participation in United Nations
procurement contracts and to report on concrete measures taken in this regard;
28. Notes that the action plan prepared by the construction manager to promote
procurement opportunities for contractors and vendors from developing countries and countries
with economies in transition has not led to a significant increase in the value of contracts awarded
to contractors and vendors from developing countries and countries with economies in transition;
29. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to review all expression of interest notices
and invitations to bid issued by the construction manager in order to ensure that their contents
fully comply with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and do not unduly restrict the
diversification of the origin of vendors;
30. Notes that some measures taken to avoid delays in the capital master plan procurement
process, in particular the ex post facto review of contracts, carry the risk of a negative impact in
terms of internal controls, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the procurement
processes are in full compliance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;39
31. Recalls that, in accordance with article 5 of the United Nations general conditions of
contract, the terms of any subcontract shall be subject to and conform to the provisions of the
general conditions of contract;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to exercise his authority to undertake, in
respect of the subcontractors directly involved in the provision of goods and services to the
Organization on behalf of the capital master plan construction manager, a thorough review of their
qualifications and the identities of the principals involved, and also requests the Secretary-General
to provide prior written approval and clearance for the use of such subcontractors, as required in
article 5 of the general conditions of contract, so as to ensure the integrity, fairness and
transparency of the procurement process;
33. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to post and regularly update the list of
subcontractors approved by the United Nations on the capital master plan website and to include
information on the implementation of article 5 of the general conditions of contract, including the

_______________
38
39

See ST/SGB/2006/15.
ST/SGB/2003/7 and Amend.1.

119

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

procedure for review and approval of subcontractors by the United Nations, in future progress
reports on the implementation of the capital master plan;
Security
34. Authorizes the implementation of the security enhancements, as reflected in
paragraph 6 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
estimated to amount to 100 million United States dollars;
35. Recognizes the efforts of the host country to improve the safety and security of United
Nations Headquarters, as well as its financial contribution to the security enhancements;
36. Notes that the funding provided by the host country will cover all costs related to the
security enhancements, including design, construction, delay, swing space rent where applicable,
contingencies and any other costs;
37. Decides that all costs related to the security enhancements, including any associated
costs resulting from the delay in the capital master plan as a result of the implementation of the
security enhancements, will not result in additional assessments on Member States, without
prejudice to the costs related to the regular maintenance of such enhancements, which shall be part
of the regular budget after the completion of the capital master plan;
38. Reaffirms that the General Assembly has the sole prerogative of deciding on any
changes to the capital master plan project, budget and implementation strategy, as approved in its
resolutions, notes that the Secretary-General did not seek the approval of the General Assembly
for the security enhancements, and expresses concern that the completion of the project as
approved in its resolution 62/87 will be delayed as a result of the security enhancements;
39. Stresses the importance of the timely sharing by the Secretary-General with the
General Assembly of information regarding the capital master plan;
40. Expresses concern that the Secretary-General did not provide to the General Assembly
detailed information regarding security enhancements;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the context of his next annual progress
report, comprehensive information on the implementation of the security enhancements;
Donations and artwork
42. Recalls paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, and in this regard reaffirms the relevant provisions of its resolutions, in
particular resolution 63/270, relating to donations for the capital master plan, and reiterates that the
donation policy should not be restrictive and that it should be in full conformity with the
international and intergovernmental character of the Organization as well as with the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and without prejudice to the scope, specifications
and design of the project;
43. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that works of art, masterpieces and other
gifts are handled appropriately during all the stages of the capital master plan, and also requests
him to cooperate with those Member States that wish to take care of their gifts of works of art,
masterpieces and other items during the renovation period;
Parking
44. Recalls paragraphs 30 to 33 of section I of its resolution 63/270, expresses concern
about the issue of the availability of parking spaces to the Member States in the garage of the
United Nations complex, and the limitations imposed on Member States in this regard, including
those related to night-time parking, reiterates its request that the total number of parking spaces
available to the Member States before the implementation of the capital master plan be retained
upon its completion and that every effort be made to maintain that number during the
120

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

implementation of the capital master plan, and looks forward, in this context, to information on the
review of the options in the forthcoming annual progress report;
Health and safety
45. Reaffirms its commitment to the safety, security, health and well-being of staff,
delegations, visitors and tourists at the United Nations, and requests the Secretary-General to
ensure that concrete safeguards for the achievement of those objectives are in place and are part of
the standard operating procedures throughout the implementation of the capital master plan;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to make provisions for appropriate health
and wellness facilities and improved physical accessibility for persons with disabilities;
Accessibility
47. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue providing specific information, in the
context of his next annual progress report, about the measures taken to eliminate physical,
communication or technical barriers to persons with disabilities at United Nations Headquarters
within the framework of the capital master plan, in particular regarding improvement in terms of
the accessibility of interpretation booths;
48. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that measures to be taken in the
context of the capital master plan, including the security enhancements, in applying building, fire
and safety codes of the host city do not violate the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities,40 especially those relating to accessibility, and also reiterates its request
to the Secretary-General to report on this subject in future annual progress reports;
Oversight
49. Reaffirms the importance of oversight with respect to the implementation of the capital
master plan, and requests the Board of Auditors and all other relevant oversight bodies to continue
to report to the General Assembly annually on the capital master plan;
50. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to develop and implement a
comprehensive internal control framework for the capital master plan to mitigate and effectively
address all possible risks, to ensure full compliance and responsiveness on the part of management
to the specific requirements of the project, to avoid any delays in the implementation of any aspect
of the project and to ensure full compliance with United Nations rules and procedures and General
Assembly resolutions governing procurement;
Advisory Board
51. Notes with appreciation the establishment of the Advisory Board of the United
Nations Capital Master Plan, and encourages it to continue its work;
52. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in his annual progress report on the capital
master plan, information about the activities of the Advisory Board, including any observations,
recommendations or any other aspects or developments of the project deemed important by the
Board, as well as any additional comments that the Secretary-General may wish to provide;
Ninth annual progress report
53. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on the status of the project, the
schedule, the projected completion cost, the status of contributions, the working capital reserve
and the letter of credit in his ninth annual progress report, as well as to include therein the
information requested in the present resolution;
_______________
40

Resolution 61/106, annex I.

121

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

II
Associated costs
54. Reiterates its decision that the approved associated costs will be financed from within
the budget approved for the capital master plan;
55. Notes the anticipated cash flow problem over the long term;
56. Takes note of paragraph 15 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to exhaust all possible
options for absorbing the associated costs from within the overall budget approved for the capital
master plan, including through cost efficiency measures, in order to avoid any additional financial
burden on Member States, and to report thereon to the General Assembly, in the context of his
ninth annual progress report on the capital master plan, at the main part of its sixty-sixth session;
57. Requests the Secretary-General to make every effort to ensure that furniture in good
condition is reused and to report thereon to the General Assembly in the context of his ninth
annual progress report;
58. Takes note of paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides to
approve eleven general temporary assistance positions, and requests the Secretary-General to
report thereon in the context of his ninth annual progress report;
59. Also takes note of paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests
the Secretary-General to make every effort to absorb the associated costs for 2011 from within the
overall budget approved for the capital master plan in a total amount of 58,871,305 dollars (net),
broken down as follows:
(a)

628,600 dollars for the Department for General Assembly and Conference Management;

(b)

190,080 dollars for the Department of Public Information;

(c)

51,350,750 dollars for the Office of Central Support Services;

(d)

199,400 dollars for the Office of Information and Communications Technology;

(e) 534,555 dollars for construction, alteration, improvement and major maintenance
activities at Headquarters;
(f)

5,967,920 dollars for the Department of Safety and Security;

60. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount of up to
286,300 dollars, and requests him to report on expenditures in the context of his next report on
proposals for financing the associated costs.
RESOLUTION 65/270
AR
/ ES6/52/70

Adopted at the 84th plenary meeting, on 4 April 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/796, para. 6)

65/270. Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2010 and programme of work for 2011
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions
31/192 of 22 December 1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of 29 October 1999, 55/230 of
23 December 2000, 56/245 of 24 December 2001, 57/284 A and B of 20 December 2002, 58/286
of 8 April 2004, 59/267 of 23 December 2004, 60/258 of 8 May 2006, 61/238 of 22 December
2006, 61/260 of 4 April 2007, 62/226 of 22 December 2007, 62/246 of 3 April 2008, 63/272 of
7 April 2009 and 64/262 of 29 March 2010,

122

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reiterating that the impact of the work of the Unit on the cost-effectiveness of activities
within the United Nations system is a shared responsibility of the Member States, the Unit and the
secretariats of the participating organizations,
Reaffirming the commitment by the Unit, the legislative organs and the secretariats of the
participating organizations to implement a system of follow-up to the recommendations of the
Unit, as set out in resolution 54/16,
Reaffirming also the statute of the Unit41 and the unique role of the Unit as the only external
and independent system-wide inspection, evaluation and investigation body,
Having considered the report of the Unit for 2010 and programme of work for 201142 and
the note by the Secretary-General,43
1.

Recalls its resolutions 61/260, 62/246, 63/272 and 64/262;

2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2010 and
programme of work for 2011;42
3.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General;43

4. Affirms that oversight is a shared responsibility of Member States, the organizations
and the internal and external oversight bodies;
5. Reiterates its request to the Unit, in line with its mandate, to continue to focus its work
and reports on system-wide issues of interest and relevance to the participating organizations and
the States Members of the United Nations and to provide advice on ways to ensure the avoidance
of duplication and overlap and more efficient and effective use of resources in implementing the
mandates of the Organization;
6. Stresses the need for the Unit to continuously update and improve its medium- and
long-term strategy for 2010–2019, taking into account the dynamics and challenges of the
environment in which it undertakes its activities;
7. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General contained in paragraph 15 of its
resolution 64/262, in the light of the ongoing development of the medium- and long-term strategy
for 2010–2019, to reflect the appropriate resource requirements associated with the
implementation of the relevant portions of the strategy, in the context of the proposed programme
budgets, including those relevant to the biennium 2012–2013;
8. Invites the Unit to report to the General Assembly on the reform process, and the
progress achieved therein, and to present new assessments on options for enhancing the
effectiveness of its work, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the Assembly on any
related implications;
9. Welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Unit to achieve greater effectiveness and
efficiency in its working methods, and encourages the Unit to further intensify its efforts in this
regard by, inter alia, increasing the use of Junior Professional Officers to assist with the workload
of the Unit;
10. Reiterates its request to the Unit to continue to focus its reports on important priority
items, identifying concrete managerial, administrative and programming questions aimed at
providing the General Assembly and other legislative organs of participating organizations with
practical and action-oriented recommendations;

_______________
41

Resolution 31/192, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/65/34).
43
A/65/718.
42

123

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11. Also reiterates its request to the Unit to issue its reports well in advance of meetings of
the legislative organs of participating organizations so that the reports can be thoroughly and
effectively utilized in their deliberations;
12. Stresses the importance of optimizing the capacity of the Unit in order to allow it to
complete its reports in a timely manner, in accordance with its programme of work, and requests
the Unit, during its preparation of future annual programmes of work, to optimize the number of
projects therein through prioritization, by taking into account the ongoing and foreseeable
processes of the legislative organs of the participating organizations as well as the number of
projects carried over from previous programmes of work;
13. Requests the Unit to improve its future programmes of work so that Member States
can easily trace the progress of each project in future annual reports;
14. Reiterates its request to the executive heads of the participating organizations to fully
comply with the statutory procedures for consideration of the reports of the Unit and, in particular,
to submit their comments, including information on what they intend to do regarding the
recommendations of the Unit, to distribute reports in time for their consideration by legislative
organs and to provide information on the steps to be taken to implement those recommendations
accepted by the legislative organs and the executive heads of participating organizations;
15. Notes the difficulties that the Unit encountered in 2010 in obtaining relevant
information and data from the United Nations Secretariat for the preparation of the report
mandated by the General Assembly, and reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the
other executive heads of the participating organizations to fully assist the Unit with the timely
provision of all information requested by it pursuant to article 6.2 of the statute of the Unit and all
relevant resolutions of the Assembly;
16. Reiterates its invitation to the legislative organs of the participating organizations
to fully consider, discuss and take concrete action in a timely manner on the relevant
recommendations issued by the Unit, including follow-up, as appropriate, taking into account the
provisions of paragraph 4 of its resolution 50/233;
17. Requests the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the United Nations System
Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to expedite the implementation of the present
resolution, including through the expected provision of support to the Unit by the secretariats of
the participating organizations in the preparation of its reports, notes and confidential letters, and
through the consideration of and action on the recommendations of the Unit in the light of
pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly on an annual basis on
the results achieved;
18. Welcomes and urges further strengthening of the interaction between the Unit and
focal points identified by the participating organizations regarding the work of the Unit, including
discussion of the consideration of and action by the participating organizations on the
recommendations of the Unit;
19. Welcomes the efforts made by the Unit to advance the development and
implementation of the web-based follow-up system;
20. Notes the ongoing progress in the development of a web-based follow-up system
to track the recommendations of the Unit, including the status of acceptance, implementation
and impact;
21. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in the amount of
71,300 United States dollars under the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011 for the
development of the web-based follow-up system, and requests him to report on expenditures in
the context of the second performance report;
22. Invites other participating organizations of the Unit to make every possible effort to
contribute to the cost-sharing arrangement of the web-based follow-up system in 2011;
124

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Invites the Unit to include in its annual report information on the status of the
development and implementation of the web-based follow-up system;
24. Requests the Unit to make every effort to ensure that future funding requests are made
in the context of the established regular budget cycle;
25. Requests the Secretary-General to invite all relevant oversight bodies to explore the
possibility of utilizing the web-based follow-up system to enhance coordination, taking into
account their different mandates and status;
26. Welcomes the coordination of the Unit with the Board of Auditors and the Office of
Internal Oversight Services of the Secretariat, and encourages those bodies to continue sharing
experiences, knowledge, best practices and lessons learned with other United Nations audit and
oversight bodies, as well as with the Independent Audit Advisory Committee, with a view to
avoiding overlap or duplication and achieving further synergy, cooperation, effectiveness and
efficiency, without prejudice to the respective mandates of the oversight bodies.
RESOLUTION 65/288
AR
/ ES6
/52
/88

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/646/Add.3, para. 6)

65/288. Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political
initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/244 A of 24 December 2009, section VI of its resolution 64/245,
also of 24 December 2009, section IV of its resolution 64/260 of 29 March 2010, section XIII of
its resolution 65/259 of 24 December 2010, its resolution 65/260 A, also of 24 December 2010
and section II of its resolution 65/268 of 4 April 2011,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Estimates in respect of
special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General
Assembly and/or the Security Council: Panel of Experts on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the
United Nations Representative to the Geneva International Discussions”44 and the related report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,45
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;44

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;45
3. Decides to approve the budget for the Panel of Experts on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
for the period from 1 June to 31 December 2011 in the amount of 1,693,500 United States dollars
gross (1,670,400 dollars net);
4. Also decides to approve the budget for the United Nations Representative to the
Geneva International Discussions for the period from 1 May to 31 December 2011 in the amount
of 1,590,600 dollars gross (1,469,000 dollars net);
5. Further decides that the resources for the activities of the Panel of Experts on the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and the United Nations Representative to the Geneva International
Discussions will be absorbed within the overall appropriation approved for special political

_______________
44
45

A/65/328/Add.7.
A/65/602/Add.2.

125

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

missions for the biennium 2010–2011, and requests the Secretary-General to report thereon in the
context of his second performance report on the programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011.
RESOLUTION 65/289
AR
/ ES6/52/89

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/890, para. 15)

65/289. Cross-cutting issues
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 49/233 A of 23 December 1994, 49/233 B of 31 March 1995,
51/218 E of 17 June 1997, 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 58/315 of 1 July 2004, 59/296 of 22 June
2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 and 61/279 of 29 June 2007 and 64/269 of 24 June 2010,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Overview of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations: budget performance for the period from 1 July
2009 to 30 June 2010 and budget for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012”,46 the reports
of the Secretary-General on the progress of training in peacekeeping,47 on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse,48 on United Nations air operations,49 on
progress in the implementation of the global field support strategy and on its standardized funding
model50 and on the welfare and recreation needs of all categories of personnel and detailed
implications,51 as well as the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on peacekeeping
operations52 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,53
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 57/290 B, 59/296, 60/266, 61/276 and 64/269, and requests
the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of their relevant provisions;
2.

Appreciates the efforts of all peacekeeping personnel in the field and at Headquarters;

3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Overview of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations: budget performance for the period from 1 July
2009 to 30 June 2010 and budget for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012”,46 the reports
of the Secretary-General on the progress of training in peacekeeping,47 on special measures for
protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse,48 on United Nations air operations,49 on
progress in the implementation of the global field support strategy and on its standardized funding
model50 and on the welfare and recreation needs of all categories of personnel and detailed
implications,51 as well as the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;53
4. Also takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on
peacekeeping operations;52

_______________
46

A/65/715.
A/65/644 and Corr.1.
48
A/65/742.
49
A/65/738.
50
A/65/643 and A/65/696 and Corr.1.
51
A/63/675 and Corr.1.
52
A/65/271 (Part II).
53
A/65/743 and A/63/746, sect. II.
47

126

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Endorses the recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,54
subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure
their full implementation;
I
Budget presentation and financial management
6.

Takes note of paragraph 24 of the report of the Advisory Committee;54

7. Reiterates that the delegation of authority on the part of the Secretary-General should
be to facilitate the better management of the Organization, but stresses that the overall
responsibility for management of the Organization rests with the Secretary-General as its Chief
Administrative Officer;
8. Affirms the need for the Secretary-General to ensure that the delegation of authority to
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support of the
Secretariat and to field missions is in strict compliance with relevant resolutions and decisions, as
well as with relevant rules and procedures of the General Assembly on this matter;
9.

Stresses that heads of departments report and are accountable to the Secretary-General;

10. Reiterates the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and
of ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for
the effective and efficient implementation of legislative mandates and the use of human and
financial resources;
11. Notes that the compacts with senior managers are meant to improve the management
of the Organization, inter alia, by increasing accountability and transparency at the senior level,
and in this regard urges the Secretary-General to implement measures that adequately address the
performance of senior managers, especially with regard to achieving goals and targets;
12. Recalls paragraph 4 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 and emphasizes that all
field missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and efficient discharge of
their respective mandates and that the transition of peacekeeping operations to peacebuilding may
entail a change in resource requirements;
13. Welcomes the timely issuance of budget proposals for peacekeeping operations by the
Secretary-General;
14. Recalls paragraph 10 of section I of resolution 64/269;
15. Stresses the importance of further steps by the Secretary-General towards improving
budget presentations and making more accurate forecasts;
16. Takes note of paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 emphasizes that
all field missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective and efficient
discharge of their respective mandates, and stresses that the current level of peacekeeping activity
should have scalable implications on resource requirements, taking into consideration the number,
size and complexity of peacekeeping operations;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify his efforts to achieve economies of scale
within and between field missions without undermining their operational requirements and the
implementation of their respective mandates and to report thereon in the context of the overview
report on the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations;
18. Notes the establishment of a resource efficiency group in the Department of Field
Support, in this regard concurs with the recommendations contained in paragraph 28 of the report
_______________
54

A/65/743.

127

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

of the Advisory Committee,54 and encourages further such initiatives by the Secretary-General,
both at Headquarters and at the mission level;
19. Recalls paragraph 59 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 and requests the
Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly with information in this regard in the context
of the next overview report on the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations for
its consideration;
II
Personnel issues
20. Expresses its appreciation to all United Nations personnel performing functions
related to peacekeeping, in particular those serving in hardship duty stations under some of the
most difficult conditions;
21. Pays tribute to all United Nations peacekeepers who have been wounded in the line of
duty or who have made the ultimate sacrifice while working in the pursuit of peace;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, in the context of the next report on the
overview of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations, updates on the
implementation in United Nations field missions of human resources management reforms, in
particular those contained in its resolution 65/247 of 24 December 2010;
23. Notes the variety of human resources management initiatives that the Organization has
undertaken since the adoption by the General Assembly of its resolution 63/250 on 24 December
2008, and recognizes that the continued implementation of the reform initiatives will better equip
the Organization to address a variable and demanding environment in which integration and
harmonization will provide the basis for longer-term efficiencies in productivity and an improved
work environment that will, in turn, better enable the Organization to meet its mandates;
24. Recalls paragraph 47 of the report of the Advisory Committee;54
25. Recognizes the importance of welfare and recreation for personnel serving in
peacekeeping operations, bearing in mind that welfare and recreation also contribute to
strengthening morale and discipline;
26. Takes note of paragraph 52 of the report of the Advisory Committee;54
27. Recalls section VII of resolution 63/250, and reiterates its request contained in
paragraph 34 of resolution 65/247;
28. Recognizes the need of the Organization for a mechanism to address rapidly changing
situations in the field, and in this regard requests comprehensive information regarding the use of
the temporary duty assignment mechanism and its implications for the regular recruitment process;
29. Notes the use by the Secretary-General of temporary vacancy announcements to
address the issue of lengthy recruitment processes, stresses the need to expedite the filling of
vacancies through the regular recruitment process, and requests the Secretary-General to provide
information on the impact of using temporary vacancy announcements on the regular recruitment
process in the field and at Headquarters in the context of his next overview report on the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations;
30. Recalls paragraph 19 of section C of its resolution 65/248 of 24 December 2010;
31. Emphasizes the importance of further steps to make training programmes more
relevant and cost-effective through, inter alia, the training of trainers and the use of
videoconferencing and e-learning where feasible, and stresses that travel for training purposes
should be kept under close review;

128

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

32. Notes the increasing role of national staff in peacekeeping operations and the need to
build national capacities and to provide professional development opportunities for national staff,
and emphasizes that national staff should be fully included in all relevant training programmes;
33. Recalls paragraph 132 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 notes the generally
positive findings of the evaluation of the Senior Mission Administration and Resource Training
Programme carried out in 2010, and looks forward to additional information on the impact of the
training programme on improved performance;
34. Also recalls paragraph 4 of section II of resolution 64/269, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to take urgent measures to eliminate the existing backlog of death and disability claims
pending for more than three months and to report on the progress made to the General Assembly
at the second part of its resumed sixty-sixth session;
35. Further recalls paragraph 55 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 requests the
Secretary-General to ensure cost-effectiveness and a high level of service to troop- and policecontributing countries, without affecting their operational requirements, underscores the need for
close coordination with troop- and police-contributing countries, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to include further information in his next overview report on the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations;
III
Operational requirements
36. Underlines the need for the United Nations to improve the management of its ground
transportation in order to achieve maximum operational efficiency, and urges the SecretaryGeneral to accelerate and strengthen his efforts in this regard and to submit concrete proposals in
his next overview report on the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations;
37. Notes that fuel is a major item of expenditure and that its management is vulnerable to
serious risk of fraud and abuse;
38. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all peacekeeping missions are provided
with the necessary fuel supplies in an uninterrupted manner to ensure their smooth functioning,
without jeopardizing safety, and that measures aimed at increasing efficiencies, including the use
of turnkey contracts, must not undermine the operational needs and safety of the mission;
39. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its resumed
sixty-seventh session in the context of his overview report on the financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations on all aspects of fuel management, including on the implementation of
the Department of Field Support Fuel Operations Manual, the feasibility of introducing a global
electronic fuel management system, the status of strategic reserve stocks of fuel for contingency
purposes, the preparation and application of standard operating procedures for fuel management
and the results of the assessment of fuel support costs and performance for several missions,
including the comparison of turnkey and in-house models, as well as on efforts aimed at factoring
in the cost of fuel when awarding contracts for vehicles and aircraft;
40. Stresses that the effective management of rations means ensuring that United Nations
peacekeepers receive sufficient rations of appropriate quality for three meals per day, including
planning, organizing and controlling the operations from the initial requisition to the final payment
to suppliers, as well as accurate and reliable record-keeping and filing;
41. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all missions monitor and evaluate the
quality management systems of rations contractors to ensure that food quality and hygienic
conditions are in accordance with established standards;
42. Urges the Secretary-General to continue to implement the new standard ratios for
personal information and communications technology equipment on the basis of the 2010 review

129

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and to ensure the most appropriate level of service with regard to satellite communications and
Internet services in each location within missions, taking into account operational requirements;
43. Recalls paragraph 61 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive assessment of the efficiencies and effectiveness,
including savings achieved and impact, of turnkey arrangements in his next overview report on
the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations;
44. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that the utilization of systems
contracts is subject to prior full analysis of all costs, in accordance with current practice;
45. Emphasizes that concerted efforts should be made to identify potential vendors in
developing countries and countries with economies in transition and to increase the representation
from those countries in the bidding for and award of contracts so as to develop a supplier base that
is more representative of the membership of the Organization;
46. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly at the second part of
its resumed sixty-sixth session with a comprehensive analysis of the administrative and budgetary
aspects of the role and implementation of the integrated operational teams;
IV
Air operations
47. Stresses that efforts to explore possibilities for economies of scale and efficiencies in
air operations must not undermine safety and operational requirements or rotation and troop
deployment cycles for each peacekeeping operation;
48. Recalls paragraph 77 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 and stresses the need
to evaluate the full range and overall cost efficiency of factors involved in air services, including
fuel consumption, maintenance costs and safety and security considerations;
49. Also recalls paragraph 13 of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget of the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012,55
and stresses that the procurement process should ensure that acquired air assets correspond to the
operational requirements of missions;
50. Recognizes the launch of a pilot project on transition to the request for proposal
methodology for the acquisition of air services, notes that best value for money is one of the four
key principles for United Nations procurement, along with fairness, integrity and transparency;
effective international competition; and the interest of the United Nations, according to the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,56 and reiterates its request to the
Secretary-General in paragraph 25 of its resolution 62/269 of 20 June 2008 to report to the
General Assembly on clear guidelines for the implementation of the best value for money
methodology in United Nations procurement, including all specifics of the weighted evaluation
techniques, and to submit a report on the results of the pilot project;
51. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure full transparency in developing the request
for proposal methodology, and emphasizes that the development of requests for proposal shall be
driven by the operational requirements of the Organization;
52. Takes note of the United Nations Common Aviation Safety Standards, requests the
Secretary-General to continue to ensure compliance with the International Civil Aviation
Organization Standards and Recommended Practices, with the objective of meeting the operational
requirements of mandate delivery in the field, and also requests the Secretary-General to report, in
the context of his next overview report on the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
_______________
55
56

130

A/65/760.
ST/SGB/2003/7 and Amend.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

operations, on the differences between the International Civil Aviation Organization Standards and
Recommended Practices and the United Nations Common Aviation Safety Standards;
53. Recalls paragraph 21 of section VI of resolution 64/269;
54. Requests the Secretary-General to provide an update on the status of the Memorandum
of Understanding with the World Food Programme and its financial implications, as well as a
detailed analysis of the governance of United Nations air operations and overall resource levels,
including information on the effective and efficient provision of backstopping functions and
information and communications technology support, in the context of his next overview report
on the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations;
V
Special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
55. Recalls section IV of resolution 64/269;
56. Reaffirms the need for full implementation of the United Nations policy of zero
tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse in peacekeeping operations;
57. Stresses that in the case of any violations of standards, appropriate action will be taken
within the authority of the Secretary-General, while criminal and disciplinary responsibility in
respect of members of national contingents will depend on the national law of the Member State;
58. Emphasizes that all acts of sexual exploitation and abuse should be investigated and
punished without delay in accordance with due process of law as well as with memorandums of
understanding that have been concluded between the United Nations and Member States;
59. Confirms that no payment, including payment under paragraph 72 below, will be made
in respect of individual peacekeepers who have been repatriated for disciplinary reasons, such as
violation of the United Nations policy of zero tolerance;
60. Recalls its resolution 62/214 of 21 December 2007 containing the United Nations
Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
by United Nations Staff and Related Personnel and calls for its continued implementation, and in
this regard stresses the importance of addressing, in a comprehensive manner, the needs of all
victims of sexual exploitation and abuse;
61. Takes note of paragraphs 10 and 18 of the report of the Secretary-General on special
measures for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse;48
62. Expresses concern at the number of investigations that have not been completed, and
encourages continued efforts to address the backlog, in accordance with memorandums of
understanding, where applicable;
63. Remains concerned about the new cases of sexual exploitation and abuse reported, and
notes the continuing decline in the number of allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse, but
regrets that the proportion of allegations of the most egregious forms of sexual exploitation and
abuse has not decreased;
64. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts with regard to standardized
training and awareness-raising on sexual exploitation and abuse matters;
65. Welcomes the efforts of the Conduct and Discipline Unit at Headquarters and of the
conduct and discipline teams in the field, and notes with appreciation the regularly updated
website dedicated to conduct and discipline, including statistical information, which helps the
Department of Field Support to evaluate progress and Member States to gain a better
understanding of the policies of the United Nations in dealing with conduct and discipline issues;
66. Requests an update on progress in implementing the United Nations Comprehensive
Strategy on Assistance and Support to Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United
131

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Nations Staff and Related Personnel in the next overview report on the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations;
67. Encourages the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Task Force to strengthen its
leadership role in the implementation of the Comprehensive Strategy on Assistance and Support to
Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by United Nations Staff and Related Personnel;
68. Notes with appreciation the actions taken to prevent unsubstantiated allegations of
misconduct from damaging the credibility of any United Nations peacekeeping mission or troopor police-contributing country or United Nations peacekeeping personnel, and requests that the
Secretary-General take appropriate measures in this regard and that he continue to ensure that
prompt actions are taken to restore the image and credibility of any United Nations peacekeeping
mission, troop- or police-contributing country or United Nations peacekeeping personnel when
allegations of misconduct are, ultimately, legally unproven;
VI
Other issues
69. Notes with concern the difficulties experienced by Member States in providing the
data requested through the survey questionnaire under the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 63/285 of 30 June 2009, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to intensify
the efforts of the Secretariat, in particular the Department of Field Support and the Department of
Management, to work closely with troop-contributing countries with a view to facilitating data
collection and assisting in the completion of the questionnaire, in order to maintain the process
within the envisaged time frame;
70. Notes that the last review of troop costs was in 1992, with a subsequent ad hoc
increase in 2002, and that troop-contributing countries have expressed concern that this has placed
a difficult financial burden on them, which they assert could jeopardize the sustainability of
participation in peacekeeping operations;
71. Recalls that all United Nations peacekeepers must act in a manner that preserves the
image, credibility, impartiality and integrity of the United Nations;
72. Decides to provide, on an exceptional basis, a one-time supplemental payment of
85 million United States dollars to troop-contributing countries during the period from 1 July 2011
to 30 June 2012, without prejudice to the integrity of the process set forth in resolution 63/285;
73. Requests the Secretary-General to establish, by October 2011, a senior advisory group
consisting of five eminent persons of relevant experience appointed by the Secretary-General, five
representatives from major troop contributors, five representatives from major financial
contributors and one member from each regional group, to consider rates of reimbursement to
troop-contributing countries and related issues;
74. Decides that the senior advisory group shall complete its work as soon as practicable;
75. Notes with concern the recurrence of problems previously identified by the Board of
Auditors in regard to the management of expendable and non-expendable property;
76. Stresses the importance of the Secretary-General’s stewardship of the management of
assets for peacekeeping, including expendable and non-expendable property and strategic
deployment stocks, and reiterates its requests to the Secretary-General to strengthen internal
controls in the management of those assets to ensure adequate safeguards that would prevent
waste and financial loss to the Organization;
77. Recalls section I, paragraph 14, of resolution 64/269, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit the report requested in that paragraph to the General Assembly at the second
part of its resumed sixty-sixth session;

132

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

78. Notes that the strategy for early peacebuilding is still being developed by the
Secretariat, and, in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to consult closely with Member
States, the Peacebuilding Commission, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and all
relevant Secretariat entities throughout the process of preparing the strategy, and underlines that
specific peacebuilding tasks undertaken by peacekeeping missions should be based on priorities
of the country concerned and on the specific context, in accordance with the principle of
national ownership;
VII
Global field support strategy
79. Expresses its appreciation for the inclusive and participatory approach taken by the
Secretary-General in developing and implementing the global field support strategy, and
encourages the Secretary-General to continue to intensify close consultations with Member States,
in particular troop-contributing countries, in the implementation of the global field support strategy;
80. Recognizes the challenges faced by the Organization in providing logistical,
administrative and information and communications technology support for peacekeeping
operations, and expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the Secretary-General to present
an integrated approach to enable more timely mission start-up and deployment and to improve
quality, efficiency and economy of scale in the delivery of services to field missions;
81. Recalls paragraph 143 of the report of the Advisory Committee;54
82. Also recalls paragraph 156 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 and encourages
the Secretary-General to continue to work in close consultation with Member States, in particular
troop- and police-contributing countries, in further developing predefined modules and service
packages;
83. Requests the Secretary-General, in a manner consistent with the objectives of the
global field support strategy, to take into account the risks involved in using single-source or
multifunctional contracts in developing further proposals related to logistics modules, as well as
applicable limitations on the number of United Nations commodities codes per vendor;
84. Recalls paragraph 157 of the report of the Advisory Committee,54 and requests the
Secretary-General to include all relevant information regarding the development and
implementation of predefined modules and service packages in his next annual progress report;
85. Emphasizes the importance of enabling capacities in the effective deployment of
service packages in field missions, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the General
Assembly with information on various options available for enabling capacities in his next
progress report for its consideration;
86. Recalls paragraphs 12 and 14 of section VI of resolution 64/269, and emphasizes the
role of the Global Service Centre at Brindisi, Italy, in delivering and managing predefined
modules and service packages;
87. Reaffirms paragraph 16 of section VI of resolution 64/269, in which it stressed that
functions primarily involving interactions with Member States, particularly troop-contributing
countries, would continue to be located at Headquarters;
88. Notes with appreciation the performance of the Transportation and Movements
Integrated Control Centre at Entebbe, Uganda;
89. Notes the results achieved to date in enhancing effective service delivery through the
Regional Service Centre at Entebbe;
90. Recognizes the potential of the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund and the strategic
deployment stocks in playing a crucial role in rapid mission start-up and expansion, and requests

133

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly with information on the implementation
of paragraphs 8 and 9 of section VI of resolution 64/269;
91. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the General Assembly, on an annual basis
and in a consolidated manner, with information on the financial and human resources provided by
client missions to the Regional Service Centre at Entebbe and on the shares of the resource
requirements for the individual client missions provided in their respective budget proposals, as
well as information on the vacancy rates, expenditures and budget performance of the Centre.
RESOLUTION 65/290
AR
/ ES6/52/90

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/890, para. 15)

65/290. Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations to manage and sustain
peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A
of 23 December 1993, 55/238 of 23 December 2000, 56/241 of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of
27 June 2002, 57/318 of 18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004, 59/301 of 22 June 2005, 60/268
of 30 June 2006, 61/245 and 61/246 of 22 December 2006, 61/256 of 15 March 2007, 61/279 of
29 June 2007, 62/250 of 20 June 2008, 63/287 of 30 June 2009 and 64/271 of 24 June 2010, its
decisions 48/489 of 8 July 1994, 49/469 of 23 December 1994 and 50/473 of 23 December 1995
and its other relevant resolutions,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations,57 on the budget performance of
the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 201058
and on the budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July
2011 to 30 June 2012,59 the preliminary report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the
implementation of the pilot project designated by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/287,60
the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the budget of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from
1 July 2011 to 30 June 201261 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,62 as well as the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
on the thematic evaluation of cooperation between, on the one hand, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support of the Secretariat and, on the other,
regional organizations,63
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being able to respond and deploy rapidly
to a peacekeeping operation upon the adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council,
within thirty days for traditional peacekeeping operations and ninety days for complex
peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping
operations, including the liquidation and termination phases,
_______________
57

A/65/624 and Corr.1.
A/65/610 and Add.1.
59
A/65/761 and Corr.1 and 2.
60
A/65/765.
61
A/65/734.
62
A/65/827.
63
A/65/762.
58

134

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate,
number, size and complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and
financial resources and policies with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient
implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of policies in
this regard;
2. Also reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the
General Assembly entrusted with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;
3.

Further reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

4. Reaffirms that the support account funds shall be used for the sole purpose of financing
human resources and non-human resource requirements for backstopping and supporting
peacekeeping operations at Headquarters, and that any changes in this limitation require the prior
approval of the General Assembly;
5. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping
operations, as well as the need for full justification for that funding in support account budget
submissions;
6. Emphasizes the importance of interaction and coordination with troop- and policecontributing countries;
7. Recalls section I, paragraph 6, of resolution 55/238, paragraph 11 of resolution 56/241,
paragraph 19 of resolution 61/279 and paragraph 22 of resolution 62/250, and requests the
Secretary-General to make further concrete efforts to ensure the proper representation of troopcontributing countries in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support of the Secretariat, taking into account their contribution to United Nations peacekeeping;
8. Recognizes the significant role of the Police Division of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in contributing to peacekeeping operations, including their
peacekeeping efforts, and the increase in the policing dimension in a number of operations;
9. Reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial management
of peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify measures to
increase the productivity and efficiency of the support account;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of General Assembly resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, and other
relevant resolutions;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,62 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Takes note of the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services on the thematic
evaluation of cooperation between, on the one hand, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support and, on the other, regional organizations;63
13. Reaffirms its role with regard to the structure of the Secretariat, and stresses that
proposals that amend the overall departmental structure, as well as the format of the budgets of
the Organization and the biennial programme plan, are subject to review and approval by the
General Assembly;
14. Notes the overall benefits of the restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support, and requests the Secretary-General to assess
these benefits and to continue to make every effort to enhance the capacity of the Organization to
manage and sustain peacekeeping operations;

135

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

15. Underlines the crucial importance of ensuring that the lessons learned and best
practices of peacekeeping missions are adequately captured, processed and incorporated into
guidelines and policies, particularly with regard to peacebuilding efforts by peacekeepers and
peacekeeping operations in transition, and in this regard recognizes the significant role of the
Peacekeeping Best Practices Section and best practices officers on the ground;
16. Notes that the strategy for early peacebuilding is still being developed by the
Secretariat, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to consult closely, throughout the
process of the preparation of the strategy, with Member States, the Peacebuilding Commission,
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and all other relevant Secretariat entities, and
underlines that specific peacebuilding tasks undertaken by peacekeeping missions should be based
on the priorities of the country concerned and on the specific context;
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget for the support account
for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 201259 and the report of
the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the budget of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2011 to
30 June 2012;61
18. Decides to maintain, for the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, the
funding mechanism for the support account used in the period from 1 July 2010 to 30 June 2011,
as approved in paragraph 3 of its resolution 50/221 B of 7 June 1996;
19. Takes note of paragraphs 44 and 55 of the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;62
20. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to review the level of the support
account on a regular basis, taking into consideration the number, size and complexity of
peacekeeping operations;
21. Emphasizes that support functions should be scalable to the size and scope of
peacekeeping operations;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to fill all vacancies in an expeditious manner;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
23. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;58
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
24. Approves the support account requirements in the amount of 344,792,400 United
States dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, inclusive of the amount of
47,185,200 dollars for the enterprise resource planning project pursuant to its resolution 64/243 of
24 December 2009, including 1,294 continuing posts and 1 new temporary post, as well as the
redeployment, reassignment and reclassification of posts as set out in annex I to the present
resolution and 151 continuing and 11 new general temporary assistance positions as set out in
annex II, as well as their related post and non-post requirements;
Financing of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the periods from 1 July
2009 to 30 June 2010 and from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
25. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for
the financial periods from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010 and from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 shall
be financed as follows:
(a) An additional amount of 24,444,900 dollars, to be appropriated and assessed in respect
of the financial period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;

136

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(b) The total amount of 6,048,000 dollars, comprising interest income of 2,161,000
dollars, other miscellaneous income of 1,359,000 dollars and the cancellation of prior-period
obligations of 2,528,000 dollars, to be applied to the resources required for the financial period
from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012;
(c) The amount of 3,377,000 dollars, representing the excess of the authorized level of the
Peacekeeping Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, to be applied to
the resources required for the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012;
(d) The balance of 359,812,300 dollars, to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012;
(e) The net estimated staff assessment income of 30,474,500 dollars, comprising the
amount of 29,685,000 dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 and the
increase of 789,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, to be set off
against the balance referred to in subparagraph (d) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the
individual active peacekeeping operations.
Annex I
A.

Support account posts to be established for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June
2012

Organizational unit

Number

Level Function

Status

P-4 Child Protection
Adviser

Conversion from
general temporary
assistance

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Policy, Evaluation and
Training Division

Peacekeeping Best
Practices Section
Total

B.

1

1

Redeployment, reassignment, reclassification, restructuring and abolition of posts
under the support account for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012

Redeployments
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Africa I Division/
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad integrated operational team
Redeployment of 1 post (P-5 Senior Political Affairs Officer) to the Africa II Division, United
Nations Mission in Liberia/United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire integrated operational team
Redeployment of 1 post (P-3 Political Affairs Officer) to the Africa I Division, United Nations
Mission in the Sudan integrated operational team
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Military Affairs/
Military Planning Service
Redeployment of 2 posts (1 P-4 Capability Development Officer and 1 P-4 Military Policy and
Doctrine Officer) to the Office of the Military Adviser, Policy and Doctrine Team
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions/Police Division
Redeployment of 16 posts (1 P-5 Chief of Section, 6 P-4 Selection and Recruitment Officers, 7 P-3
Selection and Recruitment Officers and 2 General Service (Other level) Administrative Assistants)
from the Mission Management and Support Section to the Selection and Recruitment Section

137

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Department of Field Support/Field Budget and Finance Division/Office
of the Director/Field Finance Procedures Management Unit
Redeployment of 5 posts (1 P-4 Administrative Management Officer, 2 P-3 Administrative
Officers, 1 General Service (Other level) Finance Assistant and 1 General Service (Other level)
Team Assistant) to the Front Office/Office of the Director (Field Budget and Finance
Division restructuring)
Redeployment of 2 posts (1 P-4 Finance Officer and 1 General Service (Other level) Finance
Assistant) to the Budget and Performance Reporting Service (Field Budget and Finance
Division restructuring)
Department of Field Support/Field Budget and Finance Division/Office
of the Director/Field System Support Unit
Redeployment of 4 posts (1 P-4 Chief, 1 P-3 Systems Analyst, 1 P-2 Associate Programme
Analyst and 1 General Service (Other level) Computer Information Systems Assistant) to the
Budget and Performance Reporting Service (Field Budget and Finance Division restructuring)
Redeployment of 1 post (P-3 Programme Analyst) to the Office of the Chief/ Communications
and Information Technology Services (United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy)
Department of Field Support/Field Budget and Finance Division/
Memorandums of Understanding and Claims Management Section
Redeployment of 1 post (P-3 Finance and Budget Officer) to the Office of the Under-SecretaryGeneral/Programme Implementation Coordination Team (global field support strategy)
Department of Field Support/Field Personnel Division/Field Personnel Operations Service
Redeployment of 2 posts (2 General Service (Other level) Human Resources Assistants) to the
Field Central Review Board (United Nations Logistics Base)
Department of Field Support/Logistics Support Division/Specialist Support Service/
Supply Section
Redeployment of 3 posts (1 P-4 Chief, Contracts Management Unit, 1 P-3 Contracts Officer and
1 P-2 Associate Contracts Officer) to the Office of the Director (United Nations Logistics Base)
Department of Field Support/Information and Communications Technology Division/
Field Communications and Information Technology Operations Service
Redeployment of 2 posts (1 P-4 Strategic Deployment Stock Telecommunications Officer and
1 General Service (Other level) Information and Communications Technology Assistant) to the
Assets Management Section/Communications and Information Technology Services (United
Nations Logistics Base)
Department of Field Support/Information and Communications Technology Division/
Field Communications and Information Technology Operations Service/Logistics
and Administration Unit
Redeployment of 1 post (General Service (Other level) Administrative Assistant) to the Office of
the Under-Secretary-General/Programme Implementation Coordination Team (global field
support strategy)
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Redeployment of 1 post (P-4 Resident Auditor) to the Internal Audit Division/
Regional Audit Centre (Entebbe, Uganda)
138

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Redeployment of 1 post (Field Service Audit Assistant) to the Internal Audit Division/Regional
Audit Centre (Entebbe)
Reassignments
Department of Field Support/Logistics Support Division/Specialist Support Service/
Engineering Section
Reassignment of 1 post (P-4 Engineer) to the Office of the Under-Secretary-General/Programme
Implementation Coordination Team (P-4 Programme Officer) (global field support strategy)
Department of Field Support/Field Personnel Division/Field Personnel Operations Services
Reassignment of 1 post (P-4 Human Resources Officer) to the Office of the Under-SecretaryGeneral/Programme Implementation Coordination Team (P-4 Programme Officer) (global field
support strategy)
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Reassignment of 1 post (P-5 Chief Resident Officer) to the Inspection and Evaluation Division
(P-5 Senior Evaluation Officer)
Reclassifications
Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services/United Nations Mission
in the Sudan
Reclassification of 1 post (National General Service Administrative Assistant to Field Service)
Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and Mediation Services/United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Reclassification of 1 post (National General Service Administrative Assistant to Field Service)
Restructuring
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Change name from “Peacekeeping Best Practices Section” to “Policy and Best Practices Service”
Establish the Protection Coordination Team in the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division/Policy
and Best Practices Service
Establish the Selection and Recruitment Section in the Office of Rule of Law and Security
Institutions/Police Division
Department of Field Support
Discontinue the Field Finance Procedures Management Unit and the Field System Support Unit
of the Field Budget and Finance Division
Abolition
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Africa I Division/
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad integrated operational team
Abolition of 1 post (P-4 Political Affairs Officer)

139

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Department of Field Support/Field Budget and Finance Division/Office
of the Director/Field System Support Unit
Abolition of 1 post (General Service (Other level) Information Management Assistant)
Department of Field Support/Field Personnel Division/Guidance and Organizational
Design Section
Abolition of 1 post (General Service (Other level) Team Assistant)
Department of Field Support/Logistics Support Division/Operational Support Service
Abolition of 1 post (General Service (Other level) Team Assistant)
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad
Abolition of 1 post (P-5 Chief Resident Officer)
Abolition of 3 posts (1 P-4 Resident Auditor, 1 P-3 Resident Auditor and 1 Field Service
Audit Assistant)
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Abolition of 1 post (National General Service Administrative Assistant)
Annex II
Support account general temporary assistance positions to be established for the period
from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
Number of
positions Position level

Functiona

Status

1 P-4

Organizational
Resilience Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Team Assistant –
Continuation
Organizational Resilience

— 4 months,
3 P-3

Administrative Officer

— 4 months,
3 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant —

Public Affairs Section

1 P-3

Internal Communications Continuation
Officer

Africa II Division

1 D-1

Principal Officer

Continuation

1 P-4

Political Affairs Officer

Continuation

1 P-3

Political Affairs Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Team Assistant

Continuation

Africa I Division

1 GS (OL)

Team Assistant

Continuation

Office of Military Affairs Military Planning
Service

1 GS (OL)

Team Assistant

Continuation

Current Military
Operations Service

1 GS (OL)

Team Assistant

Continuation

Organizational unit

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of the
Front Office
Under-Secretary-General

Executive Office

Office of Operations

140

—

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Number of
positions Position level

Functiona

Status

1 P-4

Judicial Officer
(Islamic law)

Continuation

1 P-3

Corrections Officer
(force generation)

Continuation

1 P-4

Judicial Officer

New

1 P-5

Senior Coordination
Officer

Continuation

1 P-4

Coordination Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Team Assistant

Continuation

1 P-4

Coordination Officer
(protection of civilians)

New

2 P-3

Coordination Officer

Continuation

1 P-4

Training Officer (Senior Continuation
Mission Administration
and Resource Training
Programme (SMART))

1 P-3

Training Officer
(SMART)

Continuation

2 P-4

Training Coordination
Officer

Continuation

1 P-5

Senior Support Officer

Continuation

1 P-4

Support Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1 D-1

Team Leader

Continuation

12 P-3

Human Resources Officer Continuation

4 GS (OL)

Human Resources
Assistant

Continuation

Quality Assurance and
Information
Management Section/
Administration of
Justice

1 P-3

Human Resources
Officer

Continuation

Air Transport Section/
Airfields and Air
Terminals Unit

1 P-3

Air Transport Officer

Continuation

Specialist Support
Service

1 P-3

Water Engineer

Continuation

1 P-3

Boundary Analyst

Continuation

Organizational unit

Office of Rule of Law
and Security Institutions

Policy, Evaluation and
Training Division

Criminal Law and
Judicial Advisory
Service

Partnerships Team

Peacekeeping Best
Practices Section
Integrated Training
Service

Subtotal

23

Department of Field Support
Office of the
Support to the African
Under-Secretary-General Union Mission in
Somalia
Headquarters support
team

Front Office/
Programme
Implementation
Coordination Team
Field Personnel Division Recruitment, Outreach
and Career
Development Section/
Occupational Group

Logistics Support
Division

Subtotal

24

141

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Number of
positions Position level

Functiona

Status

— 4 months,
3 P-4

Administrative Officer

—

— 4 months,
3 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

—

1 P-4

Capacity Development
Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Training and Analysis
Assistant

Continuation

1 P-4

Policy Guidance and
Training Officer

Continuation

1 P-4

Strategic Deployment
Stocks Officer

Continuation

3 GS (OL)

Finance Assistant
(peacekeeping accounts)

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Finance Assistant
(insurance)

Continuation

1 P-4

Accounting Policy
New
Analyst (International
Public Sector Accounting
Standards)

2 P-3

Accounting Policy
New
Analyst (International
Public Sector Accounting
Standards)

1 P-3

Finance Officer

Continuation

1 P-2

Associate Finance
Officer

Continuation

1 P-4

Information Systems
Officer

Continuation

1 P-2

Information Systems
Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Information Systems
Assistant

Continuation

Peacekeeping
Financing Division

2 P-3

Finance and Budget
Officer

Continuation

Human Resources
Policy Service

1 P-2

Associate Legal Officer

Continuation

1 P-3

Legal Officer

Continuation

2 P-3

Human Resources
Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Human Resources
Assistant

Continuation

1 P-4

Data Warehouse Project
Manager

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Integrated Management Continuation
Information System Help
Desk Assistant

Organizational unit

Department of Management
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Executive Office

Headquarters
Committee on
Contracts

Office of Programme
Planning, Budget and
Accounts

Accounts Division

Treasury

Financial Information
Operations Service

Office of Human
Resources Management

Learning,
Development and
Human Resources
Services Division

Human Resources
Information Systems
Section (New York)

142

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Number of
positions Position level

Functiona

Status

1 P-4

Chief

Continuation

1 P-3

Help Desk Manager

New

1 P-3

Development and
Production Support
Analyst

Continuation

1 P-2

Associate Applications
Support Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Database Administrator

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1 GS (PL)

Customer Support
Representative

Continuation

6 GS (OL)

Customer Support
Representative

Continuation

— 6 months,
P-4

Human Resources
Officer

—

Office of Central Support Office of the Assistant
Services
Secretary-General

1 P-3

Administrative Officer

Continuation

Procurement Division

1 P-3

Procurement Officer
(vendor registration)

New

3 GS (OL)

Procurement Assistant
(vendor registration)

Continuation

3 P-3

Procurement Officer
(engineering, logistics,
vehicles)

Continuation

1 P-3

Office Space Planning
Officer

Continuation

1 P-2

Associate Information
Management Officer

Continuation

Organizational unit

Human Resources
Information Systems
Section (Bangkok)/
Inspira Centre of
Excellence

Strategic Planning and
Staffing Division

Facilities and
Commercial Services
Division

Subtotal

48

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Executive Office

Internal Audit Division

Investigations Division

— 4 months, P-3 Auditor

—

— 4 months, P-3 Investigator

—

— 4 months,
3 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

—

New York

1 P-4

Auditor

Continuation

United Nations support
for the African Union
Mission in Somalia

1 P-4

Resident Auditor

Continuation

New York

1 P-5

Senior Investigator

Continuation

3 P-4

Investigator

Continuation

1 P-3

Investigator

Continuation

143

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Number of
positions Position level

Organizational unit

Investigations Division

Investigations Division

Investigations Division

Vienna

Nairobi

Status

1 P-3

Administrative Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Office Assistant

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Information Technology
Assistant

Continuation

1 D-1

Deputy Director

Continuation

1 P-5

Senior Investigator

Continuation

1 P-4

Forensic Investigator

Continuation

1 P-4

Investigator

Continuation

7 P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1 GS (PL)

Investigation Assistant

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Investigation Assistant

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Information Technology
Assistant

Continuation

1 D-1

Deputy Director

Continuation

1 P-5

Senior Investigator

Continuation

1 P-4

Forensic Investigator

Continuation

3 P-4

Investigator

Continuation

1 P-4

Investigator

New

6 P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1 P-3

Investigator

New

1 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

3 GS (OL)

Investigation Assistant

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Investigation Assistant

New

United Nations
Stabilization Mission
in Haiti

1 P-4

Resident Investigator

Continuation

United Nations
Organization
Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo

1 P-4

Chief Resident
Investigator

Continuation

1 P-3

Resident Investigator

Continuation

1 NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1 P-4

Chief Resident
Investigator

Continuation

2 P-3

Resident Investigator

Continuation

1 NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1 P-4

Chief Resident
Investigator

Continuation

2 P-3

Resident Investigator

Continuation

1 P-4

Resident Investigator

Continuation

United Nations
Mission in Liberia

United Nations
Mission in the Sudan
United Nations
Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire
Subtotal

144

Functiona

56

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Number of
positions Position level

Organizational unit

Executive Office of the Secretary-General

Functiona

Status

Administrative Assistant

—

1 P-4

Case Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1 P-3

Ethics Officer

Continuation

1 GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant Continuation

— 6 months,
2 GS (OL)

Subtotal
Office of the United Nations Ombudsman and
Mediation Services
Subtotal
Ethics Office

Subtotal

—

2

2

Office of Legal Affairs
General Legal Division

Office of the Legal
Counsel

1 P-4

Legal Officer

Continuation

1 P-4

Legal Officer

New

1 P-3

Legal Officer

New

— 6 months, P-4 Legal Officer
Subtotal

—

3

Office of Information and Communications Technology
Field Systems Section

Subtotal
Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions secretariat
Subtotal
Total

1 P-4

Project Manager
(customer relationship
management/
troop contributions
management)

Continuation

1 P-3

Information Systems
Continuation
Officer (customer
relationship
management/troop
contributions management)

1 P-4

Project Manager (rations Continuation
management system)

3
1 P-4

Administrative
Management Officer

Continuation

1
162 positions (of which 11 are new)
and 92 person months (positions of less than
12 months duration)b

Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level); NGS, National
General Service.
a

The specific assignment of the general temporary assistance positions is set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the budget for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June
2012 (A/65/761 and Corr.1 and 2) and referenced in the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions (A/65/827), with the exception of 1 P-4 position for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in the Office of Operations/Africa II Division, 1 P-3 position for the Department of Field Support in the
Air Transport Section/Airfields and Air Terminals Unit and 1 P-4, 1 P-3 and 1 General Service (Other level) positions
for the Office of Internal Oversight Services in the Investigations Division (Nairobi).
b

Person months are indicated in the column entitled “Position level”.

145

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 65/291
AR
/ ES6/52/91

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/890, para. 15)

65/291. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and its resolution
62/231 of 22 December 2007,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which
was resolution 64/270 of 24 June 2010,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the
strategic deployment stocks and its subsequent resolutions on the status of the implementation of
the strategic deployment stocks, the latest of which was resolution 64/270,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Logistics Base64 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,65
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and by the Government of Spain to the secondary
active telecommunications facility at Valencia, Spain;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,65 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Takes note of paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee and decides not to
transfer the airfield and air terminal standards function to the United Nations Logistics Base;
4.

Also takes note of paragraph 30 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June
2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;66
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
7. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to
68,512,500 United States dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012;
Financing of the budget estimates
8. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period
from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 shall be financed as follows:
_______________
64

A/65/642 and A/65/760.
A/65/743/Add.12.
66
A/65/642.
65

146

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(a) The unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 2,559,200 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, and an unutilized fund balance from the
1996/97 to 2003/04 periods in the amount of 1,149,900 dollars, to be applied against the resources
required for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012;
(b) The balance of 64,803,400 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012;
(c) The estimated staff assessment income of 6,808,200 dollars, comprising the amount of
6,249,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012 and the increase of 558,300
dollars in respect of the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010, to be set off against the balance
referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated among the budgets of the individual active
peacekeeping operations;
9. Also decides to consider at its sixty-sixth session the question of the financing of the
United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy.
RESOLUTION 65/292
AR
/ ES6/52/92

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/890, para. 15)

65/292. Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement to Member States
for contingent-owned equipment
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on reformed procedures for
determining reimbursement to Member States for contingent-owned equipment,67 the report of the
2011 Working Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment, as transmitted by the Chair of the
Working Group to the Chair of the Fifth Committee,68 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General67 and the report of the 2011 Working
Group on Contingent-Owned Equipment;68
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation.
RESOLUTION 65/293
AR
/ ES6/52/93

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/890, para. 15)

65/293. Closed peacekeeping missions
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of
closed peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 2008 and 30 June 2009,70 and the related reports of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,71
_______________
67

A/65/800.
See A/C.5/65/16.
69
A/65/830.
70
A/63/581 and A/64/605.
71
A/63/856 and A/64/659 and Corr.1.
68

147

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having also considered the report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position
of closed peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 201072 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of
closed peacekeeping missions as at 30 June 201072 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73 subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;
2. Stresses that all Member States should fulfil their financial obligations as set out in the
Charter of the United Nations on time, in full and without conditions;
3. Urges Member States that are in arrears in their payments of assessed contributions to
closed peacekeeping missions to pay those contributions expeditiously;
4. Urges all Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their
assessed contributions in full;
5. Decides to return the amount of 70,600 United States dollars, reflecting two thirds of
the adjusted net credits available in the Special Account for the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
Observation Mission, to the Government of Kuwait;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to return 78.01 per cent of the 230,745,000 dollars net
cash available for credit to Member States as at 30 June 2010, in the amount of 180 million
dollars, based on the scale applicable to each mission’s last assessment;
7. Decides to consider at the second part of its resumed sixty-sixth session the financial
position of closed peacekeeping missions, including the remaining amounts owed to Member
States, following the implementation of paragraphs 5 and 6 above, determined to have been
50,674,400 dollars as at 30 June 2010, under the agenda item entitled “Administrative and
budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”, and requests
the Secretary-General to submit to it for its consideration and approval concrete proposals and
alternatives to address the issue of outstanding dues to Member States from closed peacekeeping
missions that are in net cash deficit.
RESOLUTION 65/294
AR
/ ES6/52/94

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/881, para. 6)

65/294. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire74 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of 27 February 2004, by which the
Council established the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of twelve
months as from 4 April 2004, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1981 (2011) of 13 May 2011, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 31 July 2011,
_______________
72

A/65/556.
A/65/775.
74
A/65/615 and A/65/736 and Corr.1.
75
A/65/743/Add.14.
73

148

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/273 of 24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 81.9 million
United States dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only fifty-one Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges
all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Takes note of paragraphs 1 and 36 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
13. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;

149

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;76
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire the amount of 517,850,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012,
inclusive of the amount of 486,726,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation, 26,374,200
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 4,750,100 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base, at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 43,154,225 dollars for
the period from 1 to 31 July 2011, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2011, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,121,350 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 893,616 dollars approved
for the Operation, the prorated share of 186,142 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 41,592 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 474,696,475 dollars for the
period from 1 August 2011 to 30 June 2012, at a monthly rate of 43,154,225 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in resolution 64/249 and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2011 and 2012, as set out in resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the Security Council to
extend the mandate of the Operation;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X),
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 12,334,850 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 9,829,784 dollars approved for the
Operation, the prorated share of 2,047,558 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 457,508 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Operation, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 25,042,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2010, as set out in resolution 64/248;
21. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 25,042,400 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;

_______________
76

150

A/65/615.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Also decides that the increase of 852,800 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 25,042,400 dollars referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
RESOLUTION 65/295
AR
/ ES6/52/95

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/882, para. 6)

65/295. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus77 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,78
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964, regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1986 (2011) of 13 June 2011, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force
until 15 December 2011,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the Force and
its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/274 of
24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by
certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force,
including those incurred by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting
the absence of an adequate response to appeals for voluntary contributions, including that
contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the Secretary-General to all Member States,79

_______________
77

A/65/625 and A/65/706.
A/65/743/Add.2.
79
S/1994/647.
78

151

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 17.9 million
United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only forty-seven Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying and
providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in Africa;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6
Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,78 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Notes the progress that has been made thus far by the host Government and the Force
with respect to the renovation of the accommodations for military contingent personnel, as well as
other personnel of the Force, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to make every effort, in
coordination with the host Government, to ensure that the renovations are completed as scheduled,
without any further delays, and to report thereon in the context of the next budget submission;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure accurate planning of flight hours, in
order to avoid underexpenditure due to the lower number of actual flight hours compared to the
planned hours;
13. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;

152

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;80
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus the amount of 60,121,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June
2012, inclusive of 56,512,000 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 3,058,400 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 550,800 dollars for the United Nations Logistics
Base, at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to
19,114,267 dollars, will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of
Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars from the Government of Greece;
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 34,506,933 dollars at a
monthly rate of 2,875,578 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2011
and 2012, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009, subject to a decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
2,721,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,404,200 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 259,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 57,800 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 17 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 1,361,709
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the levels
updated in General Assembly resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments
for 2010, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 1,361,709 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19 above;
21. Also decides that the increase of 255,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 1,361,709 dollars referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Further decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period
ended 30 June 2010, that one third of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount
of 828,604 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be returned to the
Government of Cyprus;

_______________
80

A/65/625.

153

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended
30 June 2010, that the prorated share of other income in the amount of 297,987 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be returned to the Government of Greece;
24. Also decides to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the Force
for the period prior to 16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to that
account, and requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary
contributions to the account;
25. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
26. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
27. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 65/296
AR
/ ES6/52/96

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/654/Add.1, para. 7)

65/296. Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo81 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,82
Recalling Security Council resolutions 1258 (1999) of 6 August 1999 and 1279 (1999) of
30 November 1999 regarding, respectively, the deployment to the region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo of military liaison personnel and the establishment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
1925 (2010) of 28 May 2010, by which the Council decided to extend the deployment of the
Mission until 30 June 2010,
Recalling also that, by resolution 1925 (2010), the Council decided that, as of 1 July 2010,
the Mission would bear the title of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and decided that the Stabilization Mission would be deployed
until 30 June 2011 and authorized the continuation until that date of up to 19,815 military
personnel, 760 military observers, 391 police personnel and 1,050 personnel of formed police

_______________
81
82

154

A/65/682 and A/65/744.
A/65/743/Add.8.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

units, and recalling further resolution 1991 (2011) of 28 June 2011, by which the Council decided
to extend the mandate of the Stabilization Mission until 30 June 2012,
Recalling further its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 65/255 of 24 December
2010,
Recalling its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 30 April 2011, including the
contributions outstanding in the amount of 288.1 million United States dollars, representing some
3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only forty-four Member
States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in
particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,82 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;

155

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

12. Decides not to abolish the child protection posts, requests the Secretary-General to
make every effort to fill them, and also requests the Secretary-General to identify an equivalent
number of posts at the same level that have been vacant for more than one year to offset the
financial impact of retaining the child protection posts, without affecting operational requirements
or mandate implementation, and to report thereon in the context of the performance report;
13. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;83
Budget estimates for the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the amount of 1,507,538,900
dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, inclusive of 1,416,926,000 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission, 76,783,900 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations and 13,829,000 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
16. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 1,507,538,900 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
17. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the
amount of 39,936,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 31,980,500
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 6,503,300 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 1,453,000 dollars
of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
18. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
35,075,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2010, as
set out in resolution 64/248;
19. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 35,075,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 18 above;
20. Further decides that the increase of 1,841,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 35,075,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 18 and 19 above;

_______________
83

156

A/65/682.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo”.
RESOLUTION 65/297
AR
/ ES6/52/97

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/883, para. 6)

65/297. Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste84 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,85
Recalling Security Council resolution 1704 (2006) of 25 August 2006, by which the Council
decided to establish a follow-on mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste, for an initial period of six months, with the intention to renew it for further periods,
and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1969 (2011) of 24 February 2011, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 26 February 2012,
Recalling also its resolutions 61/249 A of 22 December 2006 and 61/249 B of 2 April 2007
on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 64/276 of 24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
_______________
84
85

A/65/687 and A/65/746.
A/65/743/Add.6.

157

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

56.1 million United States dollars, representing some 6.3 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only forty-two Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,85 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;86
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste the amount of 208,603,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to
30 June 2012, inclusive of 196,077,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 10,614,500
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 1,911,700 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 137,270,825 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2011 to 26 February 2012, in accordance with the levels updated in

_______________
86

158

A/65/687.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

General Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
16. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
6,760,632 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 6,036,914 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 591,583 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 132,135 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 71,332,875 dollars for the
period from 27 February to 30 June 2012 at a monthly rate of 17,383,641 dollars, in accordance
with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale
of assessments for 2012, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X),
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,513,168 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 3,137,086 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 307,417 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 68,665 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
17,795,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2010, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 17,795,500 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 19 above;
21. Also decides that the increase of 947,800 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 17,795,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 19 and 20 above;
22. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
23. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
24. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste”.

159

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 65/298
AR
/ ES6/52/98

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/878, para. 6)

65/298. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea87 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,88
Recalling Security Council resolution 1312 (2000) of 31 July 2000, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the last of which was resolution
1798 (2008) of 30 January 2008, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until
31 July 2008,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1827 (2008) of 30 July 2008, by which the
Council terminated the mandate of the Mission effective on 31 July 2008,
Recalling further its resolution 55/237 of 23 December 2000 on the financing of the Mission
and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/277 of
24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea as at 30 April 2011, including the credits in the amount of 2.5 million United States dollars;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,88 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Disposition of assets of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the final disposition of the assets
of the Mission;87
4. Encourages Member States that are owed credits for the closed peacekeeping mission
accounts to apply those credits to any accounts where the Member State concerned has
outstanding assessed contributions;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea”.
RESOLUTION 65/299
AR
/ ES6/52/99

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/879, para. 6)

_______________
87
88

160

A/65/678.
A/65/748.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

65/299. Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 201089
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,90
Recalling Security Council resolution 854 (1993) of 6 August 1993, by which the Council
approved the deployment of an advance team of up to ten United Nations military observers for a
period of three months and the incorporation of the advance team into a United Nations observer
mission if such a mission was formally established by the Council,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 858 (1993) of 24 August 1993, by which the
Council established the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Observer Mission, the last of which
was resolution 1866 (2009) of 13 February 2009,
Recalling further its decision 48/475 A of 23 December 1993 on the financing of the
Observer Mission and its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was
resolution 64/234 of 22 December 2009,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 4.9 million
United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only one hundred and twenty-seven Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Observer Mission in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,90 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to ensure their full implementation;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
4. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Observer Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;89
5. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Observer Mission shall be credited with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other income in the amount of 1,806,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2010, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 64/249 of
24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2010, as set out in
Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
6. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Observer Mission, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
amount of 1,806,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be set off
against their outstanding obligations, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 5 above;
_______________
89
90

A/65/681.
A/65/743/Add.1.

161

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Further decides that the increase of 157,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 1,806,800 dollars referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6 above;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia”.
RESOLUTION 65/300
AR
/ ES6/53/00

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/884, para. 6)

65/300. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo91 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,92
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/279 of 24 June 2010,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolution of the
Security Council,
Mindful also of the need to ensure coordination and cooperation with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
38.2 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only one hundred and one Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;

_______________
91
92

162

A/65/621 and A/65/711.
A/65/743/Add.4.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,92 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Takes note of paragraph 29 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, decides that the two posts of Forensic Anthropologist Officer and Legal
Officer in the Rule of Law Liaison Office should not be converted to National Officer posts and
also decides to establish the Reporting Officer post in the Office for Community Support and
Facilitation as an international P-2 post;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;93
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo the amount of 47,802,200 dollars for the period from 1 July
2011 to 30 June 2012, inclusive of 44,914,800 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission,
2,446,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 440,700 dollars for the
United Nations Logistics Base, Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 47,802,200 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009,
and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in Assembly
resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
16. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the
amount of 4,634,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,381,300
_______________
93

A/65/621.

163

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 207,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 46,300 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
8,297,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2010, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248;
18. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 8,297,100 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Further decides that the increase of 1,054,300 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 8,297,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
RESOLUTION 65/301
AR
/ ES6/53/01

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/885, para. 6)

65/301. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia94 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,95
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council
declared its readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional
government and to assist in the implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the
Council decided to establish the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of twelve months,
_______________
94
95

164

A/65/620 and A/65/727.
A/65/743/Add.7.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the
latest of which was resolution 1938 (2010) of 15 September 2010, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Mission until 30 September 2011,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/280 of 24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at
30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 88 million United States
dollars, representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that
only eighty-five Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other
Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,95 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Notes with appreciation the immediate assistance of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia to the mission in Côte d’Ivoire during the post-election crisis;
11. Also notes with appreciation that the United Nations entities with field presence in
Liberia have advanced in developing coordination mechanisms and in this regard encourages
more effective cooperation among the Mission, the United Nations country team and other United

165

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Nations entities with field presence, in line with their respective roles and mandates as adopted by
the relevant intergovernmental bodies;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to implement the initiative “Delivering as one” in
accordance with the relevant mandates adopted by the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the executive boards of United Nations funds and programmes and the
governing bodies of the specialized agencies;
13. Recalls paragraph 24 of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,95 and encourages the Secretary-General to take all steps necessary to
provide the support required for the Liberia National Police to ensure that the capacity-building
process is concluded in a proper and timely manner;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
15. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
16. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
17. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;96
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
18. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in
Liberia the amount of 559,147,030 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012,
inclusive of 513,404,030 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 12,155,900 dollars
for electoral support to be provided by the Mission, 28,461,200 dollars for the support account
for peacekeeping operations and 5,125,900 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base, at
Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
19. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 136,747,783 dollars
for the period from 1 July to 30 September 2011, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
20. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the
amount of 3,806,125 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 3,068,850
dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 602,650 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 134,625 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 12,155,900 dollars for
electoral support to be provided by the Mission, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2011, as set out
in Assembly resolution 64/248;

_______________
96

166

A/65/620.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X),
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the amount of 40,900
dollars of estimated staff assessment income approved for the Mission;
23. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 410,243,347
dollars for the period from 1 October 2011 to 30 June 2012, at a monthly rate of 45,582,593
dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in resolution 64/249 and taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
24. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be
set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the amount of 11,418,375 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 9,206,550 dollars approved for the Mission,
the prorated share of 1,807,950 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 403,875 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
25. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Mission, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 19
above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
32,775,600 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2010, as
set out in resolution 64/248;
26. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial
obligations to the Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their
respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 32,775,600
dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set
out in paragraph 25 above;
27. Decides that the increase of 361,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the amount
of 32,775,600 dollars referred to in paragraphs 25 and 26 above;
28. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
30. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia”.

167

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 65/302
AR
/ ES6/53/02

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/886, para. 6)

65/302. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force97 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was
resolution 1994 (2011) of 30 June 2011,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the
United Nations Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/281 of 24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
18.3 million United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions,
notes with concern that only forty-nine Member States have paid their assessed contributions in
full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure the payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those in
Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
_______________
97
98

168

A/65/596 and A/65/710.
A/65/743/Add.3.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,98 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
12. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;99
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
14. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force the amount of 53,753,200 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012,
inclusive of 50,526,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 2,734,600 dollars for the support
account for peacekeeping operations and 492,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
15. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 53,753,200 dollars at a
monthly rate of 4,479,434 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2011
and 2012, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009, subject to a decision of
the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
16. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,810,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,526,700 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 231,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 51,700 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their
respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 852,500 dollars
in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the levels updated in
General Assembly resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2010, as
set out in Assembly resolution 64/248;
18. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
_______________
99

A/65/596.

169

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 852,500 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Further decides that the increase of 106,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 852,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”.
RESOLUTION 65/303
AR
/ ES6/53/03

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/65/880, para. 11),100 by a recorded vote of 117 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against: Canada, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining: Tuvalu

65/303. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon101 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,102

_______________
100

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by Argentina (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
101
A/65/608 and Corr.1 and A/65/756.
102
A/65/743/Add.9.

170

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the
establishment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution
1937 (2010) of 30 August 2010, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Force until
31 August 2011,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its
subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/282 of 24 June 2010,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of
8 June 1999, 54/267 of 15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001,
56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of
18 June 2004, 59/307 of 22 June 2005, 60/278 of 30 June 2006, 61/250 A of 22 December 2006,
61/250 B of 2 April 2007, 61/250 C of 29 June 2007, 62/265 of 20 June 2008, 63/298 of 30 June
2009 and 64/282 of 24 June 2010,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963,
3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 59.5 million
United States dollars, representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only ninety-one Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding
assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with resolutions 51/233, 52/237,
53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278,
61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C, 62/265, 63/298 and 64/282;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by resolutions 51/233, 52/237,
53/227, 54/267, 55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278,
61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C, 62/265, 63/298 and 64/282;
6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
7. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
8. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
171

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
11. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,102 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
12. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Force is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
15. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to ensure
the full implementation of paragraph 8 of resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of resolution 52/237,
paragraph 11 of resolution 53/227, paragraph 14 of resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of resolution
55/180 A, paragraph 15 of resolution 55/180 B, paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 A,
paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of resolution 57/325, paragraph 13 of
resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of resolution 60/278,
paragraph 21 of resolution 61/250 A, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 B, paragraph 20 of
resolution 61/250 C, paragraph 21 of resolution 62/265, paragraph 19 of resolution 63/298 and
paragraph 18 of resolution 64/282, stresses once again that Israel shall pay the amount of
1,117,005 dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996, and requests the SecretaryGeneral to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Force for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;103
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
17. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon the amount of 580,331,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012,
inclusive of 545,470,600 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 29,540,600 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations and 5,320,400 dollars for the United Nations
Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
18. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 96,721,900 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 31 August 2011, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
19. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund in the
amount of 2,558,100 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,047,900
dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 417,000 dollars of the estimated staff
_______________
103

172

A/65/608 and Corr.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 93,200 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
20. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 483,609,700 dollars for the
period from 1 September 2011 to 30 June 2012 at a monthly rate of 48,360,967 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
21. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X),
there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 20 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 12,790,300 dollars,
comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 10,239,500 dollars approved for the Force,
the prorated share of 2,085,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
support account and the prorated share of 465,800 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
22. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Force, there shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 18 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
62,951,500 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2010, as
set out in resolution 64/248;
23. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Force, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 62,951,500 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 22 above;
24. Also decides that the increase of 1,081,300 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 62,951,500 dollars referred to in paragraphs 22 and 23 above;
25. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
26. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United
Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
27. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session, under the item
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item
entitled “United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”.
RESOLUTION 65/304
AR
/ ES6/53/04

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/887, para. 6)

173

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

65/304. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara104 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105
Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent
resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was
resolution 1979 (2011) of 27 April 2011, by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Mission until 30 April 2012,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and
its subsequent resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/284 of
24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources
necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the
amount of 44.3 million United States dollars, representing some 5 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only ninety-seven Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
_______________
104
105

174

A/65/665 and A/65/720 and Corr.1.
A/65/743/Add.5.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,105 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Notes the consistent underutilization of the budget for flight hours, and encourages the
Secretary-General to take this trend into account in future budget submissions;
11. Welcomes the initiative to implement two quick-impact projects as part of the effort
to enhance relations with the local population, and encourages the timely implementation of
the projects;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of its resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary action to ensure that the
Mission is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Mission for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;106
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara the amount of 65,398,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011
to 30 June 2012, inclusive of 61,449,400 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 3,346,300
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 602,700 dollars for the United
Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 54,498,667 dollars for
the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 April 2012, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
18. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
2,590,083 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,301,083 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 236,250 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 52,750 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 10,899,733 dollars for the
period from 1 May to 30 June 2012, at a monthly rate of 5,449,866 dollars, in accordance with the
levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of assessments for 2012, as
set out in resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of
the Mission;

_______________
106

A/65/665.

175

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

20. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 518,017 dollars, comprising the estimated
staff assessment income of 460,217 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of
47,250 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the
prorated share of 10,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
21. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Mission, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 17 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 2,386,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2010, as set out in resolution 64/248;
22. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
Mission, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 2,386,700 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 21 above;
23. Also decides that the increase of 138,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 2,386,700 dollars referred to in paragraphs 21 and 22 above;
24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
RESOLUTION 65/305
AR
/ ES6/53/05

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/888, para. 7)

65/305. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur107 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,108
Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council
established the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of
twelve months from 31 July 2007, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended
_______________
107
108

176

A/65/631 and A/65/740.
A/65/743/Add.13.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was resolution 1935 (2010) of 30 July 2010, by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until 31 July 2011,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the
Operation and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 64/285 of
24 June 2010,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of
11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the necessary financial
resources to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council,
Noting the hybrid nature of the Operation, and in that regard stressing the importance of
ensuring full coordination of efforts between the African Union and the United Nations at the
strategic level, unity of command at the operational level and clear delegation of authority and
accountability lines,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of
formulating future budget proposals in full accordance with the provisions of General Assembly
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of
24 June 2010 and 65/289 of 30 June 2011, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur as at 30 April 2011, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
262.5 million United States dollars, representing some 4 per cent of the total assessed
contributions, notes with concern that only seventy-nine Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States which have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure
payment of their assessed contributions to the Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in
particular as regards the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing
to overdue payments by Member States of their assessments;
5. Also expresses concern at the delay experienced by the Secretary-General in deploying
and providing adequate resources to some recent peacekeeping missions, in particular those
in Africa;
6. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and
non-discriminatory treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
7. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate
resources for the effective and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are
based on the relevant legislative mandates;
9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,108 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure that all personnel adhere fully to
the security procedures in place;
11. Reaffirms section XX of resolution 61/276, and encourages the Secretary-General,
where feasible, to enhance regional and inter-mission cooperation with a view to achieving greater
177

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

synergies in the use of the resources of the Organization and the implementation of the mandates
of the missions, while bearing in mind that individual missions are responsible for the preparation
and implementation of their own budgets and for controlling their own assets and
logistical operations;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant
provisions of resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269 and 65/289;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the
Operation is administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure that future budget submissions
contain sufficient information, explanation and justification of the proposed resource requirements
relating to operational costs in order to allow Member States to take well-informed decisions;
15. Stresses the importance of strengthened accountability in the Organization and of
ensuring greater accountability of the Secretary-General to Member States, inter alia, for the
effective and efficient implementation of legislative mandates on procurement and the related use
of financial and human resources, as well as the provision of necessary information on
procurement-related matters to enable Member States to make well-informed decisions;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all procurement projects for the
Organization are in full compliance with relevant resolutions;
17. Decides not to abolish the child protection posts, requests the Secretary-General to
make every effort to fill them, and also requests the Secretary-General to identify an equivalent
number of posts at the same level that have been vacant for more than one year to offset the
financial impact of retaining the child protection posts, without affecting operational requirements
or mandate implementation, and to report thereon in the context of the performance report;
18. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of resolution 65/289;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
19. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
Operation for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010;109
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur the amount of 1,797,327,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2011
to 30 June 2012, inclusive of 1,689,305,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Operation,
91,536,100 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 16,486,000 dollars for
the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 149,777,300 dollars
for the period from 1 to 31 July 2011, in accordance with the levels updated in General Assembly
resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of assessments for
2011, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
3,137,200 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,346,816 dollars
_______________
109

178

A/65/631.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

approved for the Operation, the prorated share of 646,050 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 144,334 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 1,647,550,300 dollars for
the period from 1 August 2011 to 30 June 2012, at a monthly rate of 149,777,300 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
24. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 34,509,200 dollars, comprising the
estimated staff assessment income of 25,814,984 dollars approved for the Operation, the prorated
share of 7,106,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 1,587,666 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
25. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations
to the Operation, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in
paragraph 21 above, their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the
total amount of 175,974,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 64/249, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2010, as set out in resolution 64/248;
26. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to
the Operation, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of
the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 175,974,100 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in
paragraph 25 above;
27. Also decides that the increase of 2,223,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be added to the credits from the
amount of 175,974,100 dollars referred to in paragraphs 25 and 26 above;
28. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from
other active peacekeeping missions;
29. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure
the safety and security of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the
United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of
26 August 2003;
30. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and
supplies acceptable to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance
with the procedure and practices established by the General Assembly;
31. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.
RESOLUTION 65/306
AR
/ ES6/53/06

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, without a vote, on the recommendation of the
Committee (A/65/889, para. 6)

179

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

65/306. Financing of support of the African Union Mission in Somalia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of support of the
African Union Mission in Somalia110 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,111
Recalling Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of 16 January 2009, by which the
Council expressed its intent to establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia as a
follow-on force to the African Union Mission in Somalia, subject to its further decision by 1 June
2009, and requested the Secretary-General, in order for the forces of the Mission to be
incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, to provide a United Nations logistical
support package to the Mission, including equipment and services,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1964 (2010) of 22 December 2010, by which the
Council requested the Secretary-General to continue to provide a logistical support package to the
African Union Mission in Somalia until 30 September 2011,
Recalling further its resolution 64/287 of 24 June 2010 on the financing of support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as stated in General Assembly resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII)
of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the United Nations
Trust Fund established to support the African Union Mission in Somalia,
1. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,111 subject to the provisions of
the present resolution, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures to ensure effectiveness,
efficiency and transparency with regard to the use of United Nations resources, bearing in mind
the specific nature of the support package;
3. Stresses the importance of strict adherence to the existing United Nations procurement
rules and regulations;
4. Notes that the overall level of appropriation has been adjusted in accordance with the
terms of General Assembly resolution 65/289 of 30 June 2011;
Financial performance report for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the financial performance of the
support of the African Union Mission in Somalia for the period from 1 July 2009 to 30 June
2010;112
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012
6. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the support provided to the African
Union Mission in Somalia the amount of 309,690,900 United States dollars for the period from
1 July 2011 to 30 June 2012, inclusive of the amount of 291,092,700 dollars for the maintenance
of the entity, 15,759,800 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
2,838,400 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
_______________
110

A/65/619 and A/65/809.
A/65/743/Add.16.
112
A/65/619.
111

180

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation
7. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 77,422,725 dollars for
the period from 1 July to 30 September 2011, in accordance with the levels updated in General
Assembly resolution 64/249 of 24 December 2009, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011, as set out in Assembly resolution 64/248 of 24 December 2009;
8. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as
provided for in paragraph 7 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of
1,255,950 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 847,700 dollars approved
for the entity, the prorated share of 333,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account and the prorated share of 74,550 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
9. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 232,268,175 dollars for the
period from 1 October 2011 to 30 June 2012 at a monthly rate of 25,807,575 dollars, in
accordance with the levels updated in resolution 64/249 and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2011 and 2012, as set out in resolution 64/248, subject to a decision of the
Security Council to extend the mandate;
10. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of resolution 973 (X), there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 9 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 3,767,850 dollars, comprising the estimated
staff assessment income of 2,543,100 dollars approved for the entity, the prorated share of
1,001,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and
the prorated share of 223,650 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base;
11. Further decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to
the entity, there shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 7 above,
their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of
54,457,900 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the
levels updated by the General Assembly in resolution 64/249, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2010, as set out in resolution 64/248;
12. Decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the
entity, there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other income in the total amount of 54,457,900 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2010, in accordance with the scheme set out in paragraph 11 above;
13. Also decides that the decrease of 433,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment
income in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2010 shall be set off against the credits
from the amount of 54,457,900 dollars referred to in paragraphs 11 and 12 above;
14. Invites voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund established to support
the African Union Mission in Somalia;
15. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-sixth session the item entitled
“Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”.

181

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
number

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
65/404.

Election of seven members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination.......................................................... 185
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 185

65/405.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences........................................................................................ 185
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 185

65/406.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions............................. 186
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 186

65/407.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions...................................................................................... 186
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 186

65/412.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994................................................................................................................... 187

65/413.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991................................................... 187
Decision A ................................................................................................................................................................... 187
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 188

65/414.

Appointment of a judge of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal.................................................................................. 189

65/415.

Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council........................................................................................... 189

65/416.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session .................................................................. 190

65/417.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session................................ 190

65/418.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session ........................................................ 190
Decision A ................................................................................................................................................................... 190
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 191

65/419.

Appointment of ad litem judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal ...................................................................... 191
B. Other decisions
Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

65/503.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items ................................................................................................ 192
Decision B ................................................................................................................................................................... 192

65/545.

Oceans and the law of the sea....................................................................................................................................... 194

65/546.

Commemorative meeting on the occasion of the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery
and the Transatlantic Slave Trade ................................................................................................................................. 194

65/547.

Participation of civil society representatives in the high-level meeting on a comprehensive review of the
progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration
on HIV/AIDS............................................................................................................................................................... 194
183

IV. Decisions
Decision
number

Title

Page

65/548.

Opening plenary meeting of the 2011 comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the
Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS.............................................. 194

65/549.

Participation of civil society representatives in the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases.............................................................................................. 194

65/550.

Proposed amendment to the General Regulations of the World Food Programme ........................................................ 195

65/551.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations
on HIV and AIDS......................................................................................................................................................... 195

65/552.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan................................................................................................... 195

65/553.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte ................................................................................................................ 195

65/554.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and related matters........................................................................................................................................................ 196

65/555.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme.......................................................................... 196

65/556.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor................................................................................................ 196

184

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
65/404. Election of seven members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
B1
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the basis of
nominations by the Economic and Social Council2 and in accordance with the annex to Council
resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976, paragraph 1 of Council resolution 1987/94 of 4 December
1987, as well as Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December 1987, elected FRANCE as a member of
the Committee for Programme and Coordination for a term of office beginning on 12 September
2011 and expiring on 31 December 2012.
As a result, the Committee for Programme and Coordination is composed of the following
thirty Member States:3 ALGERIA,*** ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA,*** ARGENTINA,* ARMENIA,*
BELARUS,* BENIN,*** BRAZIL,* CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC,* CHINA,*** COMOROS,**
CUBA,* ERITREA,*** FRANCE,** GUINEA,* HAITI,** INDIA,* IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),*
ISRAEL,** ITALY,* KAZAKHSTAN,* NAMIBIA,** NIGERIA,* PAKISTAN,* REPUBLIC OF KOREA,***
RUSSIAN FEDERATION,** SOUTH AFRICA,* SPAIN,* UKRAINE,* URUGUAY* and VENEZUELA
(BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2012.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2013.

65/405. Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences
B4
At its 102nd plenary meeting, on 22 June 2011, the General Assembly, in accordance with
paragraph 2 of its resolution 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, took note of the appointment by its
President, after consultations with the Chair of the regional group concerned, of the REPUBLIC OF
MOLDOVA as a member of the Committee on Conferences for a term of office beginning on
22 June 2011 and ending on 31 December 2012.
As a result, the Committee on Conferences is composed of the following twenty
Member States:5 AUSTRIA,*** CHINA,*** CONGO,* CÔTE D’IVOIRE,** ETHIOPIA,*** FRANCE,*
GERMANY,** JAPAN,*** LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA,*** MALAYSIA,* MEXICO,* MOZAMBIQUE,*
NIGERIA,** PANAMA,** PHILIPPINES,* REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,*
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC,** UNITED STATES OF AMERICA*** and VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2012.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2013.

_______________
1

Decision 65/404, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. II, becomes decision 65/404 A.
2
See A/65/291/Add.1; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2011/201 B.
3
As indicated in A/65/291/Add.1, one vacancy remains to be filled for a member from Asia-Pacific States for a term
of office beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2013, and three vacancies remain to be filled
for members from Western European and Other States whose terms of office would begin on the date of election and
expire on 31 December 2011.
4
Decision 65/405, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. II, becomes decision 65/405 A.
5
One vacancy remains to be filled for a member from Latin American and Caribbean States, whose term of office
would begin on the date of appointment and expire on 31 December 2013.

185

IV. Decisions

65/406. Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions
B6
At its 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,7 appointed Mr. David Traystman as a member of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a term of office beginning
on 23 July and ending on 31 December 2011, as a result of the resignation of Ms. Susan M.
McLurg.8
As a result, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions is
composed as follows: Ms. Aїcha AFIFI (Morocco),* Ms. Renata ARCHINI (Italy),* Ms. Jasminka
DINIĆ (Croatia),** Mr. Vladimir A. IOSIFOV (Russian Federation),* Mr. Collen V. KELAPILE
(Botswana),** Ms. Namgya C. KHAMPA (India),*** Mr. Peter MADDENS (Belgium),***
Mr. Richard MOON (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland),*** Mr. Stafford O.
NEIL (Jamaica),** Mr. Carlos RUIZ MASSIEU (Mexico),*** Mr. Akira SUGIYAMA (Japan),***
Mr. Mohammad Mustafa TAL (Jordan),** Mr. Alejandro TORRES LÉPORI (Argentina),* Mr. David
TRAYSTMAN (United States of America),* Ms. Nonye UDO (Nigeria)** and Mr. ZHANG Wanhai
(China).***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2012.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2013.

65/407. Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions
B9
At its 78th plenary meeting, on 15 March 2011, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Fifth Committee,10 appointed Mr. Patrick Haughey and Mr. Sun Xudong as
members of the Committee on Contributions for a term of office beginning on 15 March 2011 and
ending on 31 December 2011, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Richard Moon and Mr. Wu
Gang.
As a result, the Committee on Contributions is composed as follows: Mr. Andrzej T.
ABRASZEWSKI (Poland),** Mr. Joseph ACAKPO-SATCHIVI (Benin),*** Mr. Meshal AL-MANSOUR
(Kuwait),** Mr. Elmi Ahmed DUALEH (Somalia),** Mr. Gordon ECKERSLEY (Australia),***
Mr. Bernardo GREIVER DEL HOYO (Uruguay),*** Mr. Patrick HAUGHEY (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland),* Mr. Ihor V. HUMENNY (Ukraine),** Mr. Andrei V.
KOVALENKO (Russian Federation),* Mr. Juan Mbomio NDONG MANGUE (Equatorial
Guinea),*** Mr. PARK Hae-yun (Republic of Korea),* Mr. Pedro Luis PEDROSO CUESTA
(Cuba),*** Ms. Gönke ROSCHER (Germany),* Mr. Thomas SCHLESINGER (Austria),*** Ms. Lisa
P. SPRATT (United States of America),** Mr. Shigeki SUMI (Japan),** Mr. SUN Xudong (China)*
and Mr. Courtney H. WILLIAMS (Jamaica).*
___________________
*
**
***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2012.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2013.

_______________
6

Decision 65/406, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. II, becomes decision 65/406 A.
7
A/65/562/Add.1, para. 3.
8
See A/65/101/Rev.1/Add.1.
9
Decision 65/407, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. II, becomes decision 65/407 A.
10
A/65/563/Add.1, para. 3.

186

IV. Decisions

65/412. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
At its 74th plenary meeting, on 14 January 2011, the General Assembly, having considered
the letter from the Secretary-General dated 13 October 2010, transmitting letters dated 20 and
23 September 2010 from the President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and
31 December 199411 and the letter from the Secretary-General dated 23 November 2010,
transmitting the letter dated 12 November 2010 from the President of the International Tribunal,12
and taking note of the letter from the President of the Security Council dated 20 December 2010,
transmitting the text of Council resolution 1955 (2010) of 14 December 2010:13
(a) Decided that, notwithstanding the expiry of their term of office on 31 December 2010,
Judge Joseph Asoka de Silva and Judge Taghreed Hikmat were authorized to complete the
Ndindiliyimana et al. case, which they had begun before the expiry of their term of office, and
took note of the intention of the International Tribunal to complete the case in March 2011;
(b) Decided also that, notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office on 31 December
2010, Judge Joseph Masanche was authorized to complete the Hategekimana case, which he had
begun before the expiry of his term of office, and took note of the intention of the International
Tribunal to complete the case in January 2011;
(c) Decided further that, in order for the International Tribunal to complete existing trials
or conduct additional trials, the total number of ad litem judges serving at the International
Tribunal might from time to time temporarily exceed the maximum of nine provided for in
article 11, paragraph 1, of the statute of the International Tribunal, to a maximum of twelve at any
one time, returning to a maximum of nine by 31 December 2011;
(d) Reiterated the importance of the International Tribunal being adequately staffed to
complete its work expeditiously, and called upon the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations
bodies to continue to work with the Registrar of the International Tribunal in order to find
practicable solutions to address that issue as the International Tribunal approached the completion
of its work, and at the same time called upon the International Tribunal to renew its efforts to focus
on its core functions.
65/413. International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
A
At its 74th plenary meeting, on 14 January 2011, the General Assembly, having considered
the letter from the Secretary-General dated 23 November 2010, transmitting a letter from the
President of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 dated 9 November 2010,14 and taking note of the letter from the President

_______________
11

A/65/529-S/2010/513.
A/65/587-S/2010/598.
13
A/65/661.
14
A/65/588-S/2010/599.
12

187

IV. Decisions

of the Security Council dated 20 December 2010, transmitting the text of Council resolution
1954 (2010) of 14 December 2010:15
(a) Decided that, notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office on 31 December 2010,
Judge Kevin Parker was authorized to complete the Đorđević case, which he had begun before the
expiry of his term of office, and took note of the intention of the International Tribunal to complete
the case by the end of February 2011;
(b) Decided also that, notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office on 31 December
2010, Judge Uldis Kinis was authorized to complete the Gotovina et al. case, which he had begun
before the expiry of his term of office, and took note of the intention of the International Tribunal
to complete the case by the end of March 2011;
(c) Decided further to allow Judge Kinis to serve at the International Tribunal beyond the
cumulative period of service provided for under article 13 ter, paragraph 2, of the statute of the
International Tribunal;
(d) Reiterated the importance of the International Tribunal being adequately staffed to
complete its work expeditiously, called upon the Secretariat and other relevant United Nations
bodies to continue to work with the Registrar of the International Tribunal in order to find
practicable solutions to address that issue as the International Tribunal approached the completion
of its work, and at the same time called upon the International Tribunal to renew its efforts to focus
on its core functions.
B
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 19 July 2011, the General Assembly, having considered the
letter from the Secretary-General dated 27 June 2011, transmitting a letter from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
dated 8 June 2011,16 and taking note of the letter from the President of the Security Council dated
29 June 2011, transmitting the text of Council resolution 1993 (2011) of 29 June 2011:17
(a) Decided to extend the term of office of the following permanent judges at the
International Tribunal, who were members of the Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2012 or
until the completion of the cases to which they were assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Jean-Claude ANTONETTI (France)
Mr. Guy DELVOIE (Belgium)
Mr. Christoph FLÜGGE (Germany)
Mr. Burton HALL (Bahamas)
Mr. O-Gon KWON (Republic of Korea)
Mr. Bakone Melema MOLOTO (South Africa)
Mr. Howard MORRISON (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Mr. Alphonsus Martinus Maria ORIE (Netherlands)
(b) Decided also to extend the terms of office of the following ad litem judges at the
International Tribunal, who were members of the Trial Chambers, until 31 December 2012 or
until the completion of the cases to which they were assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Melville BAIRD (Trinidad and Tobago)
Ms. Elizabeth GWAUNZA (Zimbabwe)
Mr. Frederik HARHOFF (Denmark)
Ms. Flavia LATTANZI (Italy)
_______________
15

A/65/662.
A/65/893.
17
A/65/894.
16

188

IV. Decisions

Mr. Antoine Kesia-Mbe MINDUA (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
Ms. Prisca Matimba NYAMBE (Zambia)
Ms. Michèle PICARD (France)
Mr. Árpád PRANDLER (Hungary)
Mr. Stefan TRECHSEL (Switzerland)
(c) Reaffirmed the necessity of trial of persons indicted by the International Tribunal,
reiterated its call upon all States, especially the States of the former Yugoslavia, to intensify
cooperation with and render all necessary assistance to the International Tribunal, and, in
particular, called for the arrest of Mr. Goran Hadžić;
(d) Reiterated the importance of the International Tribunal being adequately staffed to
complete its work expeditiously, called upon relevant United Nations bodies to intensify
cooperation with the Secretariat and the Registrar of the International Tribunal and to take a
flexible approach in order to find practicable solutions to address that issue as the International
Tribunal approached the completion of its work, and at the same time called upon the International
Tribunal to renew its efforts to focus on its core functions;
(e) Commended States that had concluded agreements for the enforcement of sentences
of persons convicted by the International Tribunal or had otherwise accepted such convicted
persons to serve their sentences in their territories, and called upon States to renew their
commitment to the enforcement of sentences and to look positively on requests from the
International Tribunal in that regard;
(f) Called upon States that had not concluded agreements for the enforcement of
sentences of persons convicted by the International Tribunal or otherwise accepted such convicted
persons to serve their sentences in their respective territories and that were able to do so to
consider concluding those agreements or accepting such persons.
65/414. Appointment of a judge of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal
At its 75th plenary meeting, on 28 January 2011, the General Assembly, pursuant to article 3
of the statute of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal, contained in annex II to resolution 63/253 of
24 December 2008, and on the recommendation of the Internal Justice Council,18 appointed
Ms. Mary Faherty as a judge of the Tribunal for a term of office beginning on 28 January 2011
and ending on 30 June 2016, as a result of the resignation of Ms. Rose Boyko.
As a result, the United Nations Dispute Tribunal is composed as follows: Ms. Sophia
ADINYIRA (Ghana),** Mr. Jean COURTIAL (France),* Ms. Mary FAHERTY (Ireland),**
Mr. Kamaljit Singh GAREWAL (India),* Mr. Mark P. PAINTER (United States of America),*
Mr. Luis Maria SIMÓN (Uruguay)** and Ms. Inés WEINBERG DE ROCA (Argentina).**
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 30 June 2012.

**

Term of office expires on 30 June 2016.

65/415. Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council
At its 89th plenary meeting, on 20 May 2011, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006, elected as members of the Human Rights Council, for a
three-year term of office beginning on 19 June 2011, AUSTRIA, BENIN, BOTSWANA, BURKINA
FASO, CHILE, CONGO, COSTA RICA, the CZECH REPUBLIC, INDIA, INDONESIA, ITALY, KUWAIT,
PERU, the PHILIPPINES, and ROMANIA to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms
of office of ARGENTINA, BAHRAIN, BRAZIL, BURKINA FASO, CHILE, FRANCE, GABON, GHANA,

_______________
18

See A/65/671.

189

IV. Decisions

JAPAN, PAKISTAN, the REPUBLIC OF KOREA, SLOVAKIA, UKRAINE, the UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and ZAMBIA.
As a result, the Human Rights Council is composed of the following forty-seven Member
States: ANGOLA,** AUSTRIA,*** BANGLADESH,* BELGIUM,* BENIN,*** BOTSWANA,***
BURKINA FASO,*** CAMEROON,* CHILE,*** CHINA,* CONGO,*** COSTA RICA,*** CUBA,*
CZECH REPUBLIC,*** DJIBOUTI,* ECUADOR,** GUATEMALA,** HUNGARY,* INDIA,***
INDONESIA,*** ITALY,*** JORDAN,* KUWAIT,*** KYRGYZSTAN,* LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA,**
MALAYSIA,** MALDIVES,** MAURITANIA,** MAURITIUS,* MEXICO,* NIGERIA,* NORWAY,*
PERU,*** PHILIPPINES,*** POLAND,** QATAR,** REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA,** ROMANIA,***
RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SAUDI ARABIA,* SENEGAL,* SPAIN,** SWITZERLAND,** THAILAND,**
UGANDA,** UNITED STATES OF AMERICA* and URUGUAY.*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 18 June 2012.

**

Term of office expires on 18 June 2013.

***

Term of office expires on 18 June 2014.

65/416. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session19.
At its 103rd plenary meeting, on 22 June 2011, the General Assembly, in accordance with
Article 21 of the Charter of the United Nations, rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly
and paragraph 1 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978 elected by acclamation,
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz AL-NASSER of Qatar as President of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth
session.
65/417. Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly
at its sixty-sixth session19
On 22 June 2011, the six Main Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in
accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly for the purpose of
electing their Chairs.
At the 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2011, the President of the General Assembly
announced that the following persons had been elected as Chairs of the six Main Committees of
the Assembly at its sixty-sixth session:
First Committee:

Mr. Jarmo VIINANEN (Finland)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):
Ms. Simona Mirela MICULESCU (Romania)
Second Committee:

Mr. Abulkalam Abdul MOMEN (Bangladesh)

Third Committee:

Mr. Hussein HANIFF (Malaysia)

Fifth Committee:

Mr. Michel TOMMO MONTHE (Cameroon)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Hernán SALINAS BURGOS (Chile)

65/418. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session19
A
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2011, the General Assembly, in accordance with
rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to
_______________
19

In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of
the President of the Assembly, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents and the Chairs of the six Main Committees.

190

IV. Decisions

resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected by acclamation the following twenty Member
States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session: AUSTRALIA, AUSTRIA,
BENIN, BOLIVIA (PLURINATIONAL STATE OF), CHAD, CHINA, FIJI, FRANCE, HAITI, HUNGARY, IRAN
(ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF), KUWAIT, LIBERIA, MALAWI, MOROCCO, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, RUSSIAN
FEDERATION, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA and URUGUAY.
B
At its 117th plenary meeting, on 29 July 2011, the General Assembly, in accordance with
rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to
resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected by acclamation MAURITIUS as a Vice-President
of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session.
As a result, the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session are the
following twenty-one Member States: AUSTRALIA, AUSTRIA, BENIN, BOLIVIA (PLURINATIONAL
STATE OF), CHAD, CHINA, FIJI, FRANCE, HAITI, HUNGARY, IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF), KUWAIT,
LIBERIA, MALAWI, MAURITIUS, MOROCCO, REPUBLIC OF KOREA, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA and
URUGUAY.
65/419. Appointment of ad litem judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2011, the General Assembly, pursuant to its
resolution 65/251 of 24 December 2010, and on the recommendation of the Internal Justice
Council,20 decided to extend the terms of office of two of the three ad litem judges of the United
Nations Dispute Tribunal, namely Mr. Jean-François COUSIN (France) and Ms. Nkemdilim
Amelia IZUAKO (Nigeria), for an additional six months beginning on 1 July 2011.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly was informed that Ms. Marilyn KAMAN
(United States of America) had indicated to the Council that she was unable to be considered for
reappointment for the additional six-month term.20
As a result, the United Nations Dispute Tribunal is composed as follows: Mr. Vinod
BOOLELL (Mauritius, full-time, Nairobi),*** Mr. Jean-François COUSIN (France, ad litem),*
Ms. Memooda EBRAHIM-CARSTENS (Botswana, full-time, New York),** Ms. Nkemdilim Amelia
IZUAKO (Nigeria, ad litem),* Mr. Thomas LAKER (Germany, full-time, Geneva),*** Mr. Goolam
Hoosen Kader MEERAN (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, half-time)**
and Ms. Coral SHAW (New Zealand, half-time).***
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2011.

**

Term of office expires on 30 June 2012.

***

Term of office expires on 30 June 2016.

_______________
20

See A/65/853.

191

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
65/503. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
B21
At its 74th plenary meeting, on 14 January 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
the Secretary-General,22 having waived the relevant provisions of rule 40 of its rules of procedure,
decided to include in the agenda of its sixty-fifth session, an additional sub-item entitled
“Appointment of a judge of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal” as sub-item (g) of agenda
item 113, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it
directly in plenary meeting.
At its 78th plenary meeting, on 15 March 2011, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 27, entitled “Social development, including questions
relating to the world social situation and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family”, under
heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences),
and to consider it directly in plenary meeting in order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.23
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 74, entitled “Oceans and the law of the sea”, under heading F (Promotion of justice
and international law), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.24
Also at the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (b) of agenda item 113, entitled “Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to proceed
expeditiously with the consideration of the report of the Fifth Committee.25
At its 85th plenary meeting, on 7 April 2011, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of agenda item 50 entitled “International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer
space”, under heading B (Maintenance of international peace and security), and to consider it
directly in plenary meeting in order to consider expeditiously a draft resolution.26
At its 96th plenary meeting, on 13 June 2011, the General Assembly decided to consider
directly in plenary meeting sub-item (b) of agenda item 66, entitled “Comprehensive implementation
of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action”, under heading D
(Promotion of human rights), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft
resolution.27
At its 99th plenary meeting, on 15 June 2011, the General Assembly, on the recommendation
of the General Committee as set forth in its third report,28 decided to include in the agenda of its
_______________
21

Decision 65/503, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Supplement
No. 49 (A/65/49), vol. II, becomes decision 65/503 A.
22
A/65/232.
23
A/65/L.63.
24
A/65/L.61.
25
A/65/563/Add.1.
26
A/65/L.67 and Add.1.
27
A/65/L.76.
28
See A/65/250/Add.2.

192

IV. Decisions

sixty-fifth session an additional sub-item entitled “Appointment of ad litem judges of the United
Nations Dispute Tribunal” as sub-item (h) of agenda item 113, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in plenary meeting.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the General
Committee as set forth in its third report,28 decided to include in the agenda of its sixty-fifth
session an additional item entitled “Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations”,
under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to consider it directly in
plenary meeting.
At its 100th plenary meeting, on 17 June 2011, the General Assembly, decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 23, entitled “Fourth United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries”, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and
sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
recent United Nations conferences), and to consider it directly in plenary meeting in order to
consider expeditiously a draft resolution.29
At its 105th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2011, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of agenda item 23 entitled “Groups of countries in special situations”, under
heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations
conferences), and to consider it directly in plenary meeting in order to consider expeditiously a
draft resolution.30
At its 106th plenary meeting, on 30 June 2011, the General Assembly decided to reopen
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 113, entitled “Appointment of members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions”, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the
consideration of the report of the Fifth Committee.31
At its 114th plenary meeting, on 27 July 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President, decided, without setting a precedent, to invite Ms. Catarina de Albuquerque, the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation, to make a
statement at that meeting.
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly decided to
reopen consideration of agenda item 10 entitled “Implementation of the Declaration of
Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS”, under heading A
(Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to
proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.32
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda
item 19 entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the 2002 International
Conference on Financing for Development and the 2008 Review Conference”, under heading A
(Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to
proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft resolution.33

_______________
29

A/65/L.75.
A/65/L.66/Rev.1 and Add.1.
31
A/65/562/Add.1.
32
A/65/L.89.
33
A/65/L.91.
30

193

IV. Decisions

65/545. Oceans and the law of the sea
At its 78th plenary meeting, on 15 March 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal of
Canada and Saint Lucia,34 decided to request the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole on the
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment,
including Socio-economic Aspects, to submit to the Assembly at its sixty-fifth session a report on
its first meeting, held from 14 to 18 February 2011 pursuant to paragraph 203 of resolution
65/37 A of 7 December 2010.
65/546. Commemorative meeting on the occasion of the International Day of
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade
At its 81st plenary meeting, on 25 March 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President, recalling its decision 65/502 of 17 September 2010 in which it had adopted the format
for commemorative meetings, which included statements by the President of the General
Assembly, the Secretary-General, the chairs of the five regional groups and the representative of
the host country,35 decided that the commemorative meeting on the occasion of the International
Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade, held on
25 March 2011, pursuant to Assembly resolution 65/239 of 24 December 2010, would, without
setting a precedent, also include a statement on behalf of the Caribbean Community, a statement
by Ms. Ruth Simmons, President of Brown University, and some cultural presentations.
65/547. Participation of civil society representatives in the high-level meeting on a
comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS
At its 86th plenary meeting, on 18 April 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,36 decided to approve for participation in the high-level meeting on a comprehensive
review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS, to be convened from 8 to 10 June 2011, the list of civil
society representatives drawn up by the President pursuant to paragraph 14 of Assembly
resolution 65/180 of 20 December 2010.
65/548. Opening plenary meeting of the 2011 comprehensive review of the progress
achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the
Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS
At its 89th plenary meeting, on 20 May 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,37 recalling its resolution 65/180 of 20 December 2010, decided that the opening plenary
meeting of the 2011 comprehensive review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS would be held on
Wednesday, 8 June 2011, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., on the understanding that such arrangements in no
way created a precedent for the scheduling of future plenary meetings of the Assembly.
65/549. Participation of civil society representatives in the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 28 July 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its
President,38 decided to approve for participation in the High-level Meeting of the General
_______________
34

A/65/L.61.
See A/65/250, para. 43.
36
A/65/L.71.
37
A/65/L.73.
38
A/65/L.88.
35

194

IV. Decisions

Assembly on the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases, to be convened on
19 and 20 September 2011, the list of civil society representatives drawn up by the President
pursuant to paragraph 15 of Assembly resolution 65/238 of 24 December 2010.
65/550. Proposed amendment to the General Regulations of the World Food Programme
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the
recommendation of the Economic and Social Council,39 recommended that, consistent with
article XV of the General Regulations of the World Food Programme, article XIV.6 of the General
Regulations be amended by replacing the word “biennial” in article XIV.6 (a) with the word
“annual”, so that article XIV.6 read as follows:
“6.

The Executive Director will submit the following to the Executive Board for approval:

“(a) The annual World Food Programme budget, and supplementary World Food
Programme budgets, whenever appropriate, prepared in exceptional circumstances;
“(b) Annual financial statements of the World Food Programme, together with the report of
the External Auditor;
“(c) Other financial reports.
“These will also be submitted to the Finance Committee of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for their review and comments. The reports of these bodies will be
submitted to the Board.”
65/551. Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the Political Declarations on HIV and AIDS
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of its President,40 guided by the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS,41 the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS42 and the Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying Our
Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS,43 decided to include in the draft agenda of its sixty-sixth
session an item entitled “Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and
the Political Declarations on HIV and AIDS”.
65/552. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of Azerbaijan,44 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “The situation in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-sixth session.
65/553. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly, on the proposal
of the Comoros,44 decided to defer consideration of the item entitled “Question of the Comorian
island of Mayotte” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-sixth session.

_______________
39

See A/65/928, annex.
A/65/L.89.
41
Resolution S-26/2, annex.
42
Resolution 60/262, annex.
43
Resolution 65/277, annex.
44
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fifth Session, Plenary Meetings, 118th meeting (A/65/PV.118),
and corrigendum.
40

195

IV. Decisions

65/554. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership
of the Security Council and related matters
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly:
(a) Decided to immediately continue intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform in informal plenary of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session, as mandated by
Assembly decisions 62/557 of 15 September 2008, 63/565 B of 14 September 2009 and 64/568 of
13 September 2010, building on the progress achieved during its sixty-fifth session, as well as the
positions of and proposals made by Member States, while noting with appreciation the initiatives
and intensive efforts of the President of the General Assembly and the Chair of the
intergovernmental negotiations, including the preparation of the text reflecting the positions of
and proposals submitted by Member States, with a view to an early comprehensive reform of
the Council;
(b) Also decided to convene the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other
Matters Related to the Security Council during the sixty-sixth session of the General Assembly, if
Member States so decide;
(c) Further decided to include in the agenda of the sixty-sixth session of the General
Assembly an item entitled “Question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Security Council”.
65/555. Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative management
and internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into
the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee into the United Nations
Oil-for-Food Programme” and to include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-sixth session.
65/556. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 118th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2011, the General Assembly decided to defer
consideration of the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor” and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-sixth session.

196

Annex I
Allocation of agenda itemsa
a

1. The following item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable
development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent
United Nations conferences):b
19. Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of the 2002 International Conference
on Financing for Development and the 2008 Review Conference.
2. The following item, and the following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Second
Committee, were also considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-fifth
session, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations
conferences):b
23. Groups of countries in special situations:
(a)

Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries.

3. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, was also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-fifth session, under heading A
(Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences):b
27. Social development:
(b)

Social development, including questions relating to the world social situation
and to youth, ageing, disabled persons and the family.

4. The following item, which had been allocated to the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee), was also considered directly in plenary meeting during the
resumed sixth-fifth session, under heading B (Maintenance of international peace and security):b
50. International cooperation in the peaceful uses of outer space.
5. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Third Committee, was also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixth-fifth session, under heading D
(Promotion of human rights):b
66. Elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance:
(b)

Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action.

6. The following sub-items, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee, were also
considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed sixty-fifth session, under heading I
(Organizational, administrative and other matters):b
113. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a)

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions;

(b)

Appointment of members of the Committee on Contributions.

_______________
a
b

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.
See decision 65/503 B in section IV.B of the present volume.

197

Annex I – Allocation of agenda items

7. The following additional sub-items were considered directly in plenary meeting during the
resumed sixty-fifth session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):b
113. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(g)

Appointment of a judge of the United Nations Appeals Tribunal;c

(h)

Appointment of ad litem judges of the United Nations Dispute Tribunal.d

8. The following additional item was considered directly in plenary meeting during the
resumed sixty-fifth session, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters):b
163. Appointment of the Secretary-General of the United Nations.d

_______________
c
d

198

A/65/252/Add.2.
See A/65/252/Add.3.

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolutions
Resolution
number

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

74 (a)

84th

4 April 2011

3

127

106th

30 June 2011

101

144

106th

30 June 2011

103

153

106th

30 June 2011

104

Resolution B

157

106th

30 June 2011

107

65/263.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie

122 (l)

74th

14 January 2011

4

65/264.

International cooperation on humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development

69 (a)

75th

28 January 2011

7

65/265.

Suspension of the rights of membership of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya in the Human Rights Council

117

76th

1 March 2011

13

65/266.

Revision of the General Regulations of the World
Food Programme

9

77th

7 March 2011

13

65/267.

Organization of the High-level Meeting on Youth

27 (b)

78th

15 March 2011

14

65/268.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 2010–2011

129

84th

4 April 2011

111

65/269.

Capital master plan

129

84th

4 April 2011

116

65/270.

Report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2010
and programme of work for 2011

135

84th

4 April 2011

122

65/271.

International Day of Human Space Flight

50

85th

7 April 2011

16

65/272.

Report of the Secretary-General on the strengthening
of the management capacity of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

51

86th

18 April 2011

96

65/273.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and
eliminate malaria in developing countries, particularly in
Africa, by 2015

12

86th

18 April 2011

17

65/274.

Cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union

122 (a)

86th

18 April 2011

23

65/37.

Title

Oceans and the law of the sea
Resolution B

65/243.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and
reports of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B

65/254.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad
Resolution B

65/256.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti
Resolution B

65/257.

Page

Financing of the United Nations Mission in the Sudan

199

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

65/275.

International Day of Friendship

15

88th

3 May 2011

30

65/276.

Participation of the European Union in the work
of the United Nations

120

88th

3 May 2011

31

65/277.

Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: Intensifying
Our Efforts to Eliminate HIV and AIDS

10

95th

10 June 2011

33

65/278.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the
report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa

62 (b)

96th

13 June 2011

47

65/279.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action

66 (b)

96th

13 June 2011

51

65/280.

Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2011–2020

23 (a)

100th

17 June 2011

53

65/281.

Review of the Human Rights Council

13 and 115

100th

17 June 2011

53

65/282.

Appointment of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations

163

101st

21 June 2011

62

65/283.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution

33

102nd

22 June 2011

62

65/284.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support

62 (a)

102nd

22 June 2011

65

65/285.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 61/16 on the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council

13 and 115

105th

29 June 2011

72

65/286.

Implementing the smooth transition strategy for countries
graduating from the list of least developed countries

23

105th

29 June 2011

72

65/287.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia

34

105th

29 June 2011

74

65/288.

Estimates in respect of special political missions, good
offices and other political initiatives authorized by the
General Assembly and/or the Security Council

129

106th

30 June 2011

125

65/289.

Cross-cutting issues

143

106th

30 June 2011

126

65/290.

Strengthening the capacity of the United Nations
to manage and sustain peacekeeping operations

143

106th

30 June 2011

134

65/291.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi, Italy

143

106th

30 June 2011

146

65/292.

Reformed procedures for determining reimbursement
to Member States for contingent-owned equipment

143

106th

30 June 2011

147

65/293.

Closed peacekeeping missions

143

106th

30 June 2011

147

65/294.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire

145

106th

30 June 2011

148

200

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

65/295.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus

146

106th

30 June 2011

151

65/296.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo

147 and 148

106th

30 June 2011

154

65/297.

Financing of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste

150

106th

30 June 2011

157

65/298.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea

151

106th

30 June 2011

160

65/299.

Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia

152

106th

30 June 2011

160

65/300.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo

154

106th

30 June 2011

162

65/301.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

155

106th

30 June 2011

164

65/302.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force

156 (a)

106th

30 June 2011

168

65/303.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

156 (b)

106th

30 June 2011

170

65/304.

Financing of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara

158

106th

30 June 2011

173

65/305.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur

159

106th

30 June 2011

176

65/306.

Financing of support of the African Union Mission
in Somalia

160

106th

30 June 2011

179

65/307.

Improving the effectiveness and coordination of military
and civil defence assets for natural disaster response

69 (a)

107th

1 July 2011

75

65/308.

Admission of the Republic of South Sudan
to membership in the United Nations

114

108th

14 July 2011

76

65/309.

Happiness: towards a holistic approach to development

13

109th

19 July 2011

77

65/310.

Comprehensive review of the whole question
of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects

53

109th

19 July 2011

98

65/311.

Multilingualism

121

109th

19 July 2011

78

65/312.

Outcome document of the High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on Youth: Dialogue
and Mutual Understanding

27 (b)

111th

26 July 2011

82

65/313.

Follow-up to the Conference on the World Financial
and Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development

13

118th

12 September 2011

87

65/314.

Modalities for the fifth High-level Dialogue
on Financing for Development

19

118th

12 September 2011

88

65/315.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

118

118th

12 September 2011

89

65/316.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific
Islands Forum

122 (t)

118th

12 September 2011

93

201

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Decisions
Decision
number

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of Adoption

Page

112 (a)

118th

12 September 2011

185

113 (f)

102nd

22 June 2011

185

113 (a)

106th

30 June 2011

186

Decision B

113 (b)

78th

15 March 2011

186

65/412.

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994

125

74th

14 January 2011

187

65/413.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
Decision A

126

74th

14 January 2011

187

Decision B

126

109th

19 July 2011

188

65/414.

Appointment of a judge of the United Nations
Appeals Tribunal

113 (g)

75th

28 January 2011

189

65/415.

Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council

112 (c)

89th

20 May 2011

189

65/416.

Election of the President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-sixth session

4

103rd

22 June 2011

190

65/417.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees
of the General Assembly at its sixty-sixth session

5

104th

22 June 2011

190

65/418.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
at its sixty-sixth session
Decision A

6

104th

22 June 2011

190

Decision B

6

117th

29 July 2011

191

113 (h)

105th

29 June 2011

191

65/404.

Title

Election of seven members of the Committee
for Programme and Coordination
Decision B

65/405.

Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Decision B

65/406.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Decision B

65/407.

65/419.

202

Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions

Appointment of ad litem judges of the United Nations
Dispute Tribunal

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Decision
number

65/503.

Title

Plenary
meeting

Date of Adoption

Page

7

74th
78th
85th
96th
99th
100th
105th
106th
114th
118th

14 January 2011
15 March 2011
7 April 2011
13 June 2011
15 June 2011
17 June 2011
29 June 2011
30 June 2011
27 July 2011
12 September 2011

192

Item

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of agenda items
Decision B

65/545.

Oceans and the law of the sea

74 (a)

78th

15 March 2011

194

65/546.

Commemorative meeting on the occasion of the
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims
of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade

116

81st

25 March 2011

194

65/547.

Participation of civil society representatives in the highlevel meeting on a comprehensive review of the progress
achieved in realizing the Declaration of Commitment on
HIV/AIDS and the Political Declaration on HIV/AIDS

10

86th

18 April 2011

194

65/548.

Opening plenary meeting of the 2011 comprehensive
review of the progress achieved in realizing the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS and the Political
Declaration on HIV/AIDS

10

89th

20 May 2011

194

65/549.

Participation of civil society representatives in the Highlevel Meeting of the General Assembly on the Prevention
and Control of Non-communicable Diseases

115

116th

28 July 2011

194

65/550.

Proposed amendment to the General Regulations
of the World Food Programme

9

118th

12 September 2011

195

65/551.

Implementation of the Declaration of Commitment
on HIV/AIDS and the Political Declarations
on HIV and AIDS

10

118th

12 September 2011

195

65/552.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

39

118th

12 September 2011

195

65/553.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

40

118th

12 September 2011

195

65/554.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and related matters

119

118th

12 September 2011

196

65/555.

Follow-up to the recommendations on administrative
management and internal oversight of the Independent
Inquiry Committee into the United Nations Oil-for-Food
Programme

123

118th

12 September 2011

196

65/556.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

149

118th

12 September 2011

196

203
