S/PV.7316

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7316th meeting

Wednesday, 19 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Bishop/Ms. King/Mr. Quinlan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Timerman
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Delattre
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Krivas
Mr. Asselborn
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Shin Dong-ik
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. Pressman

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
International Cooperation on Combating Terrorism and Violent Extremism
Letter dated 4 November 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/787)

14-63739 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1463739*

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
International Cooperation on Combating
Terrorism and Violent Extremism
Letter dated 4 November 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/787)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. There can be
no doubt of the crucial importance of the global effort
to counter terrorism. At a number of international
meetings Australia has participated in over the past
two weeks — the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Summit, the East Asia Summit and the Group of 20
meeting — all participants expressed grave concern
about the threat posed by terrorism and by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, or Daesh, in particular.
Today’s meeting provides the international community
an important opportunity to emphasize its determination
to act against this threat.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Pakistan, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia,
Singapore, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The number of representatives wishing to
contribute to this debate is a statement in and of itself
on the importance of the matter under discussion.
2/83

19/11/2014

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/787, which contains the text of
a letter dated 4 November 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of Australia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this timely high-level debate.
Let me begin by recognizing the global leadership of
Australia, which this month successfully chaired the
Group of 20 Summit in Brisbane, Australia, in which
I had the honour of participating, and is also presiding
over the Security Council this month. Therefore, this
month Australia is leading on all the issues: peace and
security, economic development and human rights.
I welcome the Council’s increased attention to
the growing threat to international peace and security
posed by terrorism and violent extremism. Less than
two months ago, this body adopted resolution 2178
(2014), which calls for stronger international efforts
to address the challenge of foreign terrorist fighters.
That followed closely on the heels of resolution 2170
(2014), adopted in August under the presidency of the
United Kingdom. I commend the Council for its unity
of purpose.
Despite strengthened efforts to combat the threat,
the number of foreign terrorist fighters in the conflicts
in Syria and Iraq has grown to over 15,000 from more
than 80 countries. In addition, terrorist groups spurred
by violent extremist ideologies, such as Daesh, the
Al-Nusra Front, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab, continue
to carry out brutal acts and cause profound suffering.
Millions live under the control of such groups.
Technology and globalization have made it easier for
them to cause disproportionate harm, exploit narratives
and profit from illicit financing. Daesh, for example,
has been illegally trading in oil. We are increasingly
seeing terrorism, drug trafficking and transnational
crime grow in intensity and feed off each other.
The international community and the United
Nations must ensure the full implementation of our
many tools for action, including Security Council
resolutions and the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014),
we have taken a number of specific steps. First, the
Al-Qaida Monitoring Team provided an oral briefing
to the Council’s relevant Committee on the foreign
terrorist fighters threat. That will be followed by a
report in March 2015. Secondly, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) has prepared
a preliminary analysis of the principal capacity gaps
in Member States’ implementation of resolution
2178 (2014). Thirdly, in order to address those gaps,
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) has established a United Nations coordination
mechanism to mobilize action to support the needs of
Member States. Fourthly, the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre has initiated a United Nations systemwide programme on foreign terrorist fighters to develop
inter-agency projects to assist Member States.
Two major projects have been launched. The Centre
is helping Member States analyse the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon and develop policy responses.
I encourage all Member States to participate in this
project, particularly those countries most severely
affected.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is
also working to strengthen the legal and criminal justice
capacity of Middle East and North African countries to
address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
Resolution 2178 (2014) also recognizes that violent
extremism poses a broader threat to international peace
and security, affecting political stability, national
cohesion and the very foundations of some Member
States. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force is stepping up efforts to assist Member States in
addressing the multidimensional challenges of extremist
ideologies and violent extremism. That includes a
concrete follow-up programme to an international
conference convened in Geneva last year by the CTITF
office to encourage States to implement practical
measures to counter violent extremism, as prescribed in
pillar I of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. I know that CTED, a member of the CTITF, is
also looking at that challenge on behalf of the Council.
Ultimately, violent extremism is a multidimensional
challenge that needs to be effectively addressed at the
grassroots level. We are therefore examining how best
to strengthen the counter-terrorism capabilities of
United Nations special political missions, peacekeeping
operations and United Nations country teams. This will

S/PV.7316

be among the areas for review under the new High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations.
The threat of foreign terrorist fighters and the
scourge of violent extremism are not just security
challenges, they are also political and development
challenges affecting the stability and social fabric of
communities, countries and regions. We must continue
to think more deeply about the fundamental conditions
that allow extremism to thrive. Looking at these
challenges solely through a military lens has shown its
limits. People need equality and opportunity in their
lives. They need to feel included by their Governments
and trust from their leaders.
As we work together to address the challenge, we
must also strive to avoid responses to terrorism that are
carried out in a way that exacerbates the problem, such
as when efforts are not sufficiently targeted and entire
communities feel victimized by human rights abuses
committed in the name of counter-terrorism. Such
abuses are not only immoral, they are counterproductive.
Through our collective efforts, we must ensure that all
counter-terrorism actions and policies are consistent
with international human rights and humanitarian laws.
This rights-centred approach to counter-terrorism
must be up-front in our planning, not merely an
afterthought. I cannot stress this strongly enough.
I remain fully committed to working with the
Security Council to ensure that we effectively respond
to this challenge in a comprehensive manner.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for his leadership on the essential role
that the United Nations is playing in the international
effort to address terrorism. We are extremely grateful.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): When I last briefed the
Council as Chair of the Al-Qaida Committee in May
(see S/PV.7184), I spoke about the threat arising from
an increasing range of heterogeneous Al-Qaida-linked
or splinter groups. Since May we have all witnessed the
dramatic shift in that threat, with the brutal extremism
and rapid territorial gains of two groups on the Al-Qaida
sanctions list, namely, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front (ANF).

14-637393/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Council responded on 15 August by adopting
resolution 2170 (2014), which emphasizes the role of the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime in tackling the threat posed
by ISIL and ANF and called on States to strengthen
measures to counter funding and recruitment for
those groups. In that resolution, the Council directed
the Al-Qaida Sanctions Monitoring Team to submit
to the Committee in mid-November a report on the
threat, including to the region, posed by ISIL and
ANF, their sources of arms, funding, recruitment and
demographics, and to recommend additional action to
address the threat.
In its report (see S/2014/815), the Monitoring Team
notes that the threat from those groups is not new: ISIL
evolved from Al-Qaida in Iraq to emerge today as a
splinter group of Al-Qaida, while the ANF remains a
formal Al-Qaida affiliate. Both groups originated from
terrorist networks founded by veterans of previous
Al-Qaida-related groups in Afghanistan and elsewhere
during the 1990s. Differences relating to leadership
emerged in 2013, with the Al-Qaida core and ANF
formally disassociating itself from ISIL and its leader,
Al-Baghdadi, in February 2014; but both groups
continued to subscribe to the underlying goals of
Al-Qaida, promoting extremism and seeking to change
the existing political order in the Middle East through
terrorist violence to establish a State based on a widely
repudiated misinterpretation of religion and to expel
foreign influence.
But while the threat is not new, the Monitoring Team
assessed that the scale of the threat was qualitatively and
quantitatively different, because of the nexus between
funding and the groups’ control over population and
territory, and the thousands of foreign terrorist fighters
that have joined them. Both groups pose an immediate
threat to the population in territories they have seized
and where they operate, as well as in neighbouring
territories. Both groups have a track record of summary
killings, rape and sexual violence, trafficking in
women and children, targeting humanitarian workers
and kidnapping and murdering hostages for income
or political messaging. Their presence fundamentally
complicates efforts to forge political order in Iraq and
Syria, and aggravates and intensifies existing armed
violence. Their extreme ideology exacerbates sectarian
tensions, generating further tension in the region,
while their campaign against minorities has altered the
demography of Iraq and Syria.
Globally, the Monitoring Team found the threat
derived from three strands: first, the large and diverse
4/83

19/11/2014

networks of foreign terrorist fighters, numbering
over 15,000 from more than 80 countries and who
already threaten a range of States; secondly, the
power of ISIL and the Nusra Front’s toxic ideology
and propaganda, which has set a new standard for
Al-Qaida in disseminating its message; and, thirdly,
their operational innovation, which could create a
mobile, transnational cadre of expert terrorists who can
combine terrorist, guerrilla and conventional tactics.
Those three strands carry associated risks. As we have
seen with previous Al-Qaida veterans, there is a high
risk that these battle-hardened, radicalized recruits will
transfer their skills and threaten peace and security in
other countries in years to come. ISIL’s propaganda is
produced in greater volumes and with greater frequency
than before, and has been modernized and digitalized,
making it globally available with the potential to sustain
a new wave of Al-Qaida movement activity.
The Monitoring Team found that both ISIL and
ANF had seized military assets from conventional
armies, captured, diverted and traded arms with other
opposition groups and benefitted from an extensive
informal regional economy in arms smuggling. ISIL
is particularly well armed, having seized extensive
supplies of heavy weapons from the Government of
Iraq, including man-portable air defence systems and
high mobility multipurpose military vehicles, while
the Nusra Front is more dependent on continuing
fresh supplies of weapons and ammunition. Both are
sophisticated in their use of improvised explosive
devices and explosive remnants of war.
Similarly, on finances, the Monitoring Team found
that ISIL had been able to seize considerable assets in
both Iraq and Syria and continued to benefit from a
substantial, continuing revenue flow from a range of
sources, including the sale of oil, extortion, kidnapping
for ransom and — to a lesser extent today — donations.
The bulk of ISIL’s funds appear to come from its
control of oil fields in Iraq and Syria, which it sells
and smuggles predominantly through tanker trucks
and long-established smuggling networks, which
the Monitoring Team assessed could raise revenue
ranging from $846,000 to $1,645,000 per day. Both
ISIL and the Nusra Front exploit civilian populations,
extracting payments from those who pass through,
conduct business in or live in areas under their control,
and raising revenue through the sale of stolen goods.
There is evidence that ISIL encourages the looting
and smuggling of antiquities from Iraq and Syria and
generates revenue by taxing looters. However, ANF
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

lacks the same range and depth of resources and appears
to rely more on external donations and kidnapping for
ransom. The funds generated from those illegal activities
are used by groups to support their recruitment efforts
and strengthen their operational capability to organize
and carry out terrorist attacks.
In terms of ISIL and Nusra Front recruits, the Team
identified three main sources: foreign terrorist fighters,
local Iraqis and Syrians, and new local affiliates,
ranging from militia and ex-Baathists who had made
tactical alliances with ISIL. Recruits are drawn in
through Internet-based platforms, personal contact
and persuasion, or in some cases through prison-based
networks. Despite the sharp growth in foreign terrorist
fighters in the last three years, the Monitoring Team
found no specific typology for a foreign terrorist
fighter, but more data was emerging. What can be
said is that this new wave tends to be younger, more
diverse and digital-savvy, which in turn generates
fresh social and operational networks that are more
transnational. Fighters came from over 80 countries,
with large groupings from the Maghreb and the Middle
East, along with Europe and Central Asia. There was
also evidence of a significant presence of dual nationals
with European passports.
As directed in resolution 2170 (2014), adopted
in August, the Monitoring Team has made a number
of detailed recommendations, which the Al-Qaida
Committee is now considering. The Monitoring
Team recommends that the Committee promote fuller
implementation and greater use of the existing Al-Qaida
sanctions regime by encouraging States to identify
more designations to the Committee relevant to ISIL
and ANF and encouraging the availability of technical
assistance and capacity-building to address gaps in
implementation, in collaboration with the CounterTerrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate.
The Monitoring Team also recommends a number
of measures requiring Council action, designed not
only to stem the flow of funds to ISIL and ANF from
the sale of oil from territory they control, but also
to tackle potential revenue streams, such as from
looted antiquities, and to prevent possible avenues
for resupply in ISIL- and ANF-controlled territory by
banning flights to or from such territory. The Team also
recommends a specific focus on heightened vigilance in
the banking sector against ISIL and ANF. Should such
measures be adopted, the Team also recommends that

S/PV.7316

the Committee assess the impact of such measures after
six months to ensure that they affect only their target.
Lastly, the Monitoring Team recommends that
Member States use INTERPOL’s network and tools,
such as the transnational fighters database, to share
information on known and suspected foreign terrorist
fighters, and highlights the need for more concerted
multilateral and national action to address the toxic
ideas and imagery promoted by ISIL, ANF and other
groups within the Al-Qaida movement.
Effectively implemented, well-targeted Al-Qaida
sanctions can make a real contribution to disrupting
ISIL and ANF and inhibiting their international
network of recruits and facilitators. But sanctions alone
are clearly not sufficient; a comprehensive approach
is needed that properly integrates United Nations
strategies with multilateral and national action and
incorporates strategic communication to counter the
terrorist narrative.
The President: I thank Mr. Quinlan for his
comprehensive briefing.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Raimonda
Murmokaitė in her capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I would like to start
by thanking the Australian presidency for providing
me with this timely and very important opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the Counter-Terrorism
Committee’s efforts pursuant to resolution 2178 (2014).
I recall that the Committee, with the support of its
Executive Directorate (CTED), is mandated by that
resolution to identify gaps in Member States’ capacities
to implement resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005)
that may hinder States’ ability to stem the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters; identify good practices
in States’ implementation efforts; and facilitate the
necessary technical assistance to fill implementation
gaps. While implementing its mandate, the Committee,
with the support of CTED, has prepared a preliminary
analysis of the principal implementation gaps. This
non-State-specific analysis will be issued as a document
of the Security Council under the symbol S/2014/807.
Allow me to highlight some of the key findings of this
analysis.
With regard to the legal framework. States must
determine whether their laws criminalize specific acts

14-637395/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

related to foreign terrorist fighters, in accordance with
paragraph 6 of resolution 2178 (2014). Our preliminary
analysis indicates that, although many States have
introduced, pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001),
comprehensive legislation that could be transposed
to meet the challenges of the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, others do not have adequate legislation in this
respect. Some States, for example, do not yet adequately
criminalize the broad range of preparatory acts related
to the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, including acts
aimed at facilitating the travel of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as the travel of such fighters through
their territories in transit for the purpose of committing
terrorist acts in other States.
It is also evident that bringing foreign terrorist
fighters to justice faces significant practical challenges.
Many States lack the capacity needed to ensure
that individuals participating in activities related to
the flow of foreign terrorist fighters are brought to
justice through effective prosecution in accordance
with resolutions 1373 (2001) and 2178 (2014). Among
other things, the Committee’s ongoing dialogue with
States has revealed difficulties in obtaining evidence
from other countries — whether of origin, transit or
destination — and has shown that few foreign terrorist
fighters reveal their plans before leaving. International
judicial cooperation on the matter needs to be stepped
up and made more effective. Gaps also continue to
exist in arrangements and mechanisms relating to
extradition.
On the law enforcement side, resolution 1373 (2001)
requires States to take the necessary steps to prevent
the commission of terrorist acts. Many States, however,
lack adequate capacities to monitor communications
through special investigative techniques and other
lawful methods in implementing this preventive
aspect. Gaps exist also in the international exchange
of information by law enforcement and intelligence
agencies aimed at preventing the commission of terrorist
acts and bringing terrorists, including foreign terrorist
fighters, to justice, including by the provision of early
warning to other States by exchange of information.
This form of information exchange can be vital to
countering the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
and needs to be enhanced.
Significant gaps remain in Member States’
implementation of the border-control provisions of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). The lack of
relevant information and analytical capability at border

6/83

19/11/2014

crossings hampers States’ ability to detect and prevent
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters. Many
States are either inadequately connected to or do not
fully exploit the databases of INTERPOL. Controls on
the issuance of identity papers and travel documents,
and measures to prevent counterfeiting, forgery or
fraudulent use of identity papers and travel documents
are also lagging, for a variety of reasons, including a
lack of effective mechanisms to implement related
requirements. The porous and lengthy nature of many
land borders — including those of States most affected
by the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters — also
continues to increase States’ vulnerabilities.
When it comes to preventing and disrupting terrorist
financing, many States have yet to ensure, pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), that their legal frameworks
include the criminalization of terrorist financing, or to
establish mechanisms for the freezing of terrorist assets
without delay. The ability to effectively identify and
prevent the illicit cross-border movement of cash and to
regulate alternative remittances needs to be addressed
with greater urgency. States also need to work actively
with the private sector and non-profit organizations
to provide guidance on how best to protect financial
flows from being diverted to terrorist uses. Perhaps the
most critical gap in States’ capacities is the inadequate
sharing of comprehensive, useful and timely financial
information by domestic law enforcement and
intelligence partners or by national agencies and their
international counterparts.
Countering incitement to terrorism and providing
an effective and calibrated counter-narrative is key to
tackling violent extremism, which can be conducive
to terrorism. The emphasis on its importance is one of
the most novel aspects of resolution 2178 (2014), which
is also of relevance in the context of resolution 1624
(2005). Some States have not yet taken adequate steps
to initiate community-engagement programmes or to
develop strategies for effectively conveying targeted
counter-messages aimed at specific groups that may be
vulnerable to radicalization and the spread of violent
extremism. There are also gaps in States’ efforts to
counter the use of information and communications
technologies, including the Internet, by terrorists and
their supporters to incite terrorist acts and encourage
support and sympathy for terrorist groups.
Another important gap in many States is the lack of
effective strategies and programmes for the rehabilitation
and reintegration of returning foreign terrorist fighters.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The development of such strategies and programmes is
a specific requirement of resolution 2178 (2014), which
also requires States to adopt prosecutorial strategies to
hold foreign terrorist fighters accountable for terrorist
acts while assessing whether alternative means exist to
better facilitate their rehabilitation and reintegration.
Finally, there continue to be significant gaps in
States’ efforts to ensure compliance with their obligations
under international law, including international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law in the context of counter-terrorism
measures taken to implement resolutions 1373 (2001)
and 1624 (2005), and this may foreshadow similar gaps
in the implementation of resolution 2178 (2014). Respect
for human rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule
of law are complementary and mutually reinforcing
with effective counter-terrorism measures, and are an
essential part of a successful counter-terrorism effort.
The failure of States to comply with these and other
international obligations, including under the Charter
of the United Nations, is one of the factors contributing
to increased radicalization and fosters a sense of
impunity.
Against the backdrop of the new challenges of
terrorism, the Committee is aware of the fact that ever
more countries are recognizing the grave threat posed
by the global nature of foreign terrorist fighters. In
this regard, counter-terrorism actions and measures
are either being considered, reviewed or undertaken by
States to address the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as in countering violent extremism
that can be conducive to terrorism. This opens
new dimensions and possibilities for international
cooperation.
The Committee, with the support of CTED,
will continue to develop and deepen the analysis of
States’ gaps and assistance needs with regard to the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). That will help States comply with resolution
2178 (2014) and, in so doing, will build on CTED’s
unique knowledge base with regard to countryspecific, regional and global assessments of States’
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005).
The Counter-Terrorism Committee will also continue
to compile good practices and make recommendations
to States for strengthening their counter-terrorism
programmes and will continue to count upon key
partners in those endeavours.

S/PV.7316

Ultimately, the facilitation of technical assistance
is a core aspect of the mandate conveyed by resolution
2178 (2014). The Committee and CTED will underpin
their technical assistance facilitation work with specific
efforts and approaches, taking advantage of the data
gathered by the Fusion Task Force using a gaps analysis
technique. That will include working with States, at
their request, on the development of comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategies. In terms of the delivery
of technical assistance, other players, both within
and outside of the United Nations system, such as
the Counter-Terrorism Task Force, entities within the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force framework and donor States of the Global
Counterterrorism Forum, are of paramount importance.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and CTED will
continue to explore effective ways and approaches to
achieving the objectives of counter-terrorism capacitybuilding.
The Committee looks forward to future opportunities
for updating the Security Council and the wider
membership on its efforts pursuant to resolution 2178
(2014).
The President: I thank Ambassador Murmokaitė
for her detailed and insightful briefing.
The Council has before it the text of a daft statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for
their valuable contributions to the draft statement. In
accordance with the understanding reached among
members of the Council, I shall take it that the members
of the Security Council agree to the draft statement,
which will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/23.
It is so decided.
It is now my privilege to make a statement in my
capacity as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia.
For Australia, there is no more pressing matter of
national and international security than reducing the
threat from terrorism. The threat from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Nusra Front (ANF) and
other Al-Qaida-affiliated groups is more dangerous,
more global and more diversified than ever before.
Terrorists are younger, more violent, more innovative
and highly interconnected. They are masters of social
media, which they use to terrorize and to recruit, and
they are very tech-savvy. They incite each other. They
communicate their propaganda and violence directly

14-637397/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

into our homes so as to recruit disaffected young men
and women.
They draw in young people, like a 17-year-old
from Melbourne who grew up in a typical Australian
household and played sport for his local high school.
Recently, he travelled to Iraq and detonated his
explosives vest in a suicide bomb attack in a Baghdad
marketplace, injuring more than 90 people. There were
also the three young brothers from Brisbane. One
became Australia’s first known suicide bomber, killing
himself and 35 others at a military checkpoint in Syria.
The second is currently fighting with the Al-Nusra
Front. The third was stopped by Australian authorities
before he got on a plane to join them.
Australians are rightly outraged. We have turned
our outrage into action. We are committed to working
with the Iraqi Government, the United States and over
30 partners to attack and degrade ISIL and take back
Iraqi territory. We are currently conducting air strikes
against ISIL and providing special forces to help build
the capabilities of Iraqi security forces and others
fighting ISIL. I met recently with Prime Minister Al
Abadi in Baghdad. He expressed deep gratitude for
the assistance of Australia and the other nations that
have joined in the fight against the brutalization of his
citizens by ISIL. I conveyed to him Australia’s strong
support for Iraq and our determination to stop terrorist
fighters from Australia and prevent them from adding
to the suffering of the people of Iraq and neighbouring
Syria.
We are taking the necessary steps at home. The
Australian Government has cancelled the passports
of more than 70 Australians suspected of planning to
commit a terrorist act or engage in politically motivated
violence overseas. Australia already has in place
sophisticated legal architecture to effectively counter
terrorism, including laws enabling us to implement
those obligations with regard to all Member States
under resolution 1373 (2001). I used those existing
laws last week to freeze the assets of two Australians
who were recruiting for ISIL online. The Australian
Government has now introduced new foreign-fighter
laws to help disrupt the organization, financing and
facilitation of foreign terrorist fighters by enhancing
our ability to track financial transactions of suspected
foreign terrorist fighters, lowering the threshold for
arrest without warrant for terrorism offences, which
will enable our agencies to disrupt terrorist activity at
an earlier stage, and cancelling certain social welfare

8/83

19/11/2014

payments to cut off the diversion of such funds for
terrorism. Those new laws will enable us to stop
suspected foreign fighters before they board a plane
by allowing us to suspend as well as cancel a person’s
Australian passport and enhancing screening and
security measures at international airports, including
through the collection and matching of biometric data.
Those laws will enhance our ability to investigate
and prosecute foreign fighters by introducing a new,
broader offence for advocating terrorism, along with a
new offence for entering, or remaining in, designated
areas overseas where terrorist organizations are
fighting, without a legitimate reason. We have also
amended the terrorist organization listing provisions to
include the promotion and encouragement of terrorist
acts, requiring that the prosecution must prove that
a person intended to engage in a hostile activity in
any foreign country, rather than a particular foreign
country, and allowing courts greater flexibility
in determining whether to admit as evidence
material obtained from overseas in terrorism-related
proceedings. That is a significant development and will
rely on good information-sharing with Member States.
Moreover, we are now requiring telecommunication
companies to retain metadata, enhancing Australia’s
capacity to track, investigate and prosecute foreign
terrorist fighters and supporters of terrorism. The new
provisions will also enhance our ability to manage the
threat from returned foreign fighters by enabling our
police to more easily seek control orders on returning
foreign terrorist fighters and broadening the grounds
on which such control orders can be sought.
Australia is a vibrant democracy. Therefore, this
package of legislation has generated, as it should,
a vigorous national debate on the need to protect the
individual rights of Australians, including their right
to privacy. Australia is preserving those rights by
increasing support for independent oversight. We will
also expand our regional law enforcement capacitybuilding efforts. Australia will host a major Global
Counterterrorism Forum conference in December
on air passenger security to help Governments use
INTERPOL databases and implement the United
Nations Al-Qaida sanctions to prevent international
travel by foreign terrorist fighters. We are working with
INTERPOL to deliver training in our region on the
use of technology by terrorists and on how electronic
evidence is gathered, managed and used in terrorism
prosecutions. As President of the Financial Action Task

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Force for the next year, Australia will ensure that the
Task Force will act to cut off funding to terrorist groups
and foreign fighters.
A crucial pillar in the Australian approach is to
work directly with our communities. It seems to us that
the very best way to build resistance to radicalization is
through well informed families, schools, and religious
and local institutions that can influence those at risk to
dissuade them from embracing violent extremism. We
are building targeted early-intervention and counterradicalization programmes to identify the most at-risk
individuals and to work with them through mentoring,
education, employment support and counselling.
We must also involve women and girls, and we have
developed leadership training courses with them to
help build community resilience. We are working with
the information and communications technology sector
to reduce the risk posed by terrorists and extremist
groups online through education, promoting alternative
messages and removing extremist content.
ISIL and its ilk are an affront to Islam. All of
us, including Muslim communities themselves, must
do more to negate the violent extremist narratives of
terrorists and denounce radical preachers of hate in
our midst. The international community must join with
them, and the United Nations is uniquely placed to
provide leadership. The hateful ideologies are an affront
to the values of the Charter of the United Nations. We
believe that a United Nations envoy should be appointed
to build a coherent, coordinated and strategic message
to counter the spread of violent extremism and provide
much-needed guidance to States, including through
building their capacity to combat terrorism.
Every country has an obligation to prevent
terrorism. Every country has an obligation not to export
terrorist capabilities. Each one has a responsibility to
degrade the resources of terrorist organizations and to
prevent the spread of their evil propaganda. Resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) enhance our framework
to do that. But the road to effective implementation
requires sustained effort, unwavering commitment
and enduring cooperation among States. Today’s
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23 builds on those
resolutions. It identifies practical next steps to stop the
recruitment and travel of foreign terrorist fighters, to
ensure that there is no place for their toxic ideologies in
our communities and to disrupt each and every terrorist
organization’s funding sources. The statement reaffirms
the international community’s unflinching resolve. We

S/PV.7316

must starve terrorist organizations of fighters, funding
and legitimacy. We must act decisively and together.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Julie Bishop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia, for the
invitation to participate in this debate and to thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing.
Likewise, I would like to greet my colleague from
Luxembourg and the high representatives of Rwanda,
the Republic of Korea and Lithuania.
We all agree that today we are facing a proliferation
of terrorist acts that share with terrorist acts of the
recent past a common condition of being resounding
manifestations of extreme violence, radicalized
fundamentalism and an absolute and cruel devaluation
of human dignity. However, today, we are also facing
innovative modalities, if I may use that expression, that
combine the reality of cruelty with virtual horror. The
images of decapitations circulated by the networks place
us, in real time, before what we might characterize as
the virtual globalization of horror, a phenomenon that
universalizes fear, uncertainty and alarm in a tangible
manner.
The normalization of horror in the media and the
acceleration of extreme violence cannot bring us to
see the military response as the only, or preferred,
option for combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. That approach has already shown its
limitations and failings. We have a responsibility, in
the light of a humanity that seems paralysed by terror,
to work for the full rule of law in each of our countries,
assuming the imperative need to build a balanced and
fair world order based on real multilateralism and
cooperation.
In the recent past, no country could consider
itself immune from the possibility of falling victim to
terrorist acts. However, today the threat is more clear
than ever, and the implementation and strengthening
of mechanisms for effective cooperation based on
mutual respect are more necessary than ever. Although
the international community has still not reached a
universally agreed definition of terrorism, it is possible
to identify what acts the international community

14-637399/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

condemns. We join the condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations, as it is one of
the most serious threats to international peace and
security and to human dignity, peaceful coexistence,
the consolidation of democracy, and the economic and
social development of nations.
Argentina is one of the many countries that have
suffered terrorism directly.
First, from 1976 to the end of 1983, our society
suffered from terrorist acts perpetrated by the State
and with the State apparatus by the most savage
civil-military dictatorship that we have experienced.
It was responsible for heinous crimes and crimes
against humanity. The persecution of individuals
who had ideologies considered subversive, potentially
subversive or simply dangerous led to a systematic plan
for exterminating and annihilating more than 30,000
people for their political or social activism, religious
beliefs, class, ethnic identity or sexual orientation.
They were victims of the genocidal violence of a
fundamentalist conservativism, inspired by the
doctrine of national security and trained by important
centres of power that, during the Cold War, prevented
the advance and consolidation of democracy, pluralism,
tolerance and peace.
Secondly, we experienced in our own flesh the
dehumanizing and terrible actions of foreign terrorist
groups that, motivated by hatred, fanaticism and
destruction, committed terrorist attacks in 1992 and
1994 against the Jewish community centre, AMIA,
and the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires. As the
President of the Argentine nation said in the Security
Council in September (see S/PV.7272), the Argentine
Republic and the United States of America are the
two countries on the American continent to have been
the object of savage terrorist attacks. Those painful
experiences and the numerous terrorist acts carried out
since then have reaffirmed Argentina’s conviction that
the response to terrorist acts should not and cannot be
exclusively military. Rather, they should be based on a
comprehensive approach, such as that reflected in the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
I also wish to express my country’s conviction that
terrorism must be fought within the framework of the
rule of law and respect for due process. Indeed, the
measures adopted by States to combat terrorism must
fully respect international law, in particular international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and

10/83

19/11/2014

refugee law. Those measures should also respect the
purposes and the principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations, such as the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence of States and the
principle of non-intervention in domestic affairs.
Likewise, Argentina advocates respect for due
process in the work of this Council. The creation of the
Office of the Ombudsperson represents a significant
step forward in that regard, but the Members of
the Organization continue to raise concerns about
procedural guarantees. One of the major concerns is
that the mandate of the Ombudsperson covers only
those individuals included in the Al-Qaida sanctions
list. Argentina calls for broadening the mandate of
that Office to all of the Security Council sanctions
committees.
Argentina is a party to the 13 legal instruments that
have been established to combat terrorism and has taken
internal measures to implement them and the Council’s
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Furthermore,
together with your country, Madam President, and
many others, Argentina helped to initiate the Arms
Trade Treaty, which comes into force on 24 December.
One of the Treaty’s purposes is to prevent the transfer
of arms to human-rights violators and perpetrators of
crimes against humanity, as well as to reduce the risk
of weapons being diverted to the illegal market, with
the possibility that they might end up in the hands of
terrorist or criminal groups. We therefore encourage all
States Members of the United Nations, especially the
members of the Council, to ratify the Treaty, since it
will contribute significantly to our countries’ security.
I should mention that during the Treaty negotiations,
Argentina, like a significant number of delegations,
also proposed banning the sale of arms to unauthorized
non-State actors. Regrettably, no consensus was reached
on including such a ban at the time of the Treaty’s
adoption, but Argentina is hopeful that the parties to
the Treaty will approve it as one factor in preventing
arms transfers that could help to fuel conflicts in
various parts of the world. Reality has shown us that
when some countries decide today to arm those calling
themselves freedom fighters, tomorrow those freedom
fighters may be the terrorists we are trying to combat.
It is clear that the 13 conventions on combating
terrorism oblige us, among other things, to prevent
terrorist groups from having access to resources and
funding for their activities. It is also clear that the

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council’s resolutions oblige us to prevent individuals,
groups and entities associated with Al-Qaida from
having access to weapons and related material.
Argentina maintains that States should also refrain
from sending weapons to areas of conflict, which only
helps to increase such conflicts’ intensity and duration
and to endanger civilians.
Argentina believes firmly that the United Nations,
as a cornerstone of the multilateral system, should
be the Organization directing States’ actions to
combat terrorism. While we value the contribution
that other forums or initiatives can make, ours is the
body with the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. Moreover, the
universal representation it provides ensures both the
participation of all States Members on equal terms, as
well as the legitimacy of decisions that are reflected
in standards, guidelines and good practices. Argentina
believes that multilateral action through the United
Nations, in accordance with the principles of the
Organization, will enable us to address the threat of
terrorism and achieve a safer world for all.
The President: I am very grateful for Mr. Timerman’s
presence today, particularly since we met only a few
days ago at the Group of 20 Summit in Brisbane.
His presence certainly demonstrates the extent of
Argentina’s dedication to addressing the threat of
terrorism in all its forms.
Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
am grateful to you, Madam President, for taking the
initiative to organize this open debate. Luxembourg,
like Australia, believes the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism is a priority. We commend the
presidential statement we have just adopted at Australia’s
initiative, aimed at strengthening action on the part
of the international community (S/PRST/2014/23). I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing on the United Nations response to the
threat of terrorism, which highlighted the value the
United Nations adds in this area. I also thank Mr. Gary
Quinlan, Permanent Representative of Australia and
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and resolution 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, and Ms. Raimonda Murmokaitė, Permanent
Representative of Lithuania and Chair of the CounterTerrorism Committee, for their informative briefings
and determined action. I welcome the presence here
today of my Argentine colleague, Mr. Héctor Timerman.

S/PV.7316

I associate myself with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union.
The threat of terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front
and Al-Qaida and its affiliates is a source of growing
concern. While the terrorist phenomenon is certainly
not new, the problem that such groups ravaging Iraq
and Syria pose differs in nature and scale from threats
that the international community has faced in the past. I
thank the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team established pursuant to resolution 1526 (2004) for
its most recent report (see S/2014/815), which does a
good job of analysing that what distinguishes the threat
posed by such groups is the nexus they have established
between funding and control of large areas of territory
and populations, as well as the support they get from
the more than 15,000 foreign fighters, from more than
80 countries, who have joined their sinister cause. Last
year, a young couple and their child left Luxembourg
for Syria, where the father of the family very quickly
died in fighting between terrorist groups — such a
waste, such a lack of respect for human life and such
a terrible message for that man’s child. The groups’
extreme ideology is exacerbating sectarian tensions and
helping to destabilize the region even more. Indeed, it is
difficult to understand the attraction of such barbarity
to anyone.
The atrocities committed by those terrorist groups
have shocked us all. I will mention only the most recent
example, ISIL’s disgusting execution of an American
humanitarian aid worker, Abdul-Rahman Kassig, who
was captured while he was working to help the Syrian
people. We must act together to combat this threat, and
our response must be commensurate with the challenge.
In the Security Council, the adoption of resolutions
2170 (2104) and 2178 (2014) has helped strengthen
the international counter-terrorism framework aimed
at containing the threat posed by ISIL, the Al-Nusra
Front and the influx of foreign fighters. We must now
work together to ensure that the measures outlined in
those resolutions can take full effect. In that regard, I
would like to thank the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and its Executive Directorate for their preliminary
analysis and actions supporting the implementation of
resolution 2178 (2104).
For its part, Luxembourg has just completed a
review of its entire legal framework in the light of the
provisions of resolution 2178 (2014). Based on that,
we have begun to review and adapt our legislative and

14-6373911/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

regulatory framework in order to take full account of
the Council’s measures addressing the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters. The goal is to prevent those
who want to leave to fight alongside terrorist groups
from reaching conflict zones. We must also ensure that
acts preparing, training and recruiting for terrorism
are effectively prosecuted and punished. Lastly, our
relevant authorities are working on a strategy to combat
extremist radicalization based on both preventive and
punitive measures, which will include establishing a
mentoring and outreach network in close consultation
with educational institutions and religious communities,
and with the support of our National Red Cross Society.
Data-collection aimed at preventing the travel
and transit of foreign terrorist fighters also involves
strengthening information-sharing and cooperation
among Member States. The European Union is already
working on this, including through information
exchange within its Schengen Information System
and its work on providing data on passenger records.
We intend to continue such efforts, particularly when
Luxembourg assumes the presidency of the Council of
Europe in the second half of 2015.
The Monitoring Team’s report rightly emphasizes
that we must redouble our efforts to block terrorist
groups’ sources of financing, such as oil smuggling,
donations, trafficking in antiquities, taxing populations
living under their yoke and, worst of all, the despicable
trafficking of women and children. Luxembourg has
adopted a complete and consistent set of legislative and
regulatory measures in the struggle against moneylaundering and terrorist financing. We pay particular
attention to their effective implementation. Those
measures fully take into account the declaration adopted
by the Financial Action Task Force on 24 October
in Paris, expressing deep concern at the financing
generated by and provided to the terrorist group Daesh.
I would like to conclude by reiterating a point that
the Prime Minister of Luxembourg already made two
months ago at the Security Council summit held on
24 September (see S/PV.7272), which was echoed today
by the Secretary-General. This point seems essential
to me: that respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the rule of law need to be an integral
part of our counter-terrorism strategy if we want that
strategy to achieve its aim. Otherwise, we run the risk
of promoting a sense of injustice and impunity, which
in turn fuels radicalization and the spread of terrorism.
Now is not the time to fan the flames of violent

12/83

19/11/2014

extremism. On the contrary, we need to use all of the
tools at our disposal at the international, regional,
national and local levels to extinguish the noxious fire
of terrorism.
The President: I thank His Excellency
Mr. Asselborn for his presence here today and for his
statement, as well as for the national measures that
Luxembourg has taken and its commitment to working
on this issue during its presidency of the European
Union in the second half of 2015.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Madam President, allow
me at the outset to welcome your initiative of convening
this open debate on international cooperation in
combating terrorism and violent extremism. The
holding of this high-level debate only three months
after the 24 September summit on foreign terrorist
fighters (see S/PV.7272) and the adoption of resolution
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) are a demonstration of the
deep commitment of the Security Council to follow
through on its decision and address the ever-growing
phenomenon of terrorism and violent extremism.
Allow me also to welcome the presidential
statement just adopted (S/PRST/2014/23). I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and for his leadership
in mobilizing the United Nations system in combating
terrorism. I take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Raimonda Murmokaitė of Lithuania, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, and Ambassador Gary
Quinlan of Australia, Chair of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, for their respective briefings.
Terrorism is a global threat that has affected all
continents and all peoples without distinction, regardless
of race, religion or social class. As the concept note
for this debate (see S/2014/787, annex) reminds us, the
average age of terrorists is much lower than the previous
generation of terrorists, with many teenagers enrolled
in terrorist organizations. In most countries, young
people continue to face serious challenges related to
education, poverty, unemployment, bad governance
or discrimination. Through social media, extremist
propaganda and religious radicalization, young people
can easily be recruited and indoctrinated by jihadists
and other extremists. Therefore any comprehensive
approach against terrorism will require our continued
resolve to address the political, economic and social
challenges facing our societies.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Nevertheless, the economic hurdles that our
countries face should never be a justification for
criminal activities. That would be an insult to the huge
majority of law-abiding young people whose ambition
is to face those challenges and improve their lives
through education, employment, innovation, culture,
sport or any other contribution to their society. Every
terrorist, whatever his or her background, should be
held accountable for widowing mothers and fathers, for
orphaning children and for devastating communities.
As we have said in the past, terrorism should
never be identified with any religion, faith or culture.
Terrorism is pure evil and should be combated as such.
Nonetheless, religious and community leaders have
an important role to play in combating terrorism and
violent extremism. Those leaders should unequivocally
dissociate themselves from terrorist activities, reject
extremist and violent narratives, and protect young
people from radicalization and recruitment by terrorist
organizations.
Regarding foreign terrorist fighters in particular,
it is important that countries of origin, transit and
destination work together and agree on a common
approach to prevent the recruitment, training and travel
of these killers, in accordance with resolution 2178
(2014). In this regard, as terrorist organizations abuse
civil liberties such as freedom of speech and freedom
of the press, it is critical that all countries put in place
appropriate measures to counter the dissemination of
hatred ideology on social media and other information
and communications tools. We need to ensure that
fundamental rights and freedoms do not fuel extremism
and lead to the violation of the most important right of
all: the right to life.
To effectively curtain the growing trend of the
mobilization and recruitment of young people into the
ranks of terrorist groups, the Security Council and its
subsidiary bodies must be vigilant and proactive. Using
the example of the recent public announcement of
another jihadist group in Egypt, Ansar Beit al-Maqdis,
which pledged allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities should be ready to continue to impose sanctions
against groups that support sanctioned entities such as
ISIL.
Another tool in addressing the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters is financing. Most terrorist

S/PV.7316

groups such as Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram
have been financing their activities through online
fundraising, illegal taxes and extortion, as well as
kidnapping for ransom. Others, such as ISIL and the
Al-Nusra Front (ANF), have secured huge amounts of
money from the illicit trade in oil. In that context, we
call on all States to fully implement the presidential
statement of 28 July (S/PRST/2014/14) and ensure
that their nationals and residents do not engage in any
commercial or financial transactions with ISIL, ANF
or other sanctioned entities.
We recall also resolution 2133 (2014), which calls on
all Member States to prevent terrorists from benefiting
directly or indirectly from ransom payments or from
political concessions. We have to work together to drain
the bloody river that fuels terrorism and spreads death
and devastation in our communities.
Specific to our region, Africa, terrorism and
extremism have spread to the Sahel and beyond,
with unprecedented security and humanitarian
consequences. Terrorism is increasingly becoming
interconnected throughout Africa, from Boko Haram
in Nigeria, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Ansar
Eddine in Mali, Ansar Al-Sharia in Libya, Al-Shabaab
in Somalia and many others, from the Maghreb to the
Horn of Africa, with links to Syria and other parts of
the world.
This is a worrying situation that threatens African
stability. We need now to have proactive policies,
mechanisms and concrete measures to prevent the
further spread of these negative groups and eradicate
them, while sustaining the resilience of communities.
These measures can succeed only if the United Nations
works hand in hand with regional and subregional
organizations to enhance and sustain innovative
mechanisms aimed at eradicating this scourage.
Additionally, we should never lose sight of the fact that
the core of this evil is always radical ideology, be it
religious or political.
While Rwanda has no yet been affected by ISIL
or Al-Qaida terrorism, it is important to recall that,
as stated by President Kagame at the recent Council
summit on foreign terrorist fighters (see S/PV.7272),
Rwanda has faced, even its capital city, terrorist
activities carried out be elements to the so-called
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, which
has been based in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and driven by its genocidal ideology since
1994. It is therefore important that, in combating global

14-6373913/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorism, we pay attention to the most immediate to
our respective populations.
To conclude, terrorism and violent extremism
remain a global threat to international peace and
security. No country, however powerful it may be, can
deal with that threat alone. Therefore, coordination
among States, international assistance and cooperation,
information exchange and the sharing of best
practices are some of the best ways through which
the international community can defeat the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism. Rwanda is therefore
committed to continuing to play its part in the region
and beyond.
The President: I thank Ambassador Gasana for
his statement, recognizing as it did the global nature
of terrorism, its proliferation in Africa, its impact on
young people, and the fact that every terrorist must be
held to account.
Mr. Shin Dong-ik (Republic of Korea): My
delegation wishes to thank you, Madam, for presiding
over this timely debate on international cooperation
in counter-terrorism. I would like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban; Ambassador Quinlan, Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities; and Ambassador Murmokaitė, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, for their
informative briefings.
I also wish to extend my deepest condolences to the
families of those who were executed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), most recently American
aid worker Abdul-Rahman Kassig, also known as Peter
Kassig. The Republic of Korea strongly condemns these
barbaric acts. These are tragic reminders of the brutality
of ISIL and the need for the international community to
strengthen efforts to put an end to terrorism. In this
regard, my delegation strongly supports the adoption
of the draft presidential statement before us today,
which lays out steps for Member States and the United
Nations to implement counter-terrorism measures in a
comprehensive and practical manner. In particular, we
note its emphasis on curbing the financing of terrorist
entities.
At the Security Council summit in September
(see S/PV.7272), the Council demonstrated its resolve
to tackle the challenge of terrorist entities, such as
ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front (ANF), as well as foreign

14/83

19/11/2014

terrorist fighters, by unanimously adopting resolution
2178 (2014). ISIL and ANF terrorize, extort and
sexually enslave innocent civilians. They also embroil
regions with violence and terrorism, while fanning the
flames of sectarianism. This clearly goes against the
very values of Islam they claim to represent.
In particular, the security implications arising from
the increase of foreign terrorist fighters affect not only
Iraq and Syria, but resonate far beyond the Middle East.
Radicalized and disaffected foreign terrorist fighters
can return to their home countries with advanced
terrorist tactics acquired on the battlefield. The less
restrictive border controls spurred by globalization
are enabling foreign terrorist fighters to move around
the world with relative ease. At the same time, the
terrorists’ increased and adept use of the Internet has
made their recruitment and propaganda more pervasive
and toxic.
Against this backdrop, at the Security Council
summit in September President Park Geun-Hye
expressed her strong commitment to thoroughly
implementing resolution 2178 (2014). Accordingly,
the Korean Government has been making efforts to
meet this commitment. First, Korea has launched
an interagency process to review relevant laws and
systems to identify gaps in border control, financing
and information-sharing. We look forward to sharing
each others’ best practices with other countries in this
area.
Secondly, we have strengthened measures to
monitor the travel of foreign terrorist fighters.
In addition to restricting the entry of individuals
designated by the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
we are tightly monitoring those who are traveling to
or through the Republic of Korea by making use of
INTERPOL databases and the Advance Passenger
Information System. We are also increasing efforts to
share information on suspected individuals with other
countries. Such efforts helped Korea to successfully
host the 17th Asian Games and the Plenipotentiary
Conference of the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) in recent months. In fact, it was
encouraging to note that relevant authorities in other
countries of Asia and elsewhere have recently become
more proactive in sharing information.
Thirdly, Korea is actively engaging in regional
counter-terrorism initiatives. We supported the recent
adoption of the East Asia Summit statement on terrorist
groups in Syria and Iraq. We support the initiative of the
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7316

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to hold a regional counter-terrorism workshop
in North-East Asia next year, where judges, prosecutors
and police officers will discuss ways to strengthen law
enforcement in combating terrorism.

In closing, we wish to express our appreciation to
Australia for its hard work in reinforcing cooperation
to counter terrorism in its capacity as Chair of the 1267
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) during the past two years.

Fourthly, as the host of the Seoul Conference on
Cyberspace, the ITU Plenipotentiary Conference and
the forthcoming workshop with the International Atomic
Energy Agency on cybersecurity, we are endeavouring
to contribute to global efforts to end the malicious use
of information and communications technology by
terrorists. Our authorities are strengthening measures
to prevent terrorists from inciting violent extremism
through the Internet, while keeping the Internet open,
free and secure. In this regard, we look forward to
working with the United Nations , including the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF)
and CTED to address these threats.

The President: I thank Mr. Shin Dong-ik for his
statement and for outlining Korea’s specific actions in
combating terrorism and countering violent extremism.

Lastly, a more fundamental approach to addressing
the conditions that lead to violent extremism is critical.
We should explore socioeconomic strategies to address
the root causes of terrorism. To this end, Korea will
continue to expand our official development assistance
by providing training and increasing employment of
young people in developing countries.
The United Nations is well positioned to play a
central role in countering global terrorism by providing
analysis and strategic direction. Korea hopes that the
United Nations system will continue to strengthen its
counter-terrorism capacity by improving coordination
among relevant United Nations agencies, most notably
CTITF and CTED, while strengthening cooperation
with other international organizations such as
INTERPOL. In addition, the capacity gap of Member
States to address terrorism, as illustrated by the 1373
Committee Chair today, underscores the need for the
United Nations to make efforts to provide increased
technical assistance and coordination to Member States.
Finally, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) , Korea would like
to point out that we should remain vigilant in deterring
terrorists’ access to weapons of mass destruction. In
this regard, Korea hopes that the United Nations will
also come up with a more comprehensive analysis and
recommend ways to adopt a sustained and holistic
approach to countering violent extremism. We look
forward to the Council’s further deliberations on this
significant topic.

Mr. Krivas (Lithuania): I would like to start by
thanking the Australian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this highly pertinent debate.
A few days ago, the Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant carried out yet another beheading of
a humanitarian worker, Abdul-Rahman, or Peter,
Kassig, which was a disgusting, barbaric act and has
been condemned by the Council. Terrorism brings
devastation and suffering to the countries and people
affected by it by killing, raping, enslaving, displacing,
and denying the most basic of rights to those who are
in the terrorists’ way. The threat of terrorism knows no
boundaries as it spreads and mutates, affecting entire
regions.
The fact that terrorism and violent extremism
have been high on the Security Council’s agenda and
that we meet here today in this high-level open debate
demonstrates the importance and urgency that this
body attaches to such threats. We appreciate the intent
of the Australian presidency to seize the momentum
and take stock of the progress made in implementing
recent decisions of the Council, while also discussing
a practical way forward. Presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23, adopted today, is another important
step in that regard.
The constantly evolving nature and intensity of
the threat of terrorism and violent extremism have put
existing counter-terrorism measures to an unprecedented
test. Frameworks to tackle the threat existed long before
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) were adopted,
yet, as we heard from the briefers today, the actual
response still lags behind. Significant implementation
gaps persist, because of a lack of capacity, resources or
political will, and efforts to bridge those gaps need to
be stepped up. At the same time, concrete means and
measures need to be updated and adapted in order to at
least match the level of innovation and dynamics on the
part of the terrorists themselves.
Addressing the radicalization process that leads
individuals to accept terrorist violence as an action of

14-6373915/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

choice is key to preventing new terrorists from emerging
and to dissuading and rehabilitating former terrorists.
We have already had several occasions to hear States
sharing their national experiences, which increasingly
encompass education, greater public engagement
and community outreach, in order to push back the
terrorist narratives and provide positive alternatives to
their schemes. Communities, traditional and religious
leaders, women, and surviving victims of terrorism,
education, community policing and mobilization can
contribute significantly to such efforts.
On the other hand, the use of social media and
modern communication technologies merits special
attention, as it poses significant new challenges when
used by terrorists. It also provides significant new
opportunities for spreading positive messaging to
counter the terrorist narrative. The United Nations itself
needs to step up its efforts to address violent extremism
and raise its visibility in that area, including through
strategic communications.
Mobility and flexibility, as highlighted by the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, exacerbate
the threat of terrorism by providing it with a potentially
global reach. Identifying and interdicting individuals as
they travel to engage in fighting is often the last chance
to prevent them from turning into actual terrorists,
as well as a first step towards effective mitigation of
potential threats upon their return. Countries need to
step up their efforts to improve information-sharing
and their analytical capability at border crossings.
Wider and better use of INTERPOL databases must
be encouraged. Moreover, the capacities of States,
especially those neighbouring conflict zones, to control
their land borders need to be further strengthened.
It is also essential to step up efforts aimed at
disrupting terrorist financing. Terrorist organizations
increasingly rely on looting, illicit trade in antiquities
and protected species, poaching, kidnapping for ransom,
human trafficking and drug trafficking. Many of those
activities have links with international organized crime
networks. The ability of States to detect and prevent
terrorism financing in all its varieties is a crucial
component of counter-terrorism efforts. It is especially
relevant with regard to the non-profit sector, alternative
remittance systems, cross-border movements of cash
and the ability to freeze funds and assets linked to
terrorism.
The foregoing are just a few of the many interrelated
areas where progress could contribute to the suppression
16/83

19/11/2014

of terrorism, both tangibly and durably. In that regard,
preventive measures are a long-term investment, as
reducing the vulnerability of States and strengthening
the resilience of societies to terrorist threats often
prove to be more effective, also in the areas of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution.
The United Nations system as a whole plays a
central role in leading international efforts aimed at
suppressing terrorism and ensuring the coherence of
responses. We recognize linkages with the recently
revised United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the benefits of closer and more coherent
coordination among the various United Nations bodies
tasked with its implementation. Moreover, we see great
potential in the cooperation with and among various
international, regional and subregional organizations,
such as the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and the
Global Counterterrorism Forum.
However, the essential element of all those
efforts remains the long-term commitment of States.
While various multilateral bodies are in a position
to monitor States’ implementation of relevant
international obligations and help them identify and
overcome existing gaps, effective measures to counter
terrorism must correspond to national circumstances,
be nationally led, but also remain open to genuine
international cooperation.
The President: I thank Lithuania for its leadership
of the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee,
which does very important work to help States to fulfil
their obligations.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening and presiding
over this important debate today, thereby maintaining
the momentum built up by resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). I want to thank Ambassadors Quinlan
and Murmokaité for their briefings, and I welcome
the adoption of today’s strong presidential statement
underlining once again the Council’s unity on the
issue of combating terrorism and violent extremism
(S/PRST/2014/23).
The international terrorist threat continues to
evolve, posing an increasingly acute and widespread
danger to Member States. We have witnessed the
terrible suffering of those living in territories
controlled by terrorist groups. We have been appalled
by a calculated series of brutal murders of journalists

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and aid workers by Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and other Al-Qaida-related groups. We have
learned of plots involving terrorists who have fought in
Syria and Iraq to murder innocent people in their home
countries. Some of those individuals have come from
the United Kingdom after being radicalized through
the increasingly sophisticated use by ISIL of digital
propaganda. Now more than ever, the international
community must improve its collective response,
working together with the United Nations to combat
an increasingly sophisticated and dangerous terrorist
threat. There are three areas where additional effort is
specifically needed.
First, we need to counter the extremism and
extremist ideology that underpin terrorism. As the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
said in the Council yesterday (see S/PV.7314), little
attention has been paid to the underlying struggle for
minds. My Prime Minister noted in his general debate
speech in September (see A/69/PV.8) that we must take
a long-term approach and address the root cause of
terrorist threats, in particular the poisonous ideology
of Islamist extremism, which distorts the Islamic faith.
In the case of ISIL, it is a terrorist group that seeks
to misrepresent a religion with a warped, extremist
ideology. ISIL uses that political ideology to justify and
fuel its terrorism, to challenge and contradict United
Nations values and to undermine peace in the Middle
East. We should all continue to denounce ISIL and other
terrorist groups’ hijacking of religion for violent ends
and work together to defeat the ideology of extremists.
Secondly, we must disrupt the financing of terrorist
groups. ISIL is sitting on extensive assets, yet it also
relies heavily on the income it generates. Resolution
2170 (2014) made clear that direct and indirect trade
with ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front or other Al-Qaida groups
constitutes financial support in breach of United
Nations sanctions. The international community must
work in concert, deepening cooperation to disrupt that
income, suppressing the market for their oil, tackling
illicit trade in their commodities, breaking the vicious
cycle of ransom payments that incentivize future
kidnappings, and sanctioning those who trade with
Al-Qaida groups and raise funds for them. The United
Kingdom therefore welcomes the Monitoring Team’s
recent report (S/2014/770) and its recommendations for
future action.
Finally, the international community must disrupt
the travel of an unprecedented number of individuals

S/PV.7316

to conflict zones, such as Syria, to fight in terrorist
groups. In the face of that threat, resolution 2178 (2014)
is particularly important, as it obliges States to disrupt
travel by foreign terrorist fighters and to both prosecute
and rehabilitate them on return. The United Kingdom,
like Australia and many other countries, has taken
legislative action domestically to implement those
obligations.
I conclude by noting that the United Nations system
continues to have a vital role to play in the face of
these, and indeed all, terrorist threats. In particular,
the United Nations as a whole has a responsibility to
defend and promote United Nations values in response
to the extremist narratives promoted by terrorists.
For example, there is a significant opportunity for the
United Nations to up its game in terms of strategic
communications on countering extremists. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights put
it well yesterday, when he said that thought must be
undermined by thought, in order to overturn ISIL’s
ideology of violence and death.
That effort should build on existing resources
and the excellent work already being done, including
the analytical expertise of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the capacitybuilding
expertise
of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. But it must go wider,
including relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and United Nations field missions, so that
the combined United Nations response and messaging
is both more coordinated and more integrated. With
such an increasingly holistic and energized approach,
the United Nations has the potential to deliver truly
impactful support to the regions and the countries most
vulnerable to the threat of terrorism.
The President: I thank the United Kingdom for its
role in the Council’s adoption of resolution 2170 (2014),
which provides an important pillar of the international
community’s action against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Australian initiative to hold an open
debate on counter-terrorism today. We welcome your
coming to New York, Madam President, to preside at
this meeting. I thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Ambassador Quinlan, Chair of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities; and
Ambassador Murmokaitė, Chair of the Committee

14-6373917/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism, for their briefings.
The international community is presently facing
a resurgence of terrorism, with its new means and
manifestations. We have seen rampant, violent
extremist activities, the return of terrorists who were
trained abroad and the use of the Internet by terrorist
organizations to engage in all acts of terrorism.
Terrorist organizations are resorting to international
financing and information technology and is recruiting
young people, thereby causing greater harm. We face a
grim, uphill fight against terrorism.
In the face of the new threats and challenges
posed by terrorism, the Security Council swiftly
adopted resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), which
reflect the will and determination of the international
community to fight terrorism. The international
community should enhance its sharing of information
and successful experiences, scale up capacity-building
and join hands in maintaining international peace and
security. I would like to stress the following points.
First, the fight against terrorism must have one
standard. Terrorists ignore fundamental human rights
and challenge the bottom line of human civilization.
They are the common enemy of humankind. Any
terrorist act, regardless of when, where or by whom it
is committed, constitutes a grave, inexcusable crime.
All countries should cooperate in the fight without
employing double standards or selectivity. Nor should
they link terrorism with any ethnic group or religion.
Secondly, in the fight against terrorism, we
must abide by international law and the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We must respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned, and
the United Nations and Security Council should play a
leading role. Only in that way will we maintain unity
and improve the coordination of our actions. Countries
should accelerate implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014), and adopt integrated measures
to tackle both the roots and symptoms of terrorism and
eliminate its breeding ground.
Thirdly, our fight against terrorism must be
targeted more effectively. With the development of
cyber information and technology, the Internet has
become an important channel for terrorists to carry
out their activities. Cyberterrorism has become

18/83

19/11/2014

increasingly harmful to the international community;
it is the new topic and challenge in our fight against
terrorism. The international community must, on the
one hand, continue to deal with traditional strategies
and ways of combating terrorism, and, on the other,
take rigorous steps, based on the characteristics of the
Internet and cyber-terrorist activities, to tackle the
terrorist organizations’ use of the Internet to publish
terrorist audio and video, spread extremist ideology and
finance, incite, plan and carry out terrorist activities.
The United Nations counter-terrorism mechanism
must use innovative approaches and initiatives to
effectively implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly. China
looks forward to the 2015 special meeting of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on preventing the use
of the Internet and social media by terrorists to incite
terrorism and recruit terrorists. The meeting will
promote strong actions on the part of the international
community and pragmatic cooperation against
cyberterrorism.
China faces a direct and realistic threat from East
Turkestan terrorist forces, headed by the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement. In recent years, it has continued to
incite and organize terrorist activities, which threatens
both China’s national security and regional security
and stability.
In May this year, China’s President Xi Jinping
stressed that China will fight terrorism at both the
national and the international levels, and seeks to
strengthen international cooperation against terrorism.
China will continue to strictly implement the relevant
Council resolutions, strengthen its legislation on
counter-terrorism, combat terrorism in accordance
with the law and severely punish such terrorist crimes.
China will continue to actively take part in and promote
bilateral and multilateral cooperation against terrorism,
strengthen information-sharing and assist developing
countries both materially and in capacity-building
within its capabilities.
On 17 and 18 November, China hosted a workshop
on combating cyberterrorism within the Global
Counterterrorist Forum in Beijing, at which
discussions were held on ways and means to prevent
and fight cyberterrorism and strengthen international
cooperation and capacity-building. We are willing
to enhance exchanges and cooperation with the
international community and promote new progress in

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7316

international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
in order to maintain world peace and stability.

fight against terrorism through its Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.

The President: I thank China for its support of
international efforts to combat the acts of foreign
terrorist fighters, and the threat of cyberterrorism in
particular.

At the regional level, in Africa we have the
Organization of African Unity Convention on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted in
July 1999, and the African Union Plan of Action on
the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism, adopted
in September 2002. Those instruments have enhanced
cooperation among African countries in the fight
against terrorism. At the institutional level, there
is the African Centre for the Study and Research on
Terrorism, based in Algiers. The Centre works with
national focal points in African Union (AU) member
States and has a mandate to strengthen the capacity of
the AU to fight terrorism in Africa.

Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First, let me convey to you,
Madam President, the warm regards and greetings of
my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ambassador Aminu
Wali, with whom I was in Abuja just two days ago. He
wanted to be here in person, but because of pressing
matters and engagements of State, he could not come,
so he extends his regrets for not joining the Council. I
should like to thank your presidency for organizing this
important debate. My delegation also thanks SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador Murmokaitė
of Lithuania and Ambassador Gary Quinlan of
Australia for their respective briefings. Let me also
join the Secretary-General in congratulating your
Prime Minister, yourself, Madam President, and your
Government on the successful hosting of the Group of
Twenty Summit.
Terrorism and violent extremism are two of the
gravest threats to international peace and security today.
Those threats have been compounded in recent times by
the growing problem of foreign terrorist fighters. They
have also been exacerbated by the vacuum created by
forcible changes in Governments and the overthrow
of constitutive authority in some regions of the world,
where the collapse of such authority has opened space
for the emergence of terrorist groups. That is all the
more so in the case of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant. Experience shows that no country is immune
from terrorist acts and violent extremism. Experience
also shows that no one country can fight those threats
alone. Only through international cooperation can
terrorists and violent extremists be defeated. That
requires cooperation at various levels, global, regional
and subregional. It also requires critical actions at the
national level.
At the global level, the United Nations has shown
remarkable leadership in the effort to fight terrorism
through the various Security Council resolutions
and through the actions of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. The United
Nations has also provided the strategic framework for
comprehensively addressing issues pertaining to the

At the subregional level, in 2013 the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) adopted
a counter-terrorism strategy and implementation plan
within the framework of the Political Declaration
on a Common Position against Terrorism. One of the
key goals of the strategy is to promote cooperation,
coordination, harmonization and synergies in the
national counter-terrorism actions of member States.
That shows a realization on the part of ECOWAS
member States that countries must come together at the
subregional level as well to fight terrorism.
For us in Nigeria, terrorism has come with
considerable challenges and a price. That fact was
stated by President Goodluck Jonathan during the
debate on this topic in September in this very Chamber
(see S/PV.7272) when States members of the Council
met at the summit level to discuss the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. He also underscored the
commitment and underlined the resolve of the Federal
Government of Nigeria to fight terrorism on both the
local and the global stages. We have drawn inspiration
from resolution 1373 (2001) and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as we work to
address the challenges confronting us.
Terrorism compels us to review and update our
laws, review and strengthen our institutions, and create
platforms for greater coordination and cooperation
within and across national security agencies. We are
also developing capacity to work in collaboration with
civil society and the international community. We have
devised a new national security model that is inclusive
and premised on the provision of peace, security and
development.

14-6373919/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

When we started to deal with the Boko Haram
threat, our laws were not so clear on a number of
fundamental points. The situation has now changed with
the adoption of the Terrorism Prevention Act (2013),
which clearly defines what constitutes terrorism. With
the act in effect, we are now able to block some avenues
of financing, thereby quelling the activities of some of
the terrorists. We have developed a national counterterrorism strategy, while working with key stakeholders
and the international community.
We thank Australia for its support and cooperation
in the elaboration of our National Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which is organized around five pillars, each
with key objectives and indicators. We have also
developed a benchmarking framework for evaluating
the implementation of that strategy, which includes
the respect for human rights and the rule of law, the
successful prosecution of violent extremist offenders,
capacity-building of all relevant institutions, including
the criminal justice system, and public participation
and the creation of awareness with regard to preventing
terrorism.
In order to achieve the objectives of the National
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and build community
resilience, we designed a soft approach to countering
violent extremism. That approach focuses on several
aspects of deradicalization, which includes the
implementation of a prison-based deradicalization
programme for convicted terrorists and other terrorist
suspects awaiting trial. Our objective is to reform,
rehabilitate and prepare violent extremist offenders for
re-entry into society.
Significant challenges still continue to confront
us in our fight against terrorism. We are, however,
determined to sustain and indeed intensify our
efforts in that fight. We appreciate the importance of
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
In that regard, we will continue to count on the support
and cooperation of friendly countries and nations and
relevant multilateral institutions as we deal with the
scourge of terrorism.
This is going to be a long, drawn-out and difficult
fight. The underlying or root causes of terrorism and the
allure of extremism must be studied, understood and
addressed. Alienation and frustration are two powerful
forces that pull young and impressionable people
into the embrace of the ideology and make terrorism
and extremism appealing. All outstanding conflicts,

20/83

19/11/2014

especially in the Middle East, must be brought to an
end expeditiously, without further prolongation. The
problem of inequality between and among nations that
perpetuates global instability must also be addressed
through the adoption of a universal right to development
framework that has at its core the ending of poverty,
illiteracy and unemployment.
The President: I take this opportunity to express
the condolences of all present for the appalling attacks
perpetrated by Boko Haram and our solidarity with the
Nigerian Government in countering that threat.
Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to extend my thanks to you, Madam
President, for presiding over this open debate on
international cooperation to counter terrorism. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, drafted by
Australia, which enhances our collective efforts to
counter terrorism. I thank also the Secretary-General
for his statement and the Chairs of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities and the Counter-Terrorism Committee for their
briefings. My delegation has listened to those briefings
and considered them carefully.
Al-Qaida and affiliated and splinter groups,
including the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), are a major threat to international peace and
security. The risk those groups pose to the Middle East
in particular is an imminent threat, as they spread,
gain strength and form alliances. They also control
lands that are fertile and rich in resources. The ongoing
conflicts in the region continue provide fertile grounds
for terrorist organizations to gain strength. The lack of
a comprehensive political solution in Syria has made
that situation even worse. It will not be possible to put
an end the threat of ISIL and others in Syria without a
political transition in Syria.
Jordan exerts tremendous efforts to control its
borders and to counter the expansion of such groups.
Those terrorist organizations attempt to infiltrate our
borders and send terrorism elements to perpetrate
acts of sabotage in neighbouring countries. We should
therefore be vigilant regarding the ideological threat of
such organizations and others within and beyond their
areas of their operation, as they spread their values and
violent rhetoric. By exploiting all media outlets, they
attract and recruit youth. Therefore, we should all face

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

this threat through efforts to spread awareness, culture
and education within local communities and, most
importantly, among youth, and look into why they fall
into the trap of joining terrorist organizations.
Jordan reiterates its call on other countries,
international partners and other relevant United
Nations entities concerned with countering terrorism to
provide all possible assistance to support the capacity of
countries at the forefront of the fight against terrorism,
so that they are able to face the threat and shoulder their
responsibility.
Jordan is concerned by such organizations perpetrating
heinous crimes against innocent civilians in Iraq and
Syria. We affirm the need to face such barbaric acts,
which are waged primarily against Muslims, without
discrimination. The crimes of humiliation and the mass
summary executions perpetrated mercilessly by ISIL
against hundreds of Bunimer tribespeople, which were
recently condemned by the Council, are evidence of
that, as if they are telling those who oppose them, “if
you oppose us, we are entitled to spill your blood”.
Jordan is aware of the increasing global challenge
of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
compounding that of violent extremism and requiring
pre-emptive and preventive security measures at the
international and national levels. The relevant United
Nations entities concerned with combating terrorism
should act immediately and comprehensively. They
should redouble their efforts and form in-depth
partnerships with Member States in order to move
towards providing tangible support to those States in
capacity-building so that they would be able to meet
their obligations. Jordan affirms the need to enhance
regional and international cooperation to face this
phenomenon. It is important to share information
among the relevant entities in the region. Countries in
the region should also undertake their responsibilities
in terms of border control.
Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) are
important in the framework of the international
response to terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters.
Even before the adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014)
and 2178 (2014), Jordan had adopted a comprehensive
national approach, organized around three main pillars,
to dealing with such phenomena.
First, we have taken a number of pre-emptive and
preventive measures to address the violent extremism
that fuels terrorism. Those measures include security

S/PV.7316

awareness and social measures that tackle issues in the
political, economic and social dimensions, with the
participation of all relevant national institutions and
leaders. The role of Jordan is not limited to national
perspectives, but goes beyond that to the international
and regional levels. His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein has launched a number of initiatives,
including the Message of Amman, the Message of
Common Ground, and International Reconciliation
Week, all of which call for moderation, tolerance and
giving priority to the language of dialogue.
Secondly, we have adopted a number of laws and
national legislation that deal firmly with terrorism. We
addressed the phenomenon of terrorist recruitment in
the 2006 law against terrorism. We enhanced that law
through efforts to deal with the issue of foreign terrorist
fighters in a 2014 amendment. We also included the
risk of the use of information and communications
technology in terrorist recruitment and the spread of
terrorist ideology.
Thirdly, we have implemented a number of measures,
including on border control, given the growing threat
of terrorist organizations in neighbouring countries and
a lack of regular uniformed army personnel along the
northern borders of the Kingdom.
With regard to our national and regional roles,
we intend to launch a regional initiative that will
include the participation of international experts and
representatives of local communities and all the relevant
entities and organizations, focused on the growing use
of information and communications technologies by
terrorist organizations and their affiliates, including
social media and other media outlets, with the aim
of spreading extremist terrorist ideology. One of the
most important outcomes of the initiative would be the
drafting of a comprehensive media plan to confront
the misleading messages of terrorist organizations, as
well as to raise awareness in local communities about
terrorism. We call on the relevant United Nations
agencies, including the Counter-Terrorism Centre, to
support this initiative, which would be in the interests
of us all.
Our war against terrorism will take a long time.
It is a war at the levels both of security and ideology.
All of us must therefore be persistent and make every
effort to defeat this scourge, which disrupts the safety
and security of all of us.
The President: We all appreciate the significant
role that Jordan is playing in the region, and we welcome

14-6373921/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

its initiative to convene an international meeting on
challenging and countering the narratives of terrorist
groups.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let
me begin by thanking Australia for its commitment
to a subject that is one of the most pressing threats
to international peace and security today. This was
an issue raised by the State visit just carried out by
President Hollande to Australia.
The horrific murders of the young American
humanitarian worker Peter Kassig and 18 Syrians
remind us once more of the cowardice of Daesh
terrorists and of the need to combat them.
More and more regions are being affected by
terrorism, with groups and practices that flout every
precept of law and humanity now being inflicted on
new populations. Daesh constitutes an unprecedented
threat to countries in the region but also to the rest of
the world. Moreover, the threat has grown thanks to the
proliferation of groups like Ansar Al-Sharia in Libya
and Boko Haram in Nigeria. In addition, the situation
remains fragile in the Sahel. The intervention of France
in Mali alongside African forces and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali has significantly reduced the threat of terrorism,
but it has not disappeared. Faced with this challenge, it
is necessary to redouble our efforts. The responses are
many.
The fight against Daesh calls for a military response,
which today takes the form of a coalition made up of
a growing number of States. Just as it is doing in the
Sahel, France is also fully playing its part in Iraq — as
was just demonstrated by the destruction by a French
air patrol of offensive Daesh positions in the environs
of Kirkuk. France is in the process of boosting its aerial
component. The action of the coalition in support of
Iraqi forces has just served to break the siege of Baiji,
including with the participation of Peshmerga forces.
We are encouraged by the assessments that the military
response has helped offset Daesh’s momentum on
territorial expansion.
However, this fight must also be a political one.
Military action alone cannot sustainably address
terrorism. Daesh in Iraq has thrived on the fragility of a
State subject to divisions, mistrust among communities
and instability. Prime Minister Al Abadi is now working
to create the conditions for a reconciled Iraq that respects
the rights of all. We support his efforts. The formation

22/83

19/11/2014

of an inclusive Government, the growing awareness
of the concerns of Sunnis, the gradual resolution of
disputes with the Kurdistan Regional Government and
the normalization of relations with regional partners
should be commended and encouraged. Similarly, in
Syria, only a political transition at the national level
will definitely overcome the scourge of Daesh, whose
rise has been promoted and exploited by the regime in
Damascus.
Sanctions also help fight against the scourge of
terrorism. In Libya, the Sanctions Committee on
Al-Qaida has taken up a project to sanction Ansar
Al-Sharia-Derna and Ansar Al-Sharia-Benghazi.
Those sanctions should make it possible to signal the
determination of the international community vis-à-vis
terrorists, who cannot be regarded as interlocutors.
This is also about encouraging all moderate forces
in Libya to come together to present a common front
against terrorism In general, we call for a more regular
use of the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida so that
the sanctions list better reflect the reality of the threat.
This strong response to terrorism can be carried
out only in the context of strict respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law, which are essential
to the effectiveness of our strategy in the short and long
terms.
Terrorism is evolving and directly threatens
our societies thanks to the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. Terrorists, including Daesh, rally
people — often young people — to their cause. More
than 15,000 fanatical individualshave thus joined as
parties in the fight Syria and Iraq. Among them are
the 376 French nationals, or people living in France. In
total, more than 1,000 are involved in jihadist ranks in
various ways. The fight against this phenomenon is a
priority for France’s internal security.
Last September, at a summit-level meeting, the
Security Council adopted a resolution to combat this
phenomenon (see S/PV.7272). Since then, France
has expanded its national approach. On 4 November,
my country adopted new measures in line with the
recommendations set out in resolution 2178 (2014),
with a view to preventing the exit of French individuals
from our territory where there are serious reasons to
believe that their movement was for a terrorist purpose.
The law also helps fight against radicalization on the
Internet, with full respect for the freedom of expression.
We are also working to identify pathways that facilitate
recruitment.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

But we must go further together. Presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/23, which we adopted today,
notes the need to scrupulously follow up in the fight
against foreign terrorist fighters. This illustrates
the importance of the international community
strengthening its cooperation in respect of civil
liberties.
The text also emphasizes the importance of
combating trafficking in oil and recalls the obligations
of States in the fight against the financing of terrorism.
That must be a priority area for all of us. Bahraini
authorities organized a meeting on that subject on
9 November, which we welcome.
Beyond those repressive measures, it is necessary
that the international community examine the causes
of radicalization and combat violent extremism. We
must especially rein in terrorist propaganda — and
we should call it by its proper name. When it comes to
Daesh, for example, it can never be repeated enough:
that organization is neither a State nor Islamic. That is
why we decided to use the more neutral term “Daesh”.
We welcome the fact that today’s presidential
statement urges the United Nations to consider how to
better fight against the phenomenon of radicalization.
That will be an aspect of a long-term strategy against
terrorism, one in which France will remain resolutely
committed.
The President: I thank the representative of France
for his country’s leading contributions to the efforts to
combat terrorism in the Middle East and in the Islamic
Maghreb, and in the Sahel in particular.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
Madam President, I should like to welcome you and
commend you on your country’s presidency of the
Security Council and your leadership. I also welcome
the presence here of other Ministers, and I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing. I
also thank for their briefings the Chairs of the Security
Council Committees established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and resolution 1373 (2001).
The threat posed by the Islamic State and the
Al-Nusra Front is constantly changing. These terrorist
groups are armed with increasingly sophisticated
weaponry and making significant territorial gains.
They also make use of the income drawn from the
illegal trade in oil, pillage and hostage-taking to fuel
their macabre activities. They recruit throughout the

S/PV.7316

world and spread their barbarous theology everywhere,
including in Africa.
Africa is also confronting terrorism and violent
extremism. As has been noted, it teems with groups
such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
Ansar Al-Sharia, the Signers in Blood Battalion,
and Al-Shabaab. Despite their different geographic
locations, these terrorist groups constitute a wellcoordinated network in their actions across the globe.
That is why, on 2 September, important decisions were
taken at a summit meeting of the African Union Peace
and Security Council to strengthen the legal framework
of the fight against terrorism and to establish an
African arrest warrant for authors of and accomplices
to terrorist activities and a mechanism for halting
terrorist funding.
If we are to eradicate the phenomenon of foreign
fighters, we must attack its deep-rooted causes. The
emergence of terrorism and violent extremism in Africa
is nourished by widespread poverty and despair, and
by youth unemployment in particular. Young people
are easy prey indeed for terrorist groups, which enjoy
significant resources from drug trafficking and other
illicit activities. If the international community is to
stop these activities, which seriously threaten security,
it must support the youth development programmes and
projects of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. To that end, Africa’s partners must provide
ample technical and material assistance, in addition
to the assistance provided by such United Nations
entities as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. For its part, Chad is playing its role in the
fight against terrorism. Its resolute engagement in Mali,
where we have paid and continue to pay the highest
price, perfectly reflects our commitment.
To conclude, we commend the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, and hope that it
will help Member States to better implement resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
The President: We all look forward to Chad’s
initiative under its presidency next month on the
connection between terrorism and crime in Africa.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I welcome you to the presidency of the
Security Council, Madam. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive statement and the
Permanent Representatives of Australia and Lithuania
for their briefings on the efforts of the Committees

14-6373923/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

they lead in undertaking the tasks mandated by recent
decisions of the Council. We continue to believe
that the activities of those entities are an important
contribution to strengthening the central coordinating
role of the United Nations and the Security Council in
international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Two months, following the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014), aimed at cutting off the oxygen for all
activities of foreign terrorist fighters, the Council has
once again been compelled to focus on the problem of
terrorism — a threat that is not going away. Posing a
threat to all regions of the world, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front (ANF)
and other terrorist groups have long been active in the
Middle East. They have acquired additional capacities
for their criminal activities due to the weakening of
State institutions, courtesy of foreign intervention in
no small measure, and to the support of various foreign
sponsors. Moreover, so long as the ISIL and ANF
extremists were fighting Government forces in Syria,
certain States did not seem especially bothered. We
believe that such double standards are unacceptable in
the fight against terrorism.
The report published recently by the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic, created by the Human Rights Council,
explicitly notes that weapons and support provided
from abroad to so-called moderate armed groups in
Syria have time and again fallen into the hands of
more radical elements, including ISIL. Extremists have
enjoyed foreign financing, including through charitable
organizations and private individuals. The document
paints an appalling picture of the current consequences
of such short-sighted — to put it mildly — activities,
especially for civilians, including women and children.
Leniency towards the activities of extremist groups
has jeopardized the future of entire States, as is clear in
the examples of Iraq, Syria and Libya. Lebanon, Yemen,
Mali and the Central African Republic are also on the
firing line. Terrorist activities on the AfghanistanPakistan border continue to be linked to Al-Qaida, as
stated in the reports of the Monitoring Teams of the
Committees established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) and resolution 1267 (1999). In that regard, we
support focusing the efforts of the Security Council on
combating the radicalization that fuels terrorism, the
replication of terrorist ideology and violent extremism,
and the use of the media and the Internet for terrorist
purposes, and on banning incitement towards terrorism

24/83

19/11/2014

and countering the appeal of terrorist activities. It is
vital that States pursue their efforts under the auspices
of the United Nations system’s work in those areas.
Presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23, adopted today,
points us in the right direction.
Another cause for concern is terrorist income, one of
the most important sources of which is the illegal trade
in Syrian and Iraqi oil. In Syria, jihadists are exploiting
as many as 10 oil fields. ISIL is producing almost
30,000 barrels a day. In Iraq, that terrorist organization
controls 14 oil fields and is exporting up to 50,00060,000 barrels a day. Terrorists’ total daily income
from the oil trade is approaching $3 million. Moreover,
air strikes on the oil facilities seized by the terrorists
in Iraq and Syria have barely made a dent in the level
of illegal sales. Objectively, they merely complicate the
living conditions of people living in those regions. Oil
tankers go about their business; makeshift pipelines are
up and running; and shady dealers and middle-men are
helping get crude oil onto the black market.
The Security Council’s requirements of Member
States, as set out in resolution 2170 (2014) seem to
have gone unheeded — a situation that requires the
Council’s focused attention. In that context, we cannot
help but note that in April 2013 the European Union
partially lifted the series of restrictions imposed on
Syria and authorized the purchase of Syrian oil by
non-State traders. In so doing, it indirectly facilitated
the financial strengthening of ISIL and the Al-Nusra
Front, which control the oil fields in north-eastern
Syria. Brussels should acknowledge that.
We are also troubled by reports of ISIL’s seizure of
humanitarian assistance earmarked for needy Syrians.
We must prevent situations in which humanitarian
assistance is distributed under the black flag of the
Islamic State, which strengthens its authority in
territory under its control.
Another worrisome issue is the growing battle
capabilities of the terrorists, above all ISIL. They
already have access to chemical weapons of mass
destruction. There is much eyewitness testimony of
their use by terrorist militants in Iraq and Syria. There
is a genuine danger that they may gain access to the
Libyan and Iraqi chemical arsenals. We believe that
the Council must take a decisive stand on this issue
and make it clear that the use of chemical weapons by
whomsoever will carry consequences. In that regard, we
regret that our delegation’s proposed draft presidential

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

statement on chemical weapons in Syria was effectively
blocked by a number of delegations, which sought to
amend it for one purpose alone — to shift all the focus
on issues related to the chemical demilitarization of
Syria. The text in question was also omitted from the
presidential statement adopted today. We stress that
shielding terrorists at a time when they are becoming
increasingly proficient at synthesizing, producing and
using substances for military purposes is unacceptable
and very dangerous.
In the light of the new tasks assigned to the Security
Council’s counter-terrorism bodies, the need for the
subsidiary organs of the Council and its expert groups
to comply in their work with existing procedures
takes on particular importance. In that regard, we
would like to reiterate that resolution 2178 (2014) sets
out a commitment for airlines to provide passenger
name records only in cases where individuals under
sanction by the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
have sought to leave or enter countries. Therefore,
the instruction to the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) contained in today’s presidential
statement to prepare for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) an overall report on measures to
monitor the movement of air passengers and on the
preparation of the relevant recommendations, without
tying it to a specific Security Council sanctions list,
breaches the terms of resolution 2178 (2014).
We welcome the role of CTED in providing
assistance to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
commend the Directorate’s swift preparation of a
preliminary analysis of the gaps in the implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) that make it
harder for States to combat the threat of foreign terrorist
fighters. We believe that the central focus of CTED
under its updated mandate should remain to provide
support to the CTC, monitoring the implementation of
the previously mentioned resolutions and coordinating
the provision of technical assistance to Member States.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Russian Federation for Russia’s support for the Security
Council’s efforts to counter terrorism and violent
extremism.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome Australia’s initiative in convening this
debate to allow us to reflect on the role of international

S/PV.7316

cooperation in combating terrorism and violent
extremism. This year, we have been called upon to
analyse and adopt concrete measures with regard to
such phenomena, in particular within the context of
the Security Council, which speaks for the collective
responsibility of the international community to prevent
and combat such threats to stability and international
peace and security.
We believe that the Security Council should
be proactive in that context and must realize that
working within the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy presents us with
a permanent challenge to join forces in support of
combating and preventing that scourge. For its part, our
country accepts that collective responsibility, and Chile
has therefore ratified all the international conventions
that are part of the United Nations legal framework
relating to counter-terrorism. At the national level, we
have launched a parliamentary discussion with respect
to a new counter-terrorism law that would endow
the Office of the Prosecutor with greater powers and
additional means to investigate crimes of that nature.
The new law will not lose sight of the essential balance
that must exist between the prevention of terrorism and
repression, and respect for the fundamental rights of all
individuals. Such actions demonstrate our commitment
to support the resolutions that the Council has adopted
in this area, which require constant effort at the national
level to ensure their effective implementation.
Chile values the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate. We would
like to highlight the quality of the collection and
organization of the information that each State is
required to provide in its reports. We hope that the
exchange between States and the Committee will
contribute to improving the efficiency of its internal
functioning as well as serve to spotlight the areas where
individual countries need to improve their legislative
regimes. We believe that the Committee should
continue to encourage the exchange of information.
The establishment of committees of experts can be a
useful tool for sharing best practices with respect to
the implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005), as well as for identifying measures that will
support the implementation of the recently adopted
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
In that regard, we stress the strengthening effect
of the work of specialized organs within regional
bodies, such as the Inter-American Committee against

14-6373925/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism of the Organization of American States.
The atrocities committed by terrorist groups such as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), the
Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida, whose ranks include a
large number of foreign combatants, should prompt
us to analyse the root causes that have allowed those
groups to disseminate their extremist narrative. We are
concerned by the pull exerted on our young people by
speeches that oppose the fundamental universal values
that are shared by every civilization and culture. The
measures adopted by the international community
to combat extremist violence and terrorism are not
intended to persecute or stigmatize any culture or
religion.
We believe that the prevention and suppression of
terrorist acts should have priority, but that the treatment
of such acts as crimes should not be the only means
for addressing the phenomenon. Each society must
ask itself why the existing tools have failed and why
the terrorist narratives that we condemn have been
able to emerge and flourish. Moreover, we need to
ask why the international community and the affected
countries have been unable to prevent terrorist groups
such as ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida from
acquiring such power and why they have managed to
seduce citizens of other countries to embark on the
path of violence. That process of reflection should be
undertaken collectively but also within each country, in
the context of our distinct national realities and social
values.
Such an analysis should also take into account the
gaps in inclusivity, tolerance and respect for diversity
and identity in our societies. As President Bachelet
pointed out in her statement before the Council in
September (see S/PV.7272), we take heart from our belief
that among the most effective tools in the fight against
terrorism are education, the elimination of inequalities
and work among the most disaffected groups of society.
In that context, we propose that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee should undertake a study to identify the
social factors that favour the growth of terrorism and
the attraction of the extremist narratives and terrorist
groups for young people, with particular focus on the
growth in the number of foreign terrorist fighters.
Another crucial theme to be investigated is the
financing behind criminal acts of that nature, an area
that requires active cooperation. In that regard, we
would like to draw particular attention to the work of
the Sanctions Committees and their monitoring groups

26/83

19/11/2014

in the area of preventing trafficking in weapons and
the freezing of assets that would otherwise be used
for financing terrorist activities. We must also analyse
the risks that terrorism and illicit activities imply for
countries facing situations of protracted conflict and for
post-conflict societies. In addition, both peacekeeping
operations and political missions should more formally
incorporate tools for preventing the rise of extreme
violence.
To conclude, we would like to reiterate our country’s
solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families, especially women and children. We extend
our condolences to those who have been barbarously
murdered by ISIL, most recently the humanitarian
worker Peter Kassig. Chile will continue to support the
fight against international terrorism and to promote
human rights, because we are convinced that we will
thereby contribute to the dignity, peace, stability and
inclusive development of all our societies.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States deeply appreciates Australia’s leadership
in advancing the global community’s response to
terrorism and violent extremism. The group known as
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) does not
threaten only global security; the cruelty of that group
and others associated with Al-Qaida threatens the
values on which the United Nations was founded. Like
other violent extremist groups, ISIL is the product of
a brutal, nihilistic ideology that glorifies violence and
death.The horrific massacres of Sunni, Shia, Kurds,
Christians, Yazidis and other minorities demonstrate
that ISIL spares no group from its murderous agenda.
While continuing to terrorize and kill, ISIL is
actively engaged in recruitment activities that have
attracted significant numbers of foreign terrorist
fighters, from dozens of nations around the world, to
join them in Syria and Iraq in order to commit their
terrorist acts. The actions of ISIL and the foreigners
who have joined their ranks are despicable. Just this past
Sunday, we were reminded of that horrific barbarity
by ISIL’s murder of a humanitarian aid worker, Peter
Abdul-Rahman Kassig. ISIL terrorists — probably
from Western countries, and thus foreign terrorist
fighters — were seen once again in an ISIL video,
along with their cohorts, participating in a cowardly
and outrageous act targeting an innocent American
humanitarian aid worker who wanted to do nothing
more than provide help and comfort to the Syrian
people.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The spirit of goodness and service that burned so
brightly in Peter Abdul-Rahman Kassig is what binds
humankind together, and it is that light and that same
commitment to a better world that will ultimately
prevail over the destruction and hate of ISIL. As we
honour Abdul-Rahman’s service and sacrifice, we
see other tragedies unfolding beyond Syria and Iraq.
In Canada less than a month ago, violent extremists
in Quebec and Ottawa killed Canadian soldiers and
attempted to harm senior Government officials, and
yesterday we witnessed a despicable terrorist attack on
worshippers in a synagogue in Jerusalem that resulted
in the murder of four innocent civilians, including
American citizens, as well as injuries to many more.
Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their
families.
Those incidents, along with ISIL’s unrelenting
bloodshed and brutality in Iraq and Syria, remind us
that we must do more to counter violent extremism
and stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The
Security Council has recognized that countering this
threat will require the international community to
develop new tools, approaches and ways to harness our
collective efforts. The results of the Council’s recent
efforts to respond, including presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23 adopted today, provide an important
framework for addressing the threat in all its complexity.
In September, the Council adopted resolution 2178
(2014) at a summit presided over by President Obama
(see S/PV.7272) that focused on one aspect of this
menace, the global flow of foreign terrorist fighters to
and from the conflict zones involved.
The wide support that resolution 2178 (2014)
received, with 105 sponsors, demonstrates the
international community’s solidarity in meeting this
threat. The United States will continue to work with all
of its partners to counter the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters into the region, and we stand ready to help
others do the same. Over the past year, we have worked
with Western Europe, the Balkans, North Africa and
the Gulf States to press for greater cooperation on
information-sharing, border security, law enforcement,
capacity-building, counter-messaging, and countering
violent extremism and terrorist financing. We are
pleased to be seeing stronger counter-terrorism laws
and more terrorists brought to justice in the Balkans;
increased security cooperation in North Africa; terrorist
financing reforms in the Gulf; and closer cooperation
with Western European partners.

S/PV.7316

But more must be done, and as President Obama
has emphasized, all of us must help our partners build
their capacity to meet the evolving threat of terrorism,
including countering the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and violent extremism in the most vulnerable
communities. The Global Counterterrorism Forum’s
first-ever set of international good practices for a
more effective response to the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon is a good guide. Preventing foreign terrorist
fighters from reaching Syria and Iraq, and then slipping
back across any of our borders, is a critical element in
strategies for degrading and ultimately defeating ISIL.
The Security Council has recognized that tackling
the ISIL challenge will require using other tools,
including financial measures and sanctions, as we
resolved in August in the adoption of resolution 2170
(2014). Today’s presidential statement once again
addresses the importance of choking off all financial
support for ISIL that funds its violent terrorist acts and
its recruitment. In coming months, the Council should
consider whether additional actions and measures are
needed to ensure that ISIL does not use oil, kidnapping
ransoms, banks, Iraq and Syria’s cultural property,
donations and other means to finance its murderous
campaign. We welcome and value the important work of
the United Nations counter-terrorism bodies, including
the work of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team established pursuant to resolution
1526 (2004), aimed at more effectively countering
terrorist financing, recruitment and travel, and the
efforts of the Executive Directorate of the CounterTerrorism Committee to identify legal and capacity
gaps in Member States.
Beyond the official counter-terrorism body of the
United Nations, there should be greater integration,
where appropriate, of counter-terrorism into the
Organization’s other related efforts. The Council has
now firmly established the importance of countering
violent extremism, and we reiterate the central
importance of such international efforts to counter
and respond to toxic, violent ideologies of terrorism.
We must work together to de-legitimize ISIL’s hate
and violence, and we must expose its dark, false and
deadly vision. In that regard, we particularly welcome
the recent efforts of the Global Engagement and
Resilience Fund, whose governing board met this
week and approved an accelerated funding mechanism
aimed at enabling the Fund to provide small grants to
community-based organizations for projects to counter
ISIL’s violent extremism.

14-6373927/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The challenges we face in countering terrorism
could not be more important, and so it is fitting that
today the Council has adopted an important framework
to help guide additional efforts. Now we must do more.
As we have heard from Council members today, we
are united in the face of this threat to our security and
values. We must turn outrage into action, we must do so
together and we must do so decisively.
The President: I thank the representative of the
United States for the leadership that his country is
showing in countering the threat of terrorism. I would
also like to convey Australia’s deep condolences for
the barbaric murder of Peter Abdul-Rahman Kassig,
a brutal act that highlights the severe dangers that
humanitarian workers and other civilians are facing in
Syria at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant.
I would like to thank all Council members for
their statements and contributions. I should inform all
concerned that we will carry on the open debate right
through the lunch hour, as we have a very large number
of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): On behalf of my delegation,
Madam President, I would like to congratulate you
and Australia for your successful hosting of the Group
of 20 summit and of our Prime Minister’s bilateral
visit to your country. I would also like to thank you
for organizing today’s open debate on international
cooperation on combating terrorism and violent
extremism. I compliment you on your circulation of a
useful and well-structured concept note (S/2014/787,
annex), which will help us in the debate.
At the outset, we would like to assert that there can
be no justification for terrorism and that the United
Nations must demonstrate zero tolerance if we are
to successfully counter its threat. The international
community is facing unprecedented challenges from
terrorism, which threatens to endanger the very
foundation of democratic societies. Resolution 2178
(2014) represents a good beginning to the Security
Council’s response to one dimension of that threat.
The resolution’s impact will depend on how it is
implemented by Member States, keeping in mind
their obligations under Article 25 of the Charter of
the United Nations. Much will also depend on how the
Council addresses Member States’ compliance with the
resolution’s provisions. Its credibility as an effective

28/83

19/11/2014

and empowered body will be tested by the way it
oversees their implementation.
The concept note brings out the immediate context
around resolution 2178 (2014). Regarding the first and
second groups of issues in the note, whereby Member
States are asked to speak on national experience and data
collection, we would like to point out that a wealth of
such information is already available to the Council. In
India, we have used grassroots-level local communities
and committees for outreach and feedback on counterterrorism and have formulated appropriate counterterror narratives. Based on our collection of data on the
travel and transit of foreign terrorist fighters, we feel
there is a need to enhance international cooperation in
disrupting the travel of such elements.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is
not a recent one. The issue, therefore, is not so much
the need to collect more information, but what the
Council proposes to do with such information. We
believe that the Council needs to act robustly using
the instruments of law and the information available
to it to counter terrorism and maintain international
peace and security. In that context, we urge that the
Council add its collective voice to the early conclusion
of the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, so that Member States are legally obliged,
under Article 25 of the Charter, to either prosecute or
extradite terrorists.
With respect to the third basket identified in the
concept note, which is the role of United Nations entities
in countering terrorism, we would recall that during the
recent review of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, it was stated by the Secretariat that
there were as many as 31 separate entities in the United
Nations family dealing with this issue. However,
it is a matter of concern that there is no single point
or coordinator accountable to the States Members of
the United Nations for the activities of these various
entities. This, we believe, must be rectified urgently.
There are at least three important observations in
the concept note that we welcome. One of them relates
to the infrastructure of terrorism, which involves both
physical structures as well as financial and ideological
wellsprings. Since this infrastructure does not exist in
a vacuum, it is an inescapable conclusion that Member
States have an obligation to act swiftly to prevent their
sovereign territory from being used by terrorists. No
Member State can hope to be immune to the threat

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of such terrorism, and the infrastructure of terrorism
therefore needs to be erased urgently if we are to avoid
a doomsday scenario.
Secondly, we fully agree with the observation
relating to the increasingly sophisticated use of
technology and communications to commit ever more
barbaric acts of terror, based on our own horrendous
experience of 26 November 2008 in Mumbai, involving
an attack carried out by foreign terrorist fighters in the
full glare of the international media. One of the fighters
was apprehended by our authorities and prosecuted and
penalized through the due process of law. That was
the first time that we confronted the use of Voice over
Internet Protocol to direct terrorist acts. We believe
that if we are serious about countering this challenge
in an effective manner, we must agree on the necessary
adjustments to be made in the way that the global
Internet infrastructure is currently managed in order
to counter the exploitation of the Internet by terrorists.
Thirdly, I would stress the challenge posed by
terrorists to United Nations peacekeepers, specifically
in the Golan Heights and in Mali. Unless effectively
deterred, such threats will only increase in number and
scope. In the case of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, it has been alleged that the foreign
terrorist fighters who attacked United Nations
peacekeepers belong to the Al-Nusra Front, which is
proscribed by the Security Council as a terrorist group.
We call on the Council to take urgent and visible
steps to use its authority to investigate, prosecute
and penalize the perpetrators of such terrorist acts. A
clear obligation for all Member States to act against
foreign terrorist fighters who attack United Nations
peacekeepers should become an integral part of the
peacekeeping mandates approved by the Council.
Ms. King took the Chair.
Finally, it is not clear to us as to what are the
working procedures applied within the Council when
it deliberates on how to counter terrorism, which is
becoming the single biggest threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security. We feel that it would
benefit the Council to have regular interactive sessions
with Member States to address these issues. Such an
innovation would go a long way towards offsetting the
widely held perception that the Council uses different
standards to deal with terrorism.
In conclusion, we would reiterate that the fight
against terrorism has to be unrelenting and fought

S/PV.7316

across all fronts. The immediate lesson all of us must
draw is that foreign terrorist fighters and the spectre
of terrorism cannot be dealt with through selective
approaches and that there can be no justification for
terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): At the outset,
let me say that I am honoured to speak to the Council
today on behalf of the members of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation. I would like to express
my gratitude to Australia’s Foreign Minister, The
Honourable Julie Bishop, for leading this important
meeting on international cooperation on combating
terrorism, including addressing the interrelated
threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters and violent
extremism. I should like also to thank the Chair of
the sanctions Committee on Al-Qaida, Ambassador
Gary Quinlan, and the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė, for
their comprehensive statements today and for all of
their valuable work. We also welcome the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/2014/23).
Over the past decade, terrorist movements such as
Al-Qaida have transformed from a single organization
into a network of autonomous but affiliated dispersed
and continually growing groups. These groups have
exploited the lack of stability in different regions
around the world in order to gain ground and replenish
their ranks. Terrorist organizations such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), Al-Qaida and Boko
Haram have targeted anyone and everyone who refuses
to adhere to their violent and unfounded ideology. We
stress that the practices of terrorist groups such as ISIS,
which falsely claim affiliation to Islam and seek to
justify their criminal acts as being carried out for its
cause, have nothing to do with Islam or its principles,
which call for justice, equality, compassion, freedom of
faith and coexistence.
In this context, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation condemns and rejects all attempts to
associate Islam or any Islamic country, any race,
religion, culture or nationality with terrorism. We
stress the importance of the fact that religious war is
the misguided refuse of extremists who cannot build or
create anything and therefore promote only fanaticism
and hatred. We are happy to see that many countries,
including today in the Council, have recalled this

14-6373929/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

dissociation between such terrible acts and beliefs of
terror, and Islam.
Terrorist and extremist ideology requires fertile
ground to grow. Hence confronting the symptoms
of terrorism without dealing with their root causes
cannot be sufficient for a long-lasting solution to
confront violent radicalization. We therefore call for
a proper understanding of the political, social and
economic context and environment that breeds such
violent extremism. We reaffirm our commitment to
strengthening cooperation in the fight against terrorism
through, inter alia, developing an appropriate, mutually
agreed definition of terrorism, exchanges of information
and capacity-building, and, in addition, addressing
the root causes of terrorism, such as prolonged,
unresolved conflicts, the continued suppression and
marginalization of peoples, and the denial of their
rights to self-determination in situations of foreign
occupation.
We echo in this regard what the Secretary-General
said in the context of the general debate: “Missiles kill
terrorists, but only good governance kills terrorism”.
We underscore the need for a comprehensive approach
in order to respond effectively to the complex problem
of terrorism.
The OIC affirms the importance of bringing to
justice any person who supports, facilitates, participates
or attempts to participate in the financing, planning
or commission of terrorist acts. There are many
types of terrorism, and the OIC strongly condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations committed
by whomsoever and wherever. We must draw the
Council’s attention to Israel’s acts of aggression against
the Palestinian people, which constitute war crimes
and State-sponsored terrorism. We emphasize the
importance of putting an end to such acts.
We also draw the Council’s attention to the
escalating violence committed by extremist terrorist
Israeli settlers against the Palestinian population
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We call on
the international community to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to prosecute and bring to justice all
those responsible for such crimes. We reiterate our call
on the international community to include the leaders
of the settlers and the extremist settler communities,
including the “Price Tag” and “Hilltop Youth” factions,
on the list of terrorists and criminals wanted for
international prosecution.

30/83

19/11/2014

It is no exaggeration to say that humankind’s future
depends on us uniting against those who would divide
us along the fault lines of tribe or sect, race or religion.
We must keep up our guard against those who use the
fight against terrorism or infiltrate extreme movements
to serve and widen their political agenda. Such acts will
only breed more terrorism.
With your permission, Madam President, I will
now continue in my national capacity as representative
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(spoke in Arabic)
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomed resolution
2170 (2014), having co-sponsored it, and resolution
2178 (2014), as both resolutions set out effective steps
that seek to defeat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters. Both resolutions also include elements to
counter violent extremism and are in line with the
positive track record of the Kingdom in terms of
initiatives to combat terrorism in all its forms.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was one of the
first countries to take initiatives and effective steps
to combat the threat of foreing terrorist fighters. On
3 February 2014, the Government of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia issued decrees that would penalize all
those who have participated or intend to participate
in fighting outside the Kingdom. The decrees also
criminalize all religious and extremist or other groups
that are listed and classified as terrorist organizations
domestically, regionally or internationally.
On many occasions, the Kingdom has warned
of the exacerbation of the situation in Syria, but the
international community has remained silent, failing to
heed those warnings in the desired manner. Our region
today is facing serious developments as a result of such
indifference and reluctance. As a result, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia took effective and rapid steps to respond
to the threat and danger of the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
We called for a meeting on 12 September 2014
that included the participation of many countries,
including the United States of America. The meeting
issued a statement that clarifies the risks and threats
of ISIL and other extremist organizations, referring to
the importance of facing such an imminent threat in a
collective manner through an integrated international
coalition that would rescue the region and the entire
world.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The threat of foreign terrorist fighters is not limited
to countries where they are taking action; it goes
beyond the borders of those countries to have a negative
impact on the entire world. Therefore, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia is of the firm conviction that regional and
international cooperation is of paramount importance
to facing this scourge.
Combating foreign terrorist fighters, particularly
extremist groups that exploit religion, must not be
limited to the security level. It should also include
uprooting the ideology and financial support that such
phenomena rely on. Many scholars and intellectuals in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia continue to warn against
the dangers of distorted ideologies that drive terrorism.
The Council of Senior Religious Scholars of the
Kingdom recently issued a statement that affirms that
travel to areas of sedition and conflict is criminal and
anti-Islamic, and therefore prohibited. The statement
describes those who incite such acts as preachers of
evil who should be punished. Furthermore, the Grand
Mufti of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia described the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant as one of
the biggest threats that Islam is facing today. We hope
that Islamic and religious entities in other countries
will follow suit and issue statements aimed at standing
up to misleading thought and narratives.
We underscore the importance of adopting a
comprehensive approach to facing terrorism that is
not linked to religion, ethnicity, race or color. In the
meantime, we emphasize that denying the Palestinian
people their legitimate rights while Israel continues its
occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories is one
of the main reasons that violence and extremism has
spread in our region. The crisis in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the continued provocation by Israel, the occupying
Power, and the criminal acts of the settlers are all proof
of that fact. Extremist groups find in such acts a pretext
to continue with their ideology and violent behaviour.
They use this pretext to say that they are working to end
occupation, injustice and aggression.
The spread of violence and extremism and the
emergence of organizations like ISIL and others come
about because of the existence of policies and practices
that lead to marginalization and sectarianism. Those
policies are practices by some countries and regimes in
the region, in addition to the fact that the international
community fails to act or put an end to the policies and
practices of the Syrian regime against its own people,
have created fertile ground for terrorist groups in Syria.

S/PV.7316

We call upon the Security Council to adopt a resolution
that would list all terrorist groups and organizations in
Syria on the sanctions list, including Hizbullah militias,
the Abu Al-Abbas faction and the Ahl Al-Haq groups.
In the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, we continue to
combat terrorism in all its forms and at all levels. The
Council should take decisive positions that reflect the
will of the international community so that we can end
and eliminate this scourge.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank the
Australian presidency for convening today’s debate and
circulating a very solid and substantive concept note to
help us prepare for it (S/2014/787, annex).
Today’s debate has once again highlighted the
strong nexus between terrorism and violent extremism.
Ideologies, strategies and operations of terrorists and
extremists overlap. In fact, it is the violent extremism
in one form or the other that fuels terrorism. Both
terrorism and violent extremism defy State writ, disrupt
civil order and create anarchy to incite hatred in order
to execute their toxic agenda.
Violent acts justifiably require fitting military
offensive responses. We must also develop national
capacities to deconstruct those two phenomena to
comprehend the conditions in which terrorism and
violent extremism thrive. The underlying causes may
include political and economic grievances, ethnic and
religious tensions and a sense of relevant deprivation,
real or imagined. We need to understand the mindset
of the masterminds behind terrorism and violent
extremism, counter their narratives, delegitimize
their ideologies, devalue tools they use to make their
messages attractive and degrade the means they use to
recruit and motivate followers.
We should also know what impels individuals to
take violent action. Comprehension, however, does
not mean acquiescence or condonance of their heinous
crimes. We condemn terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
With the rise of the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and the interflows of
transnational terrorist groups and foreign terrorist
fighters, the broader Middle East region and scores
of countries beyond have become more volatile and

14-6373931/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

more vulnerable. The United Nations has taken timely
measures; now they must be implemented faithfully.
Our national experience is that there should be zero
tolerance for terrorists and violent extremists. That is
why for the past several months we have been prosecuting
the intense counter-terrorist Operation Zarb-e-Azb to
take out terrorists, dismantle their networks, staunch
their flow inside and outside borders, and destroy
their support system. We have learnt that hardcore
terrorists abuse the name of religion to commit crimes
against civilians and mistake overtures for dialogue as
appeasement. At the same time, we continue to make
our efforts to bring misled moderate youth back to the
national mainstream, deradicalize them and reintegrate
them. This requires both political idiom and economic
incentives. For that purpose, we are investing in the
social, educational, religious and economic sectors.
Violent extremism is, regrettably, infecting all
societies. Countering violent extremism requires
strategies and solutions suited to the relevant
environments. A one-size-fits all approach does not
work. Our national experience in countering violent
extremism has brought forth the following lessons.
Best practices need to be adapted to local conditions.
The participation of foreign actors is generally
perceived with suspicion at the local level. Efforts to
counter violent extremism must involve local actors,
preferably from the same community, and should have
demonstrable results. Young people respond positively
to economic programmes and projects; direct advocacy
is less effective. We recommend the pursuit of a rule
of law and a due process approach, and esnure access
to justice. We should avoid exacerbating ideological
and religious divisions and focus on the criminality
of terrorism and violent extremism, and not on their
ideological rationales. Community leaders should
be involved in countering violent extremism to use
appropriate platforms for mediation and intercession.
With respect to foreign terrorist fighters, our
Government has intensified efforts to implement
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). In this
regard, real-time information-sharing and effective
coordination among all relevant national departments
are most critical.
Pakistan welcomes the role played by the United
Nations and its agencies in counter-terrorism efforts.
We view the United Nations as a facilitator and provider
of technical expertise in areas identified by the Member

32/83

19/11/2014

States. We support the idea of a roster of experts being
developed by the United Nations Centre for CounterTerrorism (UNCCT). Experts well-versed in local
culture and environment can act as a focal point in the
United Nations system. The Council should weigh the
benefits of creating a new post of special representative
on extremism in order to synergize the work of the
United Nations.
Measures to prevent extremism and violent
terrorism should be mainstreamed. Most conflicts
today are being driven by extremism, terrorism and
asymmetric warfare. The United Nations peacekeeping
missions from have to deal time to time with terrorism
and transnational crime, but it would be prudent to
keep peacekeeping missions focused on their primary
mandate of keeping peace and protecting civilians.
Counter-terrorism is too broad a brief to be neatly
integrated or subsumed into peacekeeping.
We thank the leadership of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the UNCCT
for their influential work in countering terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Madam President, for organizing
this important meeting. I also thank the Australian
Foreign Minister for her bold introductory statement.
Three months have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 2170 (2014), which was
soon strengthened with the long-awaited adoption
of resolution 2178 (2014). In assessing the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to implement those
two resolutions since then, we note that the Organization
continues to turn a blind eye to Governments that
support terrorism, which have taken advantage of the
United Nations silence to compete repulsively with
one another in their pretence of combating terrorism.
The efforts of the relevant bodies of the United
Nations have been characterized by their slow-paced,
bureaucratic nature, rather than by a relentless and
effective endeavour to address the grave threat posed
to Member States and international peace and security
by terrorism.
Certain efforts have strikingly lacked the required
firmness. For example, the draft questionnaire on the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, proposed by

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the United Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism of the
Department of Political Affairs, is the result of three
years of work. According to United Nations officials,
it will take 18 months to implement and will require
terrorists returning from abroad to respond voluntarily
to the naive questions contained therein.
Another weakness of the United Nations response is
the ongoing opacity of certain subsidiary committees in
evaluating the information submitted by Member States.
For instance, I note that we have yet to receive a reply to
any of our official letters to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the most recent of
which, dated 22 October, has an annex of photographs
of victims of bombs containing skin-burning chemical
substances, used by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) against the inhabitants of the Ayn al-Arab
region in Syria. We also do not know if the Committee
is following or interested in ISIL’s current attempts to
introduce and use VX toxic gas on Syrian soil, although
we alerted it to that danger two days ago.
For their part, high-ranking officials of the
Secretariat and even the Secretary-General’s official
Spokesperson continue to use the expression “armed
opposition” in referring to terrorist organizations
included on the list of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. They
have persisted in this odd approach in spite of several
letters we have sent to the Secretary-General on this
issue, in which we have underscored the contradiction
between this description and the resolutions of the
Security Council.
At the international level, over the past three
months several States have taken measures to honour
their international commitments. Others, including
sponsors of international terrorism, have established
an alliance outside the framework of the United
Nations and without a Security Council mandate in
order to carry out air strikes against ISIL in Syria and
Iraq. In spite of appeals by the Syrian Government
for cooperation and coordination in order the achieve
the common objective of eliminating terrorism, some
States that support terrorism have undermined any
joint efforts on the matter. Today, nearly two months
after the beginning of air strikes against ISIL, we read
in American newspapers, such as The Washington Post,
statements by United States officials asserting that
more than 1,000 foreign terrorist fighters move across
the Turkish border into Syria and Iraq to join the ranks

S/PV.7316

of terrorist organizations, adding that the rate has not
changed in spite of the air strikes.
Therefore, while the monthly number of deaths
among ISIL fighters averages about 500, the
organization is taking in about 1,000 new terrorists per
month. That confirms what we have said repeatedly,
namely, that air strikes cannot achieve their established
goals if they are carried out in violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and without cooperation and
coordination with the Governments concerned — and if
they are not accompanied by enjoining States that incite
and support terrorism to stop their practices that violate
the principles of international law and the provisions of
the Charter and pose a threat to international peace and
security.
In that regard, I should like to draw the Council’s
attention to a story published in The New York Times
on 3 November. According to that paper, American
officials have suggested a possible action by the
coalition to expel ISIL from Iraq. That is a welcome
effort, to which we agree. However, after achieving that
objective and chasing ISIL out of Iraq, those terrorist
elements would be pushed into Syrian territory, rather
than eliminating them. The goal is probably to allow
the coalition to justifying continuing its operations for
three to four years.
Another dangerous element lies in the fact that
coalition aircraft have targeted oil and gas wells and
facilities that belong to the Syrian people, resulting
in a serious loss of gas and oil, damaging the Syrian
economy and sources of revenue that could help the
Syrian State and people to rebuild.
Buddhist wisdom has it that there are three things
that cannot be hidden for long: the sun, the moon and
the truth. My delegation expects the United Nations
to play an effective role in ending the practices of
States that support terrorism. Those terrorists who
are killing, raping and selling women in slave markets
are Saudi. The person who is massacring journalists
and foreign nationals is British. The kidnappers of
Christian and other clerics are Chechen. The head of
the Khorasan organization is a Kuwaiti. The kidnapper
of peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon is Jordanian, while the one who paid him
ranson is Qatari. Mehdi Nemmouche, who attacked
the Jewish synagogue in Brussels, is French. Some of
the beheaders are Australian. While the financiers,
the inciters and the arms providers are Saudis and

14-6373933/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Qataris. The host, the smuggler and the trainer of
terrorist elements sent to Syrian territory is Turkish.
The supporter and ultimate beneficiary is Israeli.
Meanwhile, the suffering is being borne by Syrians,
Iraqis and Lebanese.
Paragraphs 14 and 31 of the latest report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
(see S/2014/815) mentions the presence of thousands
of foreign terrorists linked to Al-Qaida in Syria and
Iraq, coming from more than 80 countries from all
regions of the world. In paragraph 71, the Monitoring
Team points to the existence of terrorist training camps
in Libya and neighbouring countries, namely, Jordan,
Turkey and Saudia Arabia. The Government of Syria
has been drawing attention to this development for
years, without getting any response to our appeals from
the so-called international community.
The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
welcomed resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
calling for their strict implementation. The Government
has also expressed its willingness to cooperate at the
regional and international levels to combat terrorism.
Syria will continue to combat the terrrorism posed by
ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist groups,
which some like to call moderate opposition and
which have been carrying out massacres and barbaric
acts against Syrians, some of which were timed
simultaneously with meetings of the Security Council
so as to accuse and criticize the Government of Syria.
I have in my possession the confession of one of
the terrorists who carried out the Houla massacre on
25 May 2012, one day before a Council meeting on
Syria. We will transmit that confession to the Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). The confession has been translated and is
available to Council members.
Lastly, I should like to express my disagreement
with the unobjective opinion of the Permanent
Representative of France, namely, that ISIL has been
able to grow thanks to what he called the support of
the Syrian regime. This is a stunning contradiction
coming from the representative of a permanent Member
State of the Security Council. The French Permanent
Representative appears not to have heard or understood
what was said by his Australian colleague and Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) in his briefing. The Ambassador
of Australia said verbatim that ISIL as an organization

34/83

19/11/2014

evolved from Al-Qaida in Iraq and its origins were in
terrorist networks in Afghanistan.
Obviously, Al-Qaida, its affiliates and its splinter
groups have been able to grow thanks to the support of
Saudi Arabia for terrorism in Afghanistan. We all know
that the perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks were Saudis,
and those who commit massacres in my country today
are supported by Saudi Arabia and Qatar.
Seventy-two Saudi clerics launched a call to all
Muslims to go to Syria for jihad. If Saudi Arabia is
serious about combating terrorism, how could it allow
those disreputable people, who claim to speak in the
name of Islam, issue calls for jihad in Syria? The
question is aimed at the Saudi Ambassador, who has
just left.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin by thanking Australia and by expressing
my gratitude to Ms. Julie Bishop for presiding over
this meeting of the Security Council. I also thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan, in his capacity as Chair
of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. We are grateful
to Australia for organizing this meeting and for
contributing to the fight against terrorism. We believe
that to be the most significant and direct threat to the
security of people around the world. Terrorism has
repercussions for both international peace and for
security. I also thank the Ambassador of Lithuania in
her capacity as Chair of the Security Council Sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) for her considerable efforts. And I would like to
thank the members of the Security Council for having
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23 earlier
today.
Iraq today is on the front lines against terrorism.
Each day, that confrontation exacts a heavy toll. We
are extremely concerned at the fact that the terrorist
ranks continue to swell, now numbering approximately
15,000 individuals from more than 80 different
countries. Those individuals are active on the ground
in both Iraq and Syria.
Those statistics point to the existence in a number
of States of international networks that are very well
organized and meticulously coordinated. Those
networks facilitate the transfer of foreign terrorist
fighters across borders. We would therefore like to

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

invite the Security Council to take firm measures
against the organizations and States that authorize
such networks to exist within their territory and that
facilitate the transit of foreign terrorist fighters across
their borders. We would also like to invite the Security
Council to fully and strictly implement the provisions of
resolution 2178 (2014) and demand its implementation
by all States.
The terrorist acts perpetrated against Iraqi civilians
clearly illustrate the brutality and savagery of the
terrorist group called Daesh, or the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which has once again
shown that it is nothing more than a killing machine
that is willing to commit any type of crime against
those who do not share its extremist takfiri views.
Daesh killed more than 1,700 Iraqi civilians in June
at Camp Speicher; executed hundreds of Iraqi Sunni
tribespeople, including some from the Al-Bunemer
tribe; they also killed and displaced members of the
Christian and Yazidi minority groups and Shiite,
Turkmen, and Kurdish minorities. It also sold young
Yazidi girls into slavery. That provides ample proof that
that terrorist group, with its absolutist rhetoric and view
of the world, constitutes a threat to all of the religious
and ethnic segments of Iraqi society. That is why the
Iraqi armed forces, the Peshmerga, the police, popular
movements and heroic tribal factions have responded
to the call by the legitimate Iraqi Government and the
religious authorities to fight against the Daesh terrorist
entity.
Drying up the sources of terrorist financing is a
key step in the fight against terrorism. As long as ISIL
is able to sell oil, it will maintain its presence in Iraq.
We deplore the fact that Iraqi and non-Iraqi individuals
from countries in the region and even European States
have been involved in the illegal trade in oil, buying it
from Daesh. Iraq welcomes the Manama declaration,
adopted at the international meeting on combating
terrorist financing held recently in Bahrain.
Iraq would like to once again thank and recognize
the efforts made by all Member States to fight terrorism.
It reiterates that terrorism is an persistent global
phenomenon, and greater solidarity and coordination
are required in order to eradicate it. Iraq believes that
drying up the sources of terrorist financing is a crucial
element in that fight. Success in defeating terrorism
remains dependent on efforts by all Member States
to implement resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014),
adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter, and all

S/PV.7316

relevant resolutions that seek to address the root causes
of terrorism in order to eliminate it.
For its part, the Government of Iraq is engaging in
intensive diplomatic activities and efforts to mobilize
Arab, regional and international cooperation, as we
believe that coordination and cooperation with Arab
countries and countries of the region are essential
in order to implement the provisions of international
resolutions on counter-terrorism efforts. The Arab and
international actions undertaken to eliminate Daesh
and affiliated terrorist organizations in Iraq must
also combat that entity in Syria, given the nature of
terrorism, which knows no geographic borders, in order
to deny it the resources that it requires to reorganize
itself.
The report of the Monitoring Team (see S/2014/815)
submitted pursuant to resolution 2170 (2014) and its
recommendations are very important. We would like
to invite the Security Council to implement those
recommendations and to ensure that Member States
comply with them.
Finally, we would like to thank the international
coalition led by the United States, which includes over
40 Arab, regional and European countries, for their
efforts and their support to Iraq in its fight against
terrorism.
The President: As Minister Bishop said earlier, we
stand by Iraq in its fight against terrorism and violent
extremism, which is having such a serious impact in
Iraq. I thank the representative of Iraq for his very
important acknowledgment of the assistance that is
being provided by the international community to the
efforts in his country.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you and
your delegation, Madam President, for organizing this
open debate. In the face of new and evolving trends
in international terrorism. This meeting constitutes a
timely opportunity to exchange views on international
cooperation to combat terrorism and violent extremism.
Allow me to recall that there is no better forum in
which to consider this issue than the United Nations.
Terrorism is a global threat and must be treated as
such. Terrorism must be condemned in all its forms
and manifestations. The repudiation of terrorism is
enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a guiding
principle of our foreign policy. As a country with no

14-6373935/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

history of terrorist acts, Brazil has been attentive to
prevention, both domestically and at the regional and
subregional levels.
Prevention is always the best policy, including
in the context of fighting terrorism. We are facing a
multidimensional threat, which will be efficiently
countered only through an approach that takes into
consideration its underlying causes, in particular those
associated with protracted social, political, economic
and cultural exclusion.
As resolution 2178 (2014) acknowledges, repressive
measures cannot eliminate terrorism by themselves.
Border control, air and maritime security and law
enforcement may be the more visible features of our
common endeavour, but they can become ineffective or
even counterproductive if not coupled with efforts to
address structural factors conducive to terrorism. That
comprehensive perspective informs the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which we support.
In that context, I would also like to recall the
importance of the dialogue among religions and
cultures. Initiatives such as the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations can, by seeking to promote tolerance
and mutual respect, contribute to dispelling stereotypes
that tend to associate terrorism with specific cultures,
religions or ethnic groups. We must all be wary of
dangerous rhetoric and narratives that fuel xenophobia
and prejudice. I commend those Governments around
the world that have spoken out against such distortions.
International cooperation is an essential tool for
our strategy to fight terrorism. Many countries have
the political will to implement the pertinent resolutions
issued by the Security Council, but lack the capacity
to do so. As a member of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre Advisory Board, Brazil welcomes
the fact that capacity-building for Member States and
regional organizations will remain a priority for the
Centre.
Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014) and this debate on how to better implement
them can be considered significant strides in this
Organization’s efforts to counter terrorism. The
further development of international law would also
bring new impetus to our endeavour. Brazil strongly
supports the adoption of a comprehensive counterterrorism convention, on the understanding that it
would complement existing instruments, provide a
legal framework and direct our joint efforts in a more
coordinated way.
36/83

19/11/2014

We insist on the importance of ensuring that all
efforts to counter terrorism are consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations, international refugee and
humanitarian law and all other norms of international
law. The fight against terrorism must also be undertaken
with full respect for human rights, including the right
to privacy. The protection of that right is crucial in
safeguarding individuals against the abuse of power.
Without it there can be no true freedom of opinion and
expression, nor can there be effective democracy.
In that context, I would like to call attention to
the recently issued report of the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
contained in document A/69/397. In it, Special
Rapporteur Ben Emmerson examined the use of mass
digital surveillance for counter-terrorism purposes and
considered the implications of bulk access technology
for the right to privacy. Brazil reiterates that if counterterrorism measures are undertaken at the expense of
international law or respect for human rights, their
legitimacy will be compromised, rendering them
ineffective. As the Secretary-General recently noted,
“Efforts to prevent and combat terrorism will fail if
the international community creates more terrorists
than it defeats by its actions” (A/68/841, para. 112).
The most pressing root causes of violent extremism
and radicalization are of a political nature. Allow me
to quote King Abdullah of Jordan, who addressed this
Council immediately after the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014):
“We cannot underestimate the recruitment power
emanating from a sense of exclusion from the
enjoyment of basic human rights” (S/PV.7272, p. 11).
One of the side effects of our collective failure to deal
with ongoing crises in the Middle East, especially the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, is the dissemination of
extremism and radicalization. Overcoming terrorism
necessarily involves diplomatic efforts to bring
peace, founded on justice, to conflicts that directly or
indirectly fuel terrorist agendas.
I would also like to recall that the Security Council
has a duty to condemn terrorism and to prevent its
spread in a coherent and universal manner, that is,
wherever and whenever international terrorism strikes.
Let me reaffirm the Brazilian position, according
to which there are no excuses for terrorist acts. We

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

reiterate our commitment to a multidimensional
response to the challenges posed by terrorism and
remain convinced that cooperation and dialogue
within the United Nations will enhance our capacity
to counter this dangerous matter. As with many items
on our agenda, we are convinced that we will succeed
only if we join efforts on the basis of shared values and
enhanced multilateral cooperation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Finland, Iceland,
Norway, Sweden, and my own country, Denmark.
The Nordic countries stand firmly behind the
United Nations fight against terrorism. We welcome
today’s discussion and the Security Council’s focus on
countering violent extremism and terrorism through
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
International terrorism, such as that practised by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida
and their affiliates, is a serious threat to international
peace and security. The horrendous crimes committed
by those groups continue to cause immense human
suffering in Syria and Iraq. As underlined by many
previous speakers, other terrorist groups are causing
similar suffering in other countries and regions.
We need a broad approach in order to defeat ISIL and
other terrorist groups. We need to support an inclusive
political process in Iraq, and we need a strong political
engagement to solve the conflict in Syria. We must also
continue to contribute extensively with humanitarian
assistance to the millions in desperate need of food,
shelter and medical care. The Nordic countries fully
support the crucial work being carried out by United
Nations entities on the ground, not least by the United
Nations Special Representative, Staffan de Mistura.
Our common fight against terrorism must always
comply with international law, including human rights
law and, as applicable, humanitarian law. Terrorists’
use of social media as a means of communication is of
great concern and must be countered without infringing
on freedom of expression. Censorship is not a solution.
Young people from many different countries,
including the Nordic countries — some of them only
teenagers — are being attracted by ISIL’s effective
propaganda. The Nordic countries therefore strongly
support enhanced international cooperation to strengthen

S/PV.7316

existing border controls and information-sharing aimed
at stopping the recruitment and flow of foreign terrorist
fighters, as well as terrorist financing, into Syria and
Iraq. Relevant legislation needs to be adopted and fully
applied. Information must be shared effectively.
Likewise, we must address the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their country of origin or
traveling to other areas of conflict. We are convinced
that terrorism and the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters can be defeated only through deradicalization
efforts — that is, by addressing the complex and diverse
motivations for radicalization and violent extremism.
Preventing the spread of terrorism requires local
efforts on a global scale. The role of women as agents for
conflict prevention needs to be fully acknowledged and
further explored. Early preventive efforts are essential
to understand the the motivations for radicalization
and recruitment to terrorist organizations. Civil
society organizations, religious leaders, social workers
and teachers are examples of those who can make a
difference on the ground.
The narrative of terrorism is that of hate and
intolerance. Countering that narrative and creating
resilience is essential. The Nordic countries believe
that our strongest counter-narrative is a firm
commitment to democracy, human rights and equality.
We consider those values end goals in themselves, as
well as key drivers of economic development. They
are the cornerstones of inclusive societies in which no
one should feel marginalized or be attracted to violent
extremism.
The Nordic countries place great value on United
Nations efforts to facilitate information-sharing and
the exchange of best practices. We strongly support
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and other efforts to enhance the capacity of States to
counter terrorism within the rule of law. We support
United Nations efforts to explore additional ways to
counter violent extremism and terrorism.
Finally, on behalf of the Nordic countries, I wish
to express our appreciation to Australia for taking the
initiative to arrange this timely debate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I wish to thank the Australian
presidency for organizing today’s debate.

14-6373937/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Turkey is convinced that effective international
cooperation, with the United Nations playing a central
role, is key to addressing the threat posed by terrorism.
In that regard, the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy ‑ which was reviewed for the fourth
time in June ‑ presents, with its four pillars, a solid base
and valuable tools for building cooperation. Turkey has
actively participated in and contributed to the projects
of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre since
its inception, and we have stated our will to participate
in its new project on foreign terrorist fighters.
We also welcomed resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). Resolution 2178 (2014), which Turkey
co-sponsored, stresses the importance of international
cooperation in countering the threat of foreign terrorist
fighters.
Turkey is taking all possible necessary national,
regional and international steps to counter that threat.
In fact, in order to prevent foreign terrorist fighters
from reaching the conflict areas, we reinforced security
measures long before the adoption of those Council
resolutions. Those measures include enhanced passenger
screening and security checks in regions adjacent to the
Syrian border. As a result, 7,420 individuals from more
than 80 countries have been added to the no-entry list
and 1,050 individuals have been deported. Since 2012
measures at the border have been tightened because of
increased smuggling attempts from the Syrian side,
and during the first eight months of 2014, seizures of
smuggled oil in our country’s seven border provinces
amounted to 20 million litres.
Turkey is fully determined to fight this threat.
However, we cannot do it alone. The flow of foreign
terrorist fighters can be stopped only if partners
act in a spirit of cooperation. The battle should start
in the source countries. Al-Qaida and other violent
movements with similar ideology, such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra
Front, are a serious threat to Turkey. Turkey designated
ISIL a terrorist organization under its previous name
in 2005 and revised that designation to reflect its new
name in October 2013.
When we confront the risks and threats currently
presented by extremist groups, it is important not
to lose our focus on the root causes of the problem.
Unresolved conflicts have become fields of operation
for terrorist organizations, and they are a magnet for
foreign terrorist fighters. Moreover, the process of

38/83

19/11/2014

ISIL’s evolution from a terrorist group born out of the
ashes of Al-Qaida in Iraq into an insurgent terrorist
army controlling territory and sources in Syria and
Iraq became possible because, as we have long warned,
it benefitted from the political, social and economic
alienation of the masses.
Our long and painful struggle against terrorism has
taught us that this scourge cannot be defeated by hard
security measures alone. For sustainable solutions,
there is an absolute requirement to counter the spread of
the radical ideologies that lead individuals to embrace
violence and terrorism. In particular, any attempt to
affiliate terrorism with any religion or ethnic group is
utterly wrong and would in fact play into the terrorists’
hands. In Turkey, for example, Friday sermons are
harmonized by our religious affairs authority to stress
the message of peace in Islam. Our Head of Religious
Affairs has also denounced ISIL’s actions, emphasizing
that they cannot be explained by Islam. I should also
mention that the Turkish police, beyond their national
efforts, also run extensive training programmes on
counter-radicalization for countries in the Balkans, the
Caucasus and Central Asia.
In conclusion, I wish to underline once again that
coordinated international efforts underlining solidarity
and the leading role of the United Nations are of
paramount importance for effectively combating the
threat posed by terrorists. The international community
should work vigorously to create an atmosphere of
common understanding, based on shared values among
nations of different faiths.
The President: Australia wishes to recognize
Ambassador Çevik for his leadership in chairing the
important review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in June.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Hungary.
Mr. Kőrösi (Hungary): I would like to thank
Australia for convening this open debate on counterterrorism.
While I fully support the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union, I wish to
add a few observations in my national capacity.
To combat and uproot terrorism we must apply
a broad spectrum of economic, financial, social,
educational, administrative and legal measures — and
force, if necessary. Much has been said on those aspects

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

today. Right now, I would like to focus on some legal
elements, particularly concerning accountability
for crimes committed by terrorist actors. All who
commit criminal acts or acts of terror — or who
merely think about joining a terrorist group — must
be aware that the day when they have to give account
for the crimes committed will inevitably come. As
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon noted in 2013,
“Terrorism festers where conflicts are endemic and
where human rights, human dignity and human
life are not protected and impunity prevails”
(S/PV.6900, p. 2).
Based on that often-repeated observation, Hungary
appreciates the robust measures and comprehensive
approach taken by the Security Council in resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014). My country also commends
the Council’s stronger focus on accountability in
the fight against terrorism. Resolution 2170 (2014)
reinforces the concept that widespread or systematic
attacks directed against any civilian populations
because of their ethnic or political background, religion
or belief may constitute a crime against humanity, and
it emphasizes the importance of accountability. It also
urges all States to cooperate and bring to justice those
who perpetrate, organize or sponsor terrorist acts of
any kind.
Those two resolutions have already become
important reference points and a mobilizing force for
accountability, as we have seen in the recommendations
contained in the newly published report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic on the activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). However,
the Commission of Inquiry seems to be convinced
that besides domestic action and regional international
cooperation, as outlined in two resolutions,
international accountability mechanisms, including the
International Criminal Court, should also be engaged.
That buttresses the requests that the Council has already
heard on the need to act decisively when accountability
is in jeopardy and, as the Secretary-General has put it,
impunity prevails.
Furthermore, we have no reason to doubt that the
fact-finding mission requested by the Human Rights
Council in its resolution S-22/1 will find alarming
circumstances related to ISIL activities in Iraq. Iraq
and the international community will therefore have to
ensure ISIL’s accountability for war crimes and crimes

S/PV.7316

against humanity committed against, in particular,
women, children and religious and ethnic minorities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s debate.
Germany, like so many others, is deeply concerned
about the threat that terrorism and violent extremism pose
to our societies. Germany is therefore strongly engaged
in countering that threat both abroad and at home. We
contribute to support for the Iraqi Government as well
as the people affected by the crises in Iraq and Syria.
That includes immediate responses to the humanitarian
crises and structural support to neighbouring countries
that are hosting Syrian refugees, to help prevent further
destabilization of the region. Those efforts were at the
heart of the conference on the Syrian refugee situation
held in Berlin on 28 October.
An inclusive political process in Syria is a
prerequisite for successfully combating the so-called
Islamic State, and we therefore also support ongoing
United Nations efforts for a peaceful resolution of
the conflict. Another important aspect is our military
assistance in the fight against the Islamic State and its
associates, following the Iraqi Government’s request
for international support.
I share the threat assessment presented in the
Secretary-General’s statement as well as in the concept
note for today’s debate (S/2014/787, annex). I would
therefore like to elaborate on some practical measures
that Germany has taken to counter terrorism.
In Germany we currently have Salafist followers,
numbering more than 6,000 individuals, who promote a
society governed by a fundamentalist interpretation of
Islamic rules. Approximately 450 radicalized German
Islamists have travelled to Iraq and Syria, posing a threat
there as well as on their possible return to Germany.
Whenever operable information is available in time,
our existing legal framework allows us to prevent the
travel and transit of potential foreign terrorist fighters.
We are presently reviewing our national legislation
with regard to resolution 2178 (2014).
Security organs such as border police and lawenforcement authorities work hand in hand within
our joint counter-terrorism centre. Multilateral and
bilateral cooperation at the ministerial and agency

14-6373939/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

level, including with the European Police Office,
complements this concept.
Overcoming the factors underlying violent
extremism is a fundamental and long-term challenge
for all of our societies. Prevention is of the utmost
importance, in particular with regard to the young
generation. De-radicalization measures need to
reintegrate those who have taken on extremist views.
Security organs alone cannot accomplish this. Civilsociety actors and social institutions, especially those at
the local level, are key in contributing to this endeavour.
Women have an important role to play.
Let me cite a few measures that we have put into
practice.
Families that fear that one of their members is about
to travel to a crisis region and join a terrorist movement
can seek counselling and support from a help desk.
Prison environments are occasionally conducive to
further radicalization. We have addressed this with a
project that actively approaches prisoners at risk at an
early stage of their detention.
Extremist views have to be delegitimized wherever
they appear: in prisons, on the Internet, but also in
schools and sport clubs. Credible counter-narratives
must be developed. Alliances of civil-society actors,
including representatives of Muslim communities, have
the best chances of success.
The United Nations is at the core of coordinating
the international community’s response to the threat of
terrorism and its efforts to counter violent extremism.
An example is the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre. The Secretary-General recently presented his
vision for transforming the Centre into a centre of
excellence. We welcome and commend the Centre’s
commitment to operating in a complementary,
interlinked and supportive fashion with the
34 institutions that are combined in the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force.
In conclusion, aligning and focusing our capacities
is key in achieving a sustainable result in the fight
against terrorism and in drying up its root causes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

40/83

19/11/2014

I would like to express my gratitude to you, Madam
President, for holding this open debate and preparing
the concept note (see S/2014/787, annex), and I also
thank the Secretariat for its briefing. NAM welcomes
any opportunity to share its views when the Council is
working to prepare a resolution on this important issue.
The Non-Aligned Movement unequivocally
condemns terrorism as criminal and rejects it in all its
forms and manifestations, as well as all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism wherever, by whomever
and against whomsoever committed, including those
in which States are directly or indirectly involved,
which are unjustifiable whatever the considerations
or factors that may be invoked to justify them. In that
context, NAM members reaffirm their support for the
provisions contained in General Assembly resolution
46/51, of 9 December 1991, and other relevant United
Nations resolutions.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that terrorist
acts constitute a flagrant violation of international law,
including international humanitarian and human rights
law, in particular the right to life, leading to the lack
of the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms of peoples. Such acts endanger the territorial
integrity and stability of States as well as national,
regional and international security, destabilize
legitimately constituted Governments or the prevailing
constitutional order and political unity of States, affect
the stability of nations and the very basis of societies,
create adverse consequences for economic and social
development, and cause the destruction of the physical
and economic infrastructure of States.
Terrorism should not be equated with the legitimate
struggle of peoples under colonial or alien domination
and foreign occupation, for self-determination and
national liberation. The brutalization of peoples
remaining under foreign occupation should continue to
be denounced as the gravest form of terrorism, and the
use of State power for the suppression of and violence
against peoples struggling against foreign occupation in
exercising their inalienable right to self-determination
should continue to be condemned.
Furthermore, terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization
or ethnic group, and these attributions should not be
used to justify terrorism or counter-terrorism measures
that include, inter alia, profiling terror suspects or
intrusions into individual privacy.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7316

The Movement expresses grave concern over the
acute and growing threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters, namely, individuals who travel to a State
other than their State of residence or nationality for the
purpose of the perpetration, planning or preparation
of, or participation in, terrorist acts, or providing or
receiving terrorist training, including in connection
with armed conflict.

terrorism. It urges all States, consistent with the United
Nations Charter and in fulfilling their obligations
under international law, to ensure that neither refugee
status nor any other legal status is abused by the
perpetrators, organizers or facilitators of terrorist acts,
and that claims of political motivation by them are not
recognized as grounds for refusing requests for their
extradition.

It emphasizes the need for States to address this
issue, including by implementation of their international
obligations, and underlines the importance of United
Nations capacity-building and facilitation of capacitybuilding in accordance with existing mandates to assist
States, including those in the most affected regions,
upon their request.

The Movement also calls upon all States to respect
all human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, and to reaffirm their commitment
in this respect to prevent human rights violations in
keeping with the rule of law and their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law, and in accordance with the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. We also call upon the
Security Council sanctions committees to further
streamline their listing and delisting procedures to
address the concerns of due process and transparency.

Conscious of the need to take speedy and effective
measures to eliminate international terrorism, the
Movement urges all States, consistent with the United
Nations Charter, to fulfil their obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law
in combating terrorism, including by prosecuting
or, where appropriate, extraditing the perpetrators
of terrorist acts; by preventing the organization,
instigation or financing of terrorist acts against other
States from within or outside their territories or by
organizations based on their territories; by refraining
from organizing, instigating, assisting, financing or
participating in terrorist acts on the territories of other
States; by refraining from encouraging activities within
their territories directed towards the commission of
such acts; by refraining from allowing the use of their
territories for planning or training for, or the financing
of, such acts; and by refraining from supplying arms or
other weapons that could be used for terrorist acts in
other States.
The Non-Aligned Movement rejects any actions or
measures and the use or threat of use of force, imposed
or threatened to be imposed by any State against any
NAM country under the pretext of combating terrorism
or to pursue its political aims, including by directly or
indirectly categorizing them as terrorism-sponsoringStates. It totally rejects the unilateral preparation of lists
accusing States of allegedly supporting terrorism, which
are inconsistent with international law and constitute a
form of psychological and political terrorism.
The Non-Aligned Movement calls upon all States
to condemn any form of, and refrain from extending
political, diplomatic, moral or material support to,

NAM rejects any actions and measures, and the
use or threat of use of force, in particular by armed
forces, that violate the United Nations Charter and
international law, especially the relevant international
conventions, imposed or threatened to be imposed by
any State against any non-aligned country under the
pretext of combating terrorism or to pursue its political
aims, including by directly or indirectly categorizing
them as terrorism-sponsoring-States.
The Movement reaffirms the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and Member States’
primary responsibility to implement it, welcomes the
Strategy’s reviews and calls for its transparent and
comprehensive implementation.
The Non-Aligned Movement strongly condemns
the criminal incidents of hostage-taking that result
in demands by terrorist groups for ransom and/or
other political concessions and calls upon all States
to cooperate actively in order to address this issue,
including its legal aspects.
The Non-Aligned Movement also encourages all
States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying
or acceding to the 13 international instruments
related to combating terrorism. We also call upon all
States to observe and implement the provisions of
all international instruments as well as regional and
bilateral instruments related to terrorism to which they
are party.

14-6373941/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for
an international summit conference under the auspices
of the United Nations to formulate a joint organized
response of the international community to terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, including identifying
its root causes.
We further reiterate the importance of the
conclusion of the comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, noting the negotiations in Ad
Hoc Committee established by General Assembly
resolution 51/210, of 17 December 1996, for elaboration
of the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism and the continuing efforts to that end. We
call upon all States to cooperate in resolving that
outstanding issue.
I would now like to add a few words in my national
capacity.
As we gather here today, there is a consensus in the
Council and across the United Nations on the threat that
the Takfiri terrorist groups, especially the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), pose to the security of
the Middle East and North Africa and other parts of the
world. However, we believe that any position against
the threat should be coupled with action. Slogans by
themselves will not serve the purpose. All countries,
especially those surrounding the areas controlled by
ISIL, should mean what they say and act resolutely
to stop the atrocious acts that that group commits and
mobilize in a way to destroy it.
It is very unfortunate that a few Governments in the
region have yet to take the threat seriously. They have
yet to manage to control their borders and prevent the
movement of ISIL recruits or stop the flow of financial
aid from their territories to that criminal group. To do
the job and help destroy the Takfiri terrorists, it is also
necessary to do away with the thinking and propaganda
machine underlying the activities of the group.
On that front, too, we do not see sufficient efforts
on the part of those who bear the main responsibility for
what ISIL and other similar groups have done. To the
contrary, we have witnessed — as was the case earlier
in this debate — positions talen and efforts made to
single out a number of groups that have been part of the
current fight against the Takfiri terrorist groups. That
kind of approach can only stoke the fire of sectarianism
and deflect the attention from the main threat that is
menacing the region and beyond.

42/83

19/11/2014

During the past few years, my Government has been
doing everything in its power to fight extremist groups
in the region. We have, first of all, secured our borders
to prevent any movement to or from the areas controlled
by those groups. In many cases, Iranian officials have
stopped and apprehended individuals who have tried
to use Iranian territory to cross over or send material
assistance to terrorists. We will continue our resolute
fight in that regard and hope that the Security Council
will do everything in its power to help stop this threat.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important debate. I would
also like to express my appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing and to the Chairs of the counterterrorism committees for their briefings this morning.
Yesterday. the citizens of Israel woke up to learn
that another horrifying terror attack had taken place
in Jerusalem. Two Palestinian terrorists stormed a
synagogue, attacked the Jewish worshippers and
barbarically murdered five people and injured many
others. Three victims were dual Israeli-American
citizens and the fourth was Israeli and British. The
attack reminded us that terrorism does not distinguish
between nationalities. Terrorism is on Israel’s doorstep,
but if nations continue to look the other way, terrorism
will soon be on their doorsteps also.
In the past 14 years, the rate of global terrorist attacks
has increased fivefold. I want to repeat that — there
are five times more terrorist attacks today than there
were 14 years ago. The international community can
no longer afford to be indifferent. Radical extremism
is on the rise and we are losing ground. In order to
defeat terrorism, we must attack its roots, namely,
its ideology, its sponsors and the evolving ways in
which terrorist groups recruit, operate and grow.
We cannot defeat terrorism unless we confront the
violent ideology of incitement. People do not become
terrorists in a vacuum. In the Middle East, hate-fuelled
incitement fills schools, mosques and the media. That
is particularly evident in Palestinian society.
In the past month, there have been six terror
attacks in Israel, in which 11 people have been killed
and dozens more injured. Every one of those attacks
has come in the wake of inflammatory statements made
by the Palestinian leadership, which celebrates attacks,
glorifies murderers and publishes cartoons encouraging

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

more terror attacks. Countering incitement is one of the
most effective counter-terrorism tools at our disposal.
We must promote education that teaches peace instead
of hate and tolerance instead of violence.
We cannot defeat terrorism while States continue
to sponsor and harbour terrorist groups. Iran is
terrorism’s primary sponsor, financier and trainer. Its
proxies — Hizbullah and Hamas — have dispatched
hundreds of suicide bombers, planted thousands
of bombs and fired tens of thousands of rockets at
civilians. Iran’s fingerprints can be found on terror
attacks from Argentina to Bulgaria and from Thailand
to India. In Syria, Iran has sent Shiite fighters from
Lebanon and Iraq to fight alongside the brutal Assad
regime. Directing this network is Qassem Suleimani,
the chief of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard’s Quds
Force.
Also in our region, Qatar is lending financial aid
and weapons to countless terrorist groups and providing
a base for top terrorist leaders. In recent years, the
Sheikhs of Doha have funnelled hundreds of millions
of dollars to Hamas in Gaza. Every one of Hamas’
rockets and terror tunnels might as well have had a sign
that read: “Made possible through a kind donation from
the Amir of Qatar”.
We cannot defeat terrorism unless our counterterrorism efforts evolve to meet the changing threat. In
recent years a new phenomenon has emerged in which
terrorist groups are overrunning nations and taking
control of vast areas of territory. Hamas, for example,
violently expelled its political opponents before taking
control of the Gaza Strip. Hizbullah has taken root in
southern Lebanon and amassed over 100,000 weapons
stored in densely populated civilian neighbourhoods.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) has
gained control of tens of thousands of square miles of
Syria and Iraq. By taking over vast oil fields, the terrorist
group has turned itself into a multimillion-dollar
enterprise and uses its newfound wealth to purchase
weapons and recruit new fighters. Terrorist groups
like ISIS are attracting jihadists from all over the
Middle East and as far away as Europe, Asia and the
United States. Many of those foreign fighters are now
returning home equipped with radical ideologies,
military expertise and dangerous aspirations.
Israel welcomes the adoption of resolution 2178
(2014), which addresses the threat of foreign fighters,
and resolution 2170 (2014), which reinforces the need

S/PV.7316

to curtail the financing of terrorism. But that is just the
first step. We must match our intentions on paper with
tangible actions on the ground, beginning by countering
the evolving threat of terrorism with creativity and
flexibility. Every day Israel uses its counter-terrorism
expertise to keep its citizens safe. Despite the threats
that surround us, we will never lose sight of what we are
fighting for — freedom, tolerance and the rule of law.
The struggle that we face today is the same struggle
that the rest of the civilized world will face tomorrow.
Every nation has a stake in the outcome.
As we near the end of 2014, I think about all the
lives torn apart by terrorism. Tears and sorrow have
touched every part of the world. As we approach the
new year, let us commit to standing together and
prevailing together so that 2015 will be a more peaceful
year for all people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin my statement by thanking the Government
of Australia for holding this meeting on an important
issue of concern to all States, at a time when terrorist
activities are becoming more diverse, interlinked and
widespread in an unprecedented manner. No country
is immune to the threat posed by criminal groups
committing acts of terrorism. It is therefore incumbent
upon all to exert the utmost effort in the fight against
terrorism, using all available means and at all levels,
including national, regional and international.
Egypt was one of the first countries to warn about
the threat of terrorism against international peace and
security, as it had been subjected to a wave of terrorism
in the early 1980s that was brought under control.
Since 1986, Egypt has called for the convening of an
international conference on the fight against terrorism,
with a view to establishing and strengthening
international cooperation to track and fight terrorist
cells and their associates everywhere and to track their
sources of financing at the international level.
At the national level, Egypt has carried out
effective, concrete actions in the fight against terrorism,
including reforming the Egyptian penal code, which
now includes articles on the definition of terrorism and
the struggle against it, including the criminalization of
all acts related to terrorism such as incitement or the
financing of terrorist activities. Furthermore, Egypt
is committed to implementing the relevant Security

14-6373943/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Council resolutions and its relevant international
obligations.
Given our conviction that the fight against
terrorism should not be limited to security, Al-Azhar
Al-Sharif University, with its enlightened, scientific
approach, is working to refute terrorism and radical
ideas, as well as deviant edicts that are being forcibly
linked to benevolent Islam. Al-Azhar dispatches
scientists, including a high-level religious and scientific
delegation, to many countries in West Africa, to provide
relevant connotations with thorough explanations,
thereby refuting extremist ideology.
In our view, the United Nations is the appropriate
forum to coordinate and strengthen international efforts
to fight terrorism and stand up to radical extremism.
Such efforts are needed to assist countries in building
capacities to fight terrorism and provide the necessary
means and know-how, including training and best
practices and information and data exchange.
We call upon the various departments of the
Secretariat to strengthen cooperation with Member
States in this field and provide regular briefings on
its activities in the fight against terrorism. In that
respect, it is important to listen to the views of Member
States, to avoid working in isolation from the efforts
of others. With a view to the appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General against
terrorism, radicalization and extremism, Egypt believes
that intensive consultations should be conducted among
Member States on the tasks to be mandated to such a
position.
If feasible, we believe that mandate should be
confined to facing or fighting extreme radicalism,
without being linked to any religion, culture or ethnic
group. We believe that any such link is itself a possible
mental incitement to terrorism. We also stress that
our understanding of radical extremism includes
incitement to violence against foreigners, including
Muslim minorities, which have been subjected to an
unprecedented wave of intolerance and hatred.
Daesh and Al-Nusra Front are now controlling vast
areas in Iraq and Syria. Their influence has spread
to other areas via other terrorist groups that have
supported or acceded to them. In spite of the adoption
by the Council of many resolutions, Egypt believes that
in the fight against terrorism, we must adopt a holistic
approach that addresses the root causes of terrorism.
Our efforts and those of the Council must not be

44/83

19/11/2014

limited to fighting the threats arising from those two
organizations alone, but to strengthening our efforts to
fight terrorism wherever it may exist, since all terrorist
organizations espouse the same violent and deviant
ideology.
A quick glance at the regional scene in the Middle
East — whether in Libya, Yemen, the Sahel or the Horn
of Africa — is enough for one to realize the gravity of
the danger to the international community as a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The threat that we face from international terrorism
is increasingly diverse, diffuse and unpredictable.
The resilience of terrorist groups and their ability
to regenerate and take on new forms cannot be
underestimated. No better example exists than the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and its
predecessor organizations: in 2010 most of the top
leaders had been killed or captured. Now, as others have
already said, ISIL controls great swathes of Iraq and
Syria, has huge assets at its disposal and is attempting
to extend its influence to South Asia, North Africa
and elsewhere. The threat emanating from Al-Qaida,
including in the form of Jabhat Al-Nusra and other
Al-Qaida affiliates, also remains real and potent.
Combating terrorism and violent extremism
requires a long-term, comprehensive approach by the
whole international community. The United Nations
has a central role to play in coordinating international
efforts and ensuring a coherent response, and the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy provides
the essential structure for such work.
The European Union has very close cooperation
with the United Nations, and the recent EU-United
Nations counter-terrorism political dialogue was again
an opportunity to discuss counter-terrorism issues and
ways to build upon our already strong cooperation.
The EU also recently co-hosted in Brussels, with the
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, a conference
on assisting the counter-terrorism capacity-building
work of the United Nations counter-terrorism regional
centres, in order to tackle more effectively foreign
terrorist fighters and to counter violent extremism and
radicalization.
The European Union and its member States
welcome the adoption of resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). While the international counter-terrorism
framework is robust and appropriate to the challenge,
these recent resolutions have helped sharpen its focus
in some important areas. In that context, we strongly
support action under resolution 2170 (2014) to tackle
the sources of ISIL’s wealth and weapons.
We also welcome the report and recommendations
of the Monitoring Team of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
(see S/2014/815), in particular on further listing key
individuals and entities and building capacity in affected
countries to ensure the effective implementation of
resolution 2170 (2014). The European Union and its
member States are already active in East Africa on work
to counter the financing of terrorism and stand ready to
support such capacity-building efforts elsewhere.
Within the European Union, in June 2013, we
introduced a range of measures that include improved
checks at external borders under the existing legal
framework and the intensification of our efforts to
dissuade, detect and disrupt suspicious travel. We are
now considering a legal framework to investigate and
prosecute foreign fighters. We would be happy to share
our experiences with others and are eager to learn from
others’ experiences. In that context, let me also mention
that the European Union will host in Brussels, at the
end of this month, a conference on foreign fighters,
with regional experts.
The Union and its member States strongly support
action under resolution 2178 (2014), including efforts
to bolster international action to counter violent
extremism.
As the top tier of terrorists is removed or brought
to justice, it is increasingly important that we take
action to ensure that they are not replaced by new
recruits — younger, more technically sophisticated and
more lethal.
Countering violent extremism is often a neglected
part of our collective counter-terrorism work. But it

S/PV.7316

will remain a focus of EU efforts, as we believe it is
a prerequisite to sustainably tackling the scourge of
terrorism.
Within the European Union, a network has been
established that by now includes approximately 1,000
practitioners dealing with prevention of radicalization
to violent extremism and terrorism. The network has
a special work stream dedicated to issues pertaining
to foreign fighters, and a working group dealing with
online radicalization and counter-narratives. In 2014,
it published a collection of best practices providing
contact details for concrete projects. In 2015, the
network will be integrated into the future network
centre of excellence. In support of those efforts, the
European Union recently adopted a revised strategy
to combat radicalization and recruitment to terrorism.
We have opened a dialogue with Internet companies
to confront online radicalization, and agreed on joint
training for law enforcement, industry and civil society.
We are also developing a package of measures to
help build the capacity of third countries most affected
by the terrorist threat. We are supporting the Nigerian
authorities in their fight against terrorism. We recently
launched a project on countering violent extremism
in East Africa, and an aligned one in South Asia. We
are developing a programme of countering violent
extremist-related activities focused on Syria, Iraq and
countries in the Middle East and North Africa affected
by the Syria crisis and ISIL’s activities. We are also
launching a regional initiative on countering violent
extremism in the Sahel and the Maghreb. We are
looking to strengthen the legal regime against foreign
fighters in Middle East and North Africa countries.
Critically, counter terrorism cannot be seen
in isolation from other work. We are working to
mainstream counter-terrorism and countering violent
extremism work into all appropriate EU activities. We
call on the United Nations to ensure that measures to
prevent terrorism and extremism are integrated fully
across its various activities. The European Union also
supports the calls made today to improve the role of
the United Nations. In that context, I would like to
highlight the United Nations work on the ground,
such as through the efforts of Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General De Mistura, whom the European
Union supports. At the same time, the European Union
also believes that the United Nations has the potential
to do more on countering extremism by harnessing its
internal capacity to ensure consistency and coherence

14-6373945/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of effort. The European Union and its member States
look forward to further steps in that regard.
Let me end by saying that it is our common
responsibility to ensure that the rule of law and respect
for international law, in particular human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law, be essential components
of the fight against terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to express my sincere appreciation for the President’s
leadership in convening today’s open debate. I am
also grateful to Secretary-General Ban-ki Moon
and the Chairs of the Council’s counter-terrorismrelated committees for their respective comprehensive
briefings.
We are all concerned about the fact that terrorism
has established an international network and has
expanded worldwide. The threat of terrorism is different
from that posed by ethnic or religious conflicts. The
recent serious threats posed by the so-called Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant has clearly shown that. It
is a serious thereat with global impact, and effective
measures mandated by the United Nations are therefore
necessary — not only in Iraq and Syria: we are now
facing widely expanding threats in Africa. We are
shocked that Boko Haram abducted more than 200
schoolgirls in April. That is not a problem that Japan
deems irrelevant. The hostage-taking in Amenas,
Algeria, in January of last year was followed by the
deaths of 10 Japanese people. I devoted myself to that
issue in my previous position as Director-General for
African Affairs at Japan’s Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
I also took up that issue as one of the major topics when
we organized the Fifth Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD-V), in June last year.
There is a shared view in the TICAD process
that when people, especially the younger generation,
are frustrated about extreme poverty and youth
unemployment, terrorism expands. Needless to say,
fighting terrorism on the front lines is important.
However, it is also important to address the socalled root causes. By achieving social and economic
development we can bring hope to people in various
regions and create a foundation that does not tolerate
terrorism. Advancing social and economic development
was the idea behind TICAD-V. At the conference, Prime
Minister Abe announced $1 billion for the development

46/83

19/11/2014

and stability of the Sahel, as well as assistance for
enhancing the capacity of the region to engage in
counter-terrorism.
Let me summarize briefly Japan’s recent
international undertakings in the field of counterterrorism.
First, we believe that regional cooperation is
important to cope with the challenges more effectively
and in a more practical manner. As part of the assistance
programmes announced at TICAD-V, Japan hosted a
workshop last week on criminal justice cooperation for
counter-terrorism among the Sahel States and States in
North Africa. Several States in the region participated.
We hope the meeting served to promote regional
cooperation.
Secondly, based on the idea that regional stability
and social and economic development are effective
in addressing the root causes in fighting terrorism,
Japan has provided a wide range of assistance to
several regions, in addition to what was announced at
TICAD-V. As a recent example, in September, Japan
decided to extend $22 million in emergency grant aid to
Iraq and Lebanon in order to provide emergency shelter
and relief items for Iraqi internally displaced persons
and Syrian refugees affected by the offensive of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
It goes without saying that we are in close
cooperation on counter-terrorism with States in Asia,
especially the States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). That is reflected
in the ASEAN-Japan joint declaration for cooperation
to combat international terrorism and transnational
crime, adopted last week in Naypyidaw, Myanmar.
Since Japan established the ASEAN-Japan CounterTerrorism Dialogue in 2006, we have held annual
dialogues — including the ninth meeting in May in
Singapore. Japan believes such continuous efforts
are key. It makes it easier for us to have more candid
exchange of views and ideas. That makes it easier for us
to come up with more effective and practical measures
on counter-terrorism, building on past good practices.
Furthermore, I would like to underline the fact that
the East Asia Summit also released an independent
statement last week that reiterates our commitment
to work with the international community to fight
extremism, radicalism and terrorism.
With regard to resolution 2178 (2014), adopted in
September, more than 100 Member States sponsored

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the resolution, including Japan, demonstrating the
solidarity of the international community on this
issue. Member States should take appropriate action
to implement the measures set out in the resolution in
order to respond effectively to threats, especially the
issue of foreign terrorist fighters. Various measures are
indispensible, including on border control, countering
violent extremism and terrorist financing, and
international cooperation.
I hope that the members of the international
community will reaffirm its determination to fight
terrorism by sharing their wisdom and expertise with
one another, so as to strengthen measures against
international terrorism.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan’s
position in fighting resolutely against international
terrorism. Japan, as a responsible Member of the United
Nations, will play an active role in making every effort
to fight terrorism hand in hand with the international
community.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our gratitude for the
holding of this very important meeting. We would also
like to welcome the participation of Her Excellency
Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia, and we would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing. We would also like to thank
His Excellency Mr. Gary Quinlan, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) and resolution 1989 (2011), concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities. We
also wish to thank Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaitė,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counterterrorism.
We would like to express our support for the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23) adopted today.
The President’s concept note (S/2014/787, annex)
certainly sheds light on the challenges the international
community faces in fighting terrorism as well as the
momentous dangers the world faces in dealing with the
phenomenon of terrorism. In spite of the rather sombre
picture of the situation of terrorism and terrorists’ efforts
to increase fear in societies by drawing inspiration
from violent ideologies, we need to remain optimistic

S/PV.7316

in coping with this challenge. Our determination and
cooperation are being sorely tested today. Achieving
our common goal will depend on pooling our efforts in
all spheres in order to cope with terrorist organizations.
In line with the policy adopted by my country in
cooperation with the international community to cope
with this common threat, we took part in the Security
Council meeting on this topic held on 24 September
(see S/PV.7272). We were among the countries that
supported resolution 2178 (2014). Qatar reiterated its
commitment to confront terrorism at all levels and to
continue its effective cooperation in order to combat
terrorism. We will do everything within our power
to achieve that goal. In line with that commitment,
Qatar has adopted a number of measures, including
the enactment of several laws to crimminalize the use
of electronic means in the service of terrorism. We
have been monitoring charity organizations so that
they are not used for terrorist operations. We have
also focused on international cooperation to combat
money-laundering by terrorist organizations, which is
an important area to scrutinize.
In December 2013, we also organized a joint
meeting of experts in order to implement a strategy to
combat the financing of terrorism; 120 experts from
46 States took part, 14 from regional and international
organizations. We also organized a joint seminar in
Doha to develop financial capacity in the Middle East,
North African and the Eurasian regions. With regard
to implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, Qatar has been cooperating with
various United Nations agencies in different areas. In
January 2013, under the auspices of United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and
the Centre on Global Counter-terrorism Cooperation,
we held a conference in Doha on preventing the use
of non-profit organizations to finance terrorism. We
have worked with CTED to strengthen national legal
institutions to cope with such challenges by training
legal experts and investigators to establish a network for
legal cooperation to stand up to terrorism, strengthen
the international campaign to combat terrorism and
promote the rule of law at the national and international
levels.
The increasing number of transnational terrorist
groups and their use of intimidation and committing
massacres run counter to human conscience and to
every religion.

14-6373947/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We need to marshall political will and take into
account Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2170 (2014), in order to put an end to
anything that poses a threat to international peace and
security. The terrorism threat is substantial today, and
it has an impact on the international community. It is
impossible to deal with that threat in the absence of a
strategy that takes into account the deep-rooted causes
of terrorism, whether that has to do with the actions
of terrorist groups or the kind of terrorism carried
out by certain regimes. Terrorism serves as merely
an argument for certain groups. The fact that certain
regimes characterize terrorism as a threat becomes
a justification for them to carry out their own acts of
terrorism.
Our cooperation on terrorism requires more
institutional work to deal with it. We need to draw up
plans to fight terrorism in the short, medium and long
terms. We also need to raise awareness and to focus
on its deep-rooted causes and the reasons that young
people are recruited by terrorist organizations. We
need to prevent all policies that aim to violate human
rights, as well as to counter any unjust policies based
on intimidation and marginalization. Strengthening
international cooperation is a crucial element in putting
an end to the threat of terrorism. Terrorist groups
have taken advantage of the lack of cooperation at
the international level, which has made it possible for
them to take control of large regions. Their capacities
have strengthened, and they take advantage of a lack of
stability and of political and security vacuums.
Any attempt to link terrorism to a civilization,
nationality or group will be used as an argument by
terrorists to incite terrorism and justify their actions.
Experience shows that terrorism is not linked to any
single nationality or religion.
We have a great responsibility on our shoulders,
which requires that we adopt resolute steps — and
quickly — in order to stand up to terrorists. We need to
prosecute all those who encourage terrorism. We reject
terrorism and extremism. We will fulfil our obligations
in implementing resolution 2178 (2014) and other
relevant resolutions. We will support all international
efforts aimed at combating terrorism and putting an
end to its sources of funding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is my delegation’s first time to address the
48/83

19/11/2014

Security Council during Australia’s presidency, let me
wish you, Madam President, and your delegation every
success and congratulate you on your presidency. I
believe that the statement by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs this morning set the pace for our reflection on
the challenge that terrorism represents today for all of us.
We are grateful for the concept note (S/2014/787, annex)
provided to the Council, which also serves as a point of
reference.
Colombia rejects and condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations and reaffirms that it is not
justified under any circumstances. We have increasingly
witnessed the brutality of those who resort to terrorism
as a means to achieve their ends. Our response must be
clear and unanimous, as has been reflected in all of the
statements made today. There are no circumstances or
conditions that justify such acts.
Colombia is a country that has been a victim of
terrorism, as the Council well knows, and has suffered
its consequences. We are therefore committed to
combating it, and we express our full solidarity with its
victims. It is clear that terrorism is a global threat that
manifests itself in different ways in different regions of
the world and does not spare anyone. That requires us
to take measures in line with the principles shared by
all humankind.
As recently stated by the Secretary-General, we
must respond to terrorism by collectively strengthening
all our efforts and policies in the fight against terrorism
and ensuring that they are consistent with international
human rights norms and humanitarian law, and that all
the measures we undertake are in line with the goals,
values and universal principles of the United Nations.
In Colombia’s view, it is vital that we adopt a
sustained and comprehensive approach that includes
reobust measures to address the conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism, such as a lack of social and
economic development, as highlighted this morning. For
military force alone will never be enough to vanquish
terrorism, and events have proven repeatedly that we
cannot associate terrorism with a single country, region,
religion, culture or set of specific social conditions.
Addressing the growing phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters requires that we take multilateral
measures agreed to on the basis of consensus, in an
inclusive and participatory manner, strengthen national
legal frameworks, identify best practices and share
successful experiences for strengthening international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism.
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Regarding the funding of such groups, much
emphasis has been placed on the payment of ransoms
for kidnapping. In considering that question, Colombia
believes it is important to be clear on the fact that the
kidnapping victim also faces the imminent risk of losing
their life, in addition to having lost, at least temporarily,
their freedom. Their right to life and freedom are
internationally recognized values and rights that must
be respected and protected. Therefore, in dealing with
kidnapping, the State and the international community
should take measures that do not make criminals out of
the victim or those trying to defend them.
Based on that firm commitment, we must
develop and strengthen national laws and institutions
relating to financial information and intelligence, the
establishment of effective mechanisms for information
sharing and the development of effective and efficient
border controls.
One of Colombia’s biggest concerns is the diversion
of arms to non-State armed groups and its harmful
impact on the global fight against terrorism. The arms
from the trade in and illicit transfer of weapons not
only have negative impacts on the human rights of
populations, exacerbate conflicts and undermine the
stability and security of States, but have a significant
connection with terrorism.
In that regard, as has also been stated here, the
adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty represented an
important step forward. Its entry into force this
December will be important for all of us, and its full
implementation will contribute to the activities aimed
at preventing and eliminating terrorism.
Colombia is a State party to most international
instruments to combat terrorism and believes that their
full implementation is a sine qua non for achieving
the goals we have set for ourselves as an international
community. However, our actions will not be entirely
successful if we lack a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, since it is through such an
instrument that we will be able to complement other
existing instruments, resolve remaining gaps and
strengthen the international legally binding framework
to combat this crime. The Council can always rely on
my country’s support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): The fight
against international terrorism demands a long-

S/PV.7316

term comprehensive approach and cooperation at the
national, regional and global levels, with the active
participation of all Member States, regional structures
and civil society.
Kazakhstan is a party to all the major international
conventions against terrorism. It welcomes the idea of
reconvening the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Terrorism to draft a comprehensive anti-terrorism
convention and supports a further improvement of other
anti-terrorist treaty mechanisms. My country also fully
supports the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) of the Security Council.
As evidence of our involvement in the activities
of the Security Council, together with the CTC, in
September 2014, we organized a visit by His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, head of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, to Astana. His
discussions with Kazakhstan’s high-ranking officials
in law enforcement and of financial and other
specialized bodies were successful in expanding our
joint cooperation.
Kazakhstan is guided by the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other international
universal instruments that it has ratified. My country
is also actively involved in the security measures of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.
My country, as an active member of the
Anti-Terrorist Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), has signed the SCO Convention on CounterTerrorism and all agreements on combating the illicit
trafficking of arms, ammunition and explosives. We
also work closely with various agencies of the United
Nations system. In particular, the southern capital of
my country, Almaty, hosts the Central Asian Regional
Information and Coordination Centre for combating the
illicit trafficking of narcotics. We are thankful to all
donors for supporting the regional centre of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Almaty.
We are engaged in the Joint Plan of Action for the
Implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in Central Asia. The Plan was
elaborated by several partners: the countries of the

14-6373949/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

region, the task force to implement counter-terrorism
arrangements, the European Union and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, based in Ashgabat. Kazakhstan
also organized a consultative meeting with regional
organizations in June 2012 in Almaty to execute the
Strategy in Central Asia.
As the 2010 Chair of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, Kazakhstan hosted a
conference on the prevention of terrorism, which
adopted the Astana declaration, confirming the
commitment of OSCE participating States and partner
countries to combating terrorism. Those activities are
also very high on the agenda for Kazakhstan-European
Union cooperation. In addition, my country also
participates in an Individual Partnership Action Plan
with NATO, thus expanding its collaboration with the
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council.
At the national level, last year we adopted the
State Programme for Countering Religious Extremism
and Terrorism in the Republic of Kazakhstan for the
2013-2017 period, allocating $600 million for its
implementation. The main goal of that effort is to
ensure the safety of people, the State and society at large
through improved measures to minimize and eliminate
the consequences of that double scourge. Special
attention is being paid to greater active engagement by
the public on prevention and the reshaping of outreach
activities for target groups.
In conclusion, the Republic of Kazakhstan is
committed to joining hands with the international
community based on our deep commitment to combat
more effectively the ever-increasing scourge of
terrorism and radical extremism.

19/11/2014

without an act of terrorism occurring somewhere in the
world. Such ignominious acts blindly strike innocents
who have the bad luck to be in the wrong place at the
wrong time. It is in the interest of all countries to combat
this scourge at the global, regional and national levels.
Everyone agrees that the the essence of the terrorist
threat is its transnationality. Terrorism does not take
root in a given State or in a random locality, but rather
moves from place to place opportunistically. Judging
by the range of locales where it has emerged since 2001,
we are witnessing both the displacement and the export
of the terrorist threat from the Middle East into Africa
and other regions. Nor can it be ignored that terrorism
is the result of interactions among political, security,
social and environmental factors, and that it is linked
to poverty, poor governance, weak institutions and
underdevelopment. Terrorism is particularly active in
fragile societies and in post-conflict countries, where
the absence of the rule of law and administrative
gaps allow such groups to develop and flourish with
impunity as they expand their influence on populations
without resources and no hope for the future, as is the
case with Al-Shabaab in Somalia.
Wherever it is present, terrorism annihilates all
hope, all vision of a future, all thought of programmes
of economic and social development. Criminal
organizations gain the upper hand as if they were the
authorities in charge of the areas under their control
and discourage foreign investment, thereby promoting
the isolation and eventually the economic collapse of
the affected States.

Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Australia’s assumption of the Security
Council for the month of November. Allow me also
to thank you for your choice of the very important
subject of today’s debate: international cooperation on
combating terrorism and violent extremism.

In this ever more connected world, in which
once great distances have shrunk to a mere pinpoint,
everything is visible, everything can be verified and
everything is experienced first-hand. As terrorism
becomes ever more global, there are obvious links
among drug traffickers in the Sahel, the European
mafia and Latin American groups, which now trade
experience and expertise. The new wave of terrorists
is like a spider’s web that connects practically all
continents. The question on everyone’s lips today is by
what means to put an end to this perpetually ramifying
scourge of our century and what available avenues to a
solution we should prioritize.

Current events all too often remind us that terrorism
continues to bring sorrow to the world and to inflict
pain and suffering on all its people without distinction.
As members of the Council know, not a week goes by

First of all, the brief period we have devoted
to combating terrorism has shown that military
intervention does not suffice to rid us of the scourge.
Military action may allow us to snuff out terrorist

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.

50/83

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

bastions, but it does not make them disappear for good.
If we set fire to a terrorist bastion in place X, another
one will spring from its ashes in place Y, often with even
greater virulence and determination. Moreover, purely
military action that is not accompanied by civic action
can create instability at the heart of a State and fuel
its terrorist potential. To prevent the spread, resurgence
or return of terrorists, the conditions that allow them
to exist must therefore be alleviated. That is where the
key concept of the moment comes into play: a global
and holistic approach as articulated in resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014).
Members will surely agree with me that only
by ensuring the well-being of citizens, populations
and communities, above all the poorest and weakest,
will they become less receptive to the ideologies that
promote extremism and violence. Only the promise of
development and personal and community fulfilment
can compete with that sordid and death-dealing
alternative.
Secondly, the importance of development assistance
in the fight against terrorism should not be minimized.
Development aid would make it possible to prevent the
eruption of crisis hot spots, especially in our immediate
surroundings. Development aid would therefore seem
to be an obvious measure to put in place, and would
make it possible to detect and analyse the warning signs
of a crisis as soon as they appear.
Thirdly, it is essential to identify the typology of
terrorist groups in order to assess their weak points and
develop an adequate security and defence policy. Their
modes of operation do not correspond to the classic
approach to conflict with which we are familiar. Instead,
they try to blend into the population, using people and
protected property as shields without displaying any
identifying signs. Their aim is to create a permanent
state of insecurity and psychosis at the heart of regular
forces, thereby spreading a general sense of suspicion
and panic.
Finally, at the strategic level, we need to deepen our
understanding of terrorism’s appeal in order to combat
it by promoting a culture of peace through dialogue,
education, awareness and community exchanges. The
importance of protecting human rights cannot be
stressed enough in the context of combating terrorism.
Instead of limiting ourselves to good intentions, we
must prove through our actions our respect for human
rights and the rule of law. We must also find ways to

S/PV.7316

mobilize the international community by shining a light
on the fate of the victims of terrorism and by providing
them with all the necessary assistance. It is in fact the
victims and their families who can best make the case
for the urgency of the fight to combat terrorism.
To conclude, I would like to reiterate Burundi’s
fierce determination and unflagging commitment to
work with other countries to combat this pernicious
threat to international peace and security, which
strikes at the very heart of our States. With that same
determination and commitment, Burundi has placed its
most experienced fighting troops at the disposal of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which is currently
under the command of a high-ranking Burundi officer,
in order to help restore a peace that has been lost now
for so many decades.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not express my
deep sympathy and solidarity with all the victims of
terrorism and their loved ones.
The President: At this point, I would like to thank
all delegations for their willingness to continue the
debate through the lunch hour in order to accommodate
the very large number of speakers, which is an indication
of the significant level of interest in this critical issue.
We thank everyone for their presence and participation
here today, but as we start our session this afternoon,
I would like to take this opportunity to remind all
speakers that they should try to limit their statements to
no more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthier statements are kindly requested to circulate
the text in writing and deliver a more condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Malaysia.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I would first like to
congratulate you and your delegation, Madam
President, on Australia’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month, and for
convening this important meeting. Malaysia also
welcomes the presidential statement adopted earlier
(S/PRST/2014/23), and we thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing.
My delegation is further encouraged by the
presence of the high-level representatives of Argentina,
Luxembourg, Lithuania and the Republic of Korea. Such
high-level participation reflects the importance all we

14-6373951/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

attach to the subject of today’s meeting, which we feel
affords us the opportunity to take stock of the progress
that has been made in combating the twin scourges of
terrorism and violent extremism, particularly in the
context of implementing resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014), adopted earlier this year.
Malaysia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Iran and Saudi
Arabia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
Malaysia reiterates in the strongest terms its
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as of all acts, methods and
practices of terrorism. In the wake of the rampant
advance of terror and violent extremist groups, in terms
of capturing actual territory as well as intellectual and
ideological space, Malaysia was a sponsor of resolution
2178 (2014), adopted in September. In doing so, we
sought to lend our support to the effort to galvanize
international action in the fight against terrorism in
general and the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters in
particular.
So far, 2014 has witnessed disturbing developments,
particularly in the tactics employed by violent extremist
groups. The brutality of the punishments and retribution
inflicted on their opponents and victims is appalling
and horrific. Perhaps even more worrying is the fact
that the narratives of such groups appear to be gaining
ground and seem to resonate increasingly with a diverse
cross-section of the world’s population. In that regard,
my delegation believes it is imperative to halt the flow
of funds and recruits to such groups. We join others in
calling for robust and effective international action to
fight terrorism and violent extremism, undertaken in
full respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
for universally recognized principles of law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Malaysia has consistently worked to enhance
its domestic legal framework in order to ensure that
measures aimed at safeguarding national security fully
respect human rights. That is apparent in the evolution
of our relevant legislation on combating terrorism and
countering violent extremism, whereby our muchcriticized Internal Security Act of 1960 was repealed
and replaced with the Security Offences (Special
Measures) Act in 2012.
In terms of law enforcement, since 2000 the
Royal Malaysian Police’s counter-terrorism division
52/83

19/11/2014

has forged strong bilateral ties with approximately
50 foreign intelligence and enforcement agencies,
with particular emphasis on information-sharing. In
regard to compliance with resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014), our existing legal and policy framework
has successfully prevented the movement of potential
recruits out of the country. In 2013, Malaysia amended its
2001 Anti-Money-Laundering Act to include measures
combating terrorism financing. Now known as the
Anti-Money Laundering and Anti-Terrorism Financing
Act, it provides comprehensively for freezing terrorist
funds and implementing the provisions of resolution
1267 (1999) and, more broadly, resolution 1373 (2001).
In 2003, Malaysia established the Southeast Asia
Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism, designed to
provide capacity-building and technical assistance at
the national, regional and international levels. As of
31 October, the Centre has conducted 140 capacitybuilding programmes attended by almost 3,000 local
and 1,260 foreign participants. The Centre works
closely on various aspects of counter-terrorism with
many countries, as well as with bodies such as the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime.
At the regional level, cooperation in combating
terrorism takes place primarily within the framework
of the Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crime of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
In addition, ASEAN’s annual senior officials’ meeting
on transnational crime implements and reviews the
Ministerial Meeting’s decisions, as well as exploring
further areas of cooperation. The ASEAN Convention
on Counter-Terrorism provides a legislative framework
at the regional level that complements the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, international conventions
related to counter-terrorism and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
At the international level, Malaysia has ratified nine
of the 14 international conventions and protocols aimed
at combating terrorism. We continue to take various
measures to implement our international obligations,
including the legislative measures necessary to enable
us to accede to the remaining conventions and protocols.
On a related note, Malaysia also welcomes
the signing in June of a cooperation agreement
between CTED and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, which, among other things, establishes
a regular framework for consultation between the two
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

entities. While the Alliance is not exclusively geared
to countering terrorism, it engages in projects aimed at
improving inter-cultural understanding and addressing
feelings of isolation among certain groups, especially
vulnerable young people. That in itself constitutes a
formidable bulwark against the recruitment efforts of
terrorists and violent extremists. Malaysia strongly
believes that the Alliance’s emphasis on promoting an
approach anchored in the principle of moderation should
be further supported by Member States, particularly in
the context of our common endeavour to combat the
narratives of terrorists and violent extremists.
In the fight against terrorism and violent extremism,
it is fair to say that we have all come a long way.
However, we still have quite some distance to go. We
must continue to vigorously counter the narratives and
appeal of terrorists and violent extremists and combat
their murderous actions every step of the way. Malaysia
reaffirms its unwavering commitment and continued
support to that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Ms. Tan (Singapore): We thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon and the Chairs of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities and of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee for their briefings.
We commend Australia for convening this timely
open debate. Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)
established a solid foundation for an international
counter-terrorism framework for dealing with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra
Front, and today’s debate is a useful opportunity for the
international community to continue developing that
framework. Singapore was a sponsor of resolution 2178
(2014), which deals with halting the international flow
of terrorist fighters.
We condemn the atrocities committed by ISIL
and Al-Nusra against innocent civilians, Muslims
and non-Muslims alike, in the strongest possible
terms. Singapore remains committed to supporting
international counter-terrorism efforts. We will
continue to cooperate with the United Nations and
international partners to curb material and financial
support for terrorist organizations.
Singapore is an international hub and a multireligious
society with a sizeable Muslim community. Extremist

S/PV.7316

groups such as ISIL infect vulnerable individuals with
their ideology. Battle-hardened returnees may carry out
attacks at home, exacerbating the threat from existing
terrorist networks in our region such as Jemaah
Islamiyah. Self-radicalization and spontaneous acts of
terror are also major concerns given the prevalence of
information and communications technology and social
media platforms. In this regard, approximately 350
South-East Asians, including a handful of Singaporeans,
are reportedly in Iraq and Syria. The long-term risk to
social harmony is also clear.
As part of our integrated counter-terrorism
approach, Singapore has joined other countries in
offering to contribute assets and personnel to Operation
Inherent Resolve, the United States-led multinational
coalition to combat ISIL. These include liaison and
planning officers, a KC-135R tanker aircraft for air-toair refuelling and an imagery analysis team from the
Singapore Armed Forces. These assets have proved
effective in our previous contributions to multinational
coalition efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan.
However, we recognize that it is also critical to
counter the extremist ideology used to recruit foreign
terrorist fighters and which fuels the violent agenda of
groups such as ISIL. As such, Singapore’s integrated
approach to combating terrorism also emphasizes
religious-based and community-led rehabilitation
efforts. Our religious and community leaders have
condemned Al-Qaida and ISIL unequivocally. The
Religious Rehabilitation Group, a voluntary group
formed by individual Islamic scholars and teachers
in Singapore, debunks misconceptions of extremist
ideology in one-on-one sessions, offers offenders robust
ideological counters to misinterpretations of religious
teaching, and rehabilitates them back into society.
As families play an important role in the
rehabilitation of offenders, other community
organizations also weigh in to provide support for their
families where necessary. Those organizations also
help secure jobs for offenders when they are released.
It is our view that the weed of violent extremism
can be blasted, but its ideological roots will continue
to proliferate unless extirpated. To this end, in 2015
Singapore will convene a symposium for East Asia
Summit countries to exchange views and share
best practices on de-radicalization and religious
rehabilitation. We hope that the symposium will be a
useful contribution to international efforts to tackle the

14-6373953/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

ideological roots of extremism and thereby weaken the
lure of terrorist groups such as ISIL.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium would like to associate itself with the statement
delivered by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union and would like to add a few comments in its
national capacity.
Belgium is one of the countries that has been most
affected by the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon.
It has also been one of the most involved in the fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
In that regard, we are very pleased to be able to take
part in today’s debate.
The threat posed by ISIL and other terrorist groups,
not only in Syria but also in Iraq and throughout the
broader Middle East and the Sahel, as well as in other
parts of Africa and elsewhere, is indeed a reality and
extremely significant. It reminds us every day of the
appalling methods that terrorists use to threaten both
the international community and local communities
and of how this undermines international peace and
security.
Belgium remains firmly convinced that the United
Nations has a leading role to play in responding to these
threats, through international coordination of various
efforts and initiatives and through efforts to ensure
policy coherence. The United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, whose fourth biennial review was
concluded in June, should continue to guide our actions.
Belgium welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council of resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), and
calls on Member States to take the steps necessary to
ensure their comprehensive implementation.
In that context, Belgium underscores the
importance of the role played by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre in promoting the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Belgium welcomes and
supports the Centre’s initiatives aimed at increasing
understanding of the foreign fighter phenomenon.
Prevention must be a major component of
our response to terrorism and violent extremism.
Resolution 2178 (2014) rightly calls for strengthened
international action to counter violent extremism. In
order to tackle the problem of foreign terrorist fighters,

54/83

19/11/2014

the Belgian Government has adopted a new strategy
to prevent violent radicalization that is based on the
following principles: improve our understanding of
the radicalization process, promote social measures in
order to address the root causes of radicalization, and
build the resilience of vulnerable groups. The strategy
also involves efforts to increase awareness of the
phenomenon of radicalization at the local level.
A new unit responsible for preventing radicalization
has also been set up within the Ministry of the Interior.
It is tasked with supporting local strategies to counter
radicalization and promoting such efforts. Indeed, we
must focus our efforts at the local level — be it local
authorities or civil society — in order best to wage the
fight against the phenomenon of radicalization.
Finally, the fight against the financing of terrorist
groups should form an integral part of a wider counterterrorism effort. Belgium recently participated in a
number of discussions on how to more effectively
fight terrorist financing, and we would like to mention
several points in that regard as part of those discussions.
First, we must fully implement existing United
Nations sanctions regimes. With regard to the financing
of terrorism, resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)
provide us very useful guidance.
Secondly, the exchange of information at the
international level and other levels is also necessary
in order to identify those who contribute to terrorist
activities and to enable us to take action against such
individuals and groups.
Thirdly, terrorism and terrorist groups must be
cut off from the international financial system, and to
that end our financial institutions must very rigorously
apply the principles of transparency and due diligence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset, Madam
President, I should like to thank you for having
organized this important debate.
Today terrorism has become one of the gravest
threats to international peace and security. Kyrgyzstan
condemns and rejects terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As a global, transnational phenomenon,
it should not be associated with any religion,
nationality, civilization or ethnic group, and can be
successfully countered only through the strengthening

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of international cooperation. In this regard, Kyrgyzstan
reiterates its resolute support for all measures and
legal instruments adopted within the framework of the
United Nations to combat international terrorism and
violent extremism.
We should firmly continue our efforts to implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, which has provided a solid foundation for
a comprehensive response to international terrorism
and violent extremism at all levels. In that context,
we welcome General Assembly resolution 68/276, on
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Review, adopted in June this year. To achieve our
goals, it is important to keep the Strategy relevant and
strengthen coordination in the light of emerging new
threats and evolving trends in international terrorism
and violent extremism.
The current situation in the world demonstrates that
acts of terrorism and violent extremism are increasing
and negatively influencing stability, security and
development. We witness atrocities committed by
terrorist groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), the Al-Nusra Front and Boko Haram and
their attempts to influence conflicts. The Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities estimates that more
than 13,000 foreign terrorist fighters from over 80
Member States have joined ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front
cannot but cause serious concern. The participation of
such fighters in terrorist groups on an unprecedented
scale is aggravating not only the conflicts themselves,
but the humanitarian, social, economic and human
rights situations as well. There is no doubt that after
returning to their home countries, those terrorist
fighters will continue to present a serious danger.
In that regard, resolution 2178 (2014), adopted at
the Security Council summit on 24 September (see
S/PV.7272), on addressing the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters was timely and very important.
Kyrgyzstan fully shares the need to take both urgent and
preventive measures in the long term to deal with the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. Kyrgyzstan
is taking steps to implement resolution 2178 (2014) in
accordance with Chapter VII of the United Nations
Charter. We consider it crucial to mainstream measures
relating to the implementation of the resolution’s
paragraph 14, which calls for building the capacity of

S/PV.7316

States to address the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters.
The modern world is going through a difficult
period characterized by increasing instability both
at the regional and international levels. Our region
is no exception in that regard. In his address to the
Permanent Council of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe on 6 November, Secretary
General Ban Ki-moon emphasized that the impact of
the transition in Afghanistan on Central Asia is also a
leading concern. We fully agree with that assessment of
the situation in the region. Today, strengthening regional
security is a priority in Central Asia, where terrorist and
narcotic threats emanating from Afghanistan are major
destabilizing factors, especially with the withdrawal of
the International Security Assistance Force.
The situation is worsening with the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. It will require more
effective regional cooperation and the development of
more coordinated and practical measures within the
framework of anti-terrorist structures of such regional
organizations as the Collective Security Treaty
Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
We believe that strengthening regional cooperation
will make a practical contribution to global efforts to
counter terrorism and violent extremism.
Kyrgyzstan supports the activities of the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, upon which we call to draw special
attention to these issues. It should also explore the
possibility of assisting the countries in the region in the
implementation of resolution 2178 (2014) on effectively
addressing the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters. At the same time, we clearly understand that
in order to eradicate the phenomenon of terrorism,
including foreign terrorist fighters, we must address its
underlying causes. It is well known that the emergence
of terrorism and extremism is fuelled by poverty, social
injustice and the absence of the rule of law as well
as low literacy and unemployment, especially among
young people. Therefore, there is a need to take those
aspects into account in our strategies and programmes.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our strong
commitment to carrying on the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism on the national, regional and
global levels. We firmly believe that it is the obligation

14-6373955/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

19/11/2014

and responsibility of all States Members of the United
Nations and the international community to remain
mobilized to prevent the further spread of and eradicate
this global menace.

in addressing the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, our country is preparing additional legal
reforms in order to strengthen our capacity to prevent
the recruitment and travel of such fighters.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.

The second aspect that my delegation wanted
to refer to is the need to act resolutely against the
radicalization and propaganda that promotes violent
extremism. In that regard, Spain has drawn up a national
strategic plan to combat violent radicalization. Actions
in that area should always be carried out in close
cooperation with leaders of communities susceptible to
radicalization. Terrorists’ use of new communications
technology should lead us to developing programmes
of action aimed at de-activating and countering the
propaganda that is spread by terrorists through social
media. We should always respect — and this is a very
sensitive matter — the freedom of expression and the
free circulation of ideas. It is very important to develop
positive and inclusive messages that target members of
these communities and in particular their young people.

Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
are meeting at a crucial moment in the fight against
terrorism, Al-Qaida, the Al Nusra Front, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and related terrorist
organizations. In that context, the United Nations
and the Security Council have acted decisively with
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014), both of which
contain significant provisions for combating these
groups and against the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters.
This suggests that the situation is a threat to
international peace and security, as the Council
has asserted, and that States have to act globally
against the threat. That involves four elements that
my delegation would like to highlight. First, we need
to focus on the conditions that foster the emergence
of the phenomenon. Secondly, we must combat the
propaganda that promotes violent extremism. Thirdly,
we must promote cooperation among States in order to
combat the scourge. Lastly, I would like to refer to the
importance of combating financing of these groups.
On the first point, I note that it is essential to
examine the conditions that promote the spread of
terrorism, while at the same time respecting human
rights and the rule of law. Terrorism should be fought
on various fronts with efficiency and respect for the
law. It is essential to delegitimize terrorism, focus on
the radicalizing environment that fosters its emergence,
and fight its expressions by prosecuting perpetrators
and holding them accountable in courts of law for their
acts.
Spain has taken steps in this area and implemented
measures within the current legal framework, in
particular to prevent Spanish citizens and residents
of my country from travelling to areas of conflict and
participating in terrorist activities and violent actions.
Various individuals have been detained while trying
to leave Spain for that purpose, and, in cooperation
with neighbouring countries, we have dismantled
a network that was involved in recruiting those
individuals. Although Spanish criminal law already has
useful provisions for combating terrorism, including

56/83

The third aspect is critical international cooperation
among States, without which it is impossible to
effectively combat the threat of global terrorism. We
need to step up and promote exchanges of information
and assistance in terms of criminal investigations
and the gathering of proof. Our national experience
leads us to think that international cooperation is a
very effective tool for coping with and defeating the
terrorist threat. In that context, Spain has established
strong mechanisms for cooperation with its neighbours,
in particular the States of the southern shores of the
Mediterranean.
Finally and fourthly, we believe — and it goes
without saying — that it is essential to combat the
financing of terrorism. The Council has acted to that
end by adopting the two resolutions that have been
frequently referenced in today’s debate. It is crucial
to strengthen international coordination to establish
mechanisms that will leave no loopholes whereby
terrorists could continue receiving financing for their
criminal activities. Strengthened cooperation is also
necessary to prevent the financial flows that benefit
those groups.
With respect to the four elements I have mentioned,
the work of the United Nations is essential. In that
respsect, my delegation expresses its full support for
the excellent work carried out by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
are the best equipped and most appropriate mechanisms
in the fight against violent extremism and, indeed,
terrorism in general.
I cannot conclude without expressing Spain’s
solidarity with the victims of terrorism, whom we must
always keep in mind because they can play a key role in
preventing radicalization and violent extremism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country’s successful presidency of
the Security Council this month, and especially for the
relevant topic chosen for today’s discussion, “Threats
to international peace and security caused by terrorist
acts”.
The Kingdom of Morocco takes this opportunity
to reiterate its firm condemnation of terrorism in all
its forms and to underline that nothing can justify
a terrorist act. In that respect, Morocco strongly
condemns the beheading on 16 November of the
American hostage Peter Abdul-Rahman Kassig by the
terrorist organization Daesh, and expresses its complete
disapproval of that odious crime, which runs counter
to all universal human and moral values, including the
teachings of Islam, a religion of peace, tolerance and
coexistence. Terrorism must not be associated with any
particular religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group.
The discussion on this topic comes at a crucial
moment, marked by an unprecedented expansion
of terrorism, violent extremism and radicalization,
despite the efforts of the international community to
curb that phenomenon. Terrorism continues to strike
indiscriminately and viciously and to spread like a
cancer. Control of Iraqi and Syrian territory by the
terrorist group Islamic State is a challenge not only
for the two countries, but also for the international
community.
Terrorist groups increasingly exploit all existing
resources in order to achieve their goals. They use
advanced technologies in media, the Internet and social
networks to attract the maximum number of recruits
from among all social strata and all nationalities.

S/PV.7316

We have witnessed with great concern the alarming
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. While other
regions, such as Afghanistan and North Africa, have
experienced that phenomenon, which began as a limited,
local threat, today it has evolved into a global threat.
Terrorist groups are successfully recruiting young
people, including from wealthy families and developed
countries, making the traditional link between poverty
and terrorism less relevant. They are recruiting doctors,
engineers and students. Terrorists are brainwashing
their victims and exploiting them to carry out their
own macabre designs. That finding deserves increased
attention and analysis. Moreover, radical discourse
in places of worship and the incitement of terrorist
acts are other means they use to achieve their goals.
The international community is facing a destructive
ideology whose obscurantist goals must be countered
with will and determination.
The Kingdom of Morocco, struck by terrorist
attacks in Casablanca in 2003 and Marrakech in 2011,
has developed a comprehensive and consistent approach
focused on prevention and action, in accordance with
the four pillars of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, including resolution 2178 (2014),
which my country co-sponsored. The Kingdom’s
approach is one prong of the ongoing commitment of
Morocco, its King, its institutions and its people in the
struggle against terrorism in the wake of the attacks
of 11 September 2001. Our approach is focused on
the following principles, while remaining dynamic,
responsive, evolving and open to improvement.
The first principle concerns strengthening the
security sector and keeping the legal framework up to
date in the fight against terrorism. We have improved
our security operations to help crush the terrorist
threat. Our laws complement such vigilance through
the adoption of legislation aimed at stopping young
people from traveling to the theatres of conflict by
criminalizing such activity.
The second principle is the fight against social
instability and promoting sustainable human
development. In 2005, His Majesty the King launched a
national initiative for human development to overcome
social shortcomings, exclusion and instability.
The third principle involves the restructuring
and reform of our religious policy. In that capacity as
Commander of the Faithful His Majesty the King has

14-6373957/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

preserved the religious foundations and structures of
Morocco. Moreover, reforms of religious policy include
the establishment of a scientific authority responsible
for issuing religious edicts and interpreting Koranic
texts first. It is the role of the Senior Council of Ulemas
to discourage those who may be considering terrorist
or obscurantist activities, and to train young imams
and preachers in the teachings of Islam. Morocco
is committed to sharing and exchanging expertise
with its African partners; it has established religious
cooperation with a number of African countries and has
begun to host young African imams. The imams that
have received training will then train others in their
respective countries.
The partnership experience was described on
30 September before the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism, in the presence of some of the beneficiary
countries. I take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the cooperation and support of the
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, in this
area and especially for our very productive relationship
in the fight against terrorism.
A number of terrorist affiliates in West Africa
are involved in destabilizing Mali and have joined
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb. That is a source
of concern for my country and for the entire region
of the Sahel and the Maghreb. This growing trend in
the region has allowed terrorist networks to acquire
financial and technological resources providing them
with greater flexibility and threatening the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of the States of the region.
We must therefore redouble our coordination and
information-exchange efforts among the countries of
the Sahel and the Maghreb so as to wage a collective
and effective fight against the destabilizing activities of
the terrorists. Affiliates of these groups have announced
their allegiance to the Islamic State, which has further
heightened the threat to our region and must therefore
be taken into consideration.
Bolstering security on our borders, information­
sharing and halting the flow of financial resources
to terrorists are key and even vital measures in the
effective fight against terrorism, particularly foreign
terrorist fighters. In that regard, I note that, on 7 and
8 February 2012, Morocco hosted in Rabat the second
meeting of the Global Counterterrorism Forum’s
Criminal Justice Sector and Rule of Law Working

58/83

19/11/2014

Group , culminating in the adoption of a good practices
document, entitled “The Rabat Memorandum on Good
Practices for Effective Counterterrorism Practice in the
Criminal Justice Sector”.
In the context of that same joint initiative under
the Forum, Morocco and the Netherlands organized,
on 14 and 15 May in Marrakech, the first meeting of
experts on foreign terrorist fighters. They discussed
issues related to police, border control, justice and
information-sharing. The most recent ministerial
meeting of the Forum, held on 23 September, adopted
The Hague-Marrakech Memorandum on Good Practices
for a More Effective Response to the Foreign Terrorist
Fighters Phenomenon. That Memorandum focused on a
better response to the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters and also endorsed the creation of a working
group on the subject, to be chaired by Morocco and the
Netherlands.
On this occasion, I would just like to add that
Morocco and the Netherlands have been forerunners in
the sphere of border control to combat the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist fighters. I would like to commend
those who have taken a part in that fight.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): It is a pleasure to see you,
Madam President, presiding over this very important
subject matter. We appreciate the opportunity to make
our statement.
Kenya has suffered some of the most atrocious acts
of terrorism. We recall some of the most recent. In 1998,
the Al-Qaida terror group bombed the United States
Embassy in Nairobi, killing 224 people and wounding
over 5,000. The majority of the dead or wounded were
Kenyans along with several Americans, even though
Americans were the main target. In 2002, the Paradise
Hotel in the coastal city of Mombasa was bombed by
terrorists, targeting Israeli tourists and killing over 15
people. On 21 September 2013, Al-Shabaab, an affiliate
of Al-Qaida, devastated the Westgate Mall in Nairobi,
an incident in which over 70 people, including Kenyans
and foreigners of various nationalities, perished. Dozens
of lower-level terror attacks have been witnessed in
various parts of the country over the years. That is our
story, our experience with terror.
Terrorism is not a national phenomenon; it is indeed
an international phenomenon. In fact, terrorism in Kenya
and the region stems from the perennial instability in
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

neighbouring countries, particularly the Al-Shabaab
movement in Somalia. Kenya is a target only because of
our avowed war on terror and our unflinching support
and partnerships with our key allies in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism in all its forms and
manifestations. Our experience and policies add legal
and moral authority to our desire to fully engage here
on the theme of today’s meeting, not just in terms of our
own self-defence, but also in terms of the larger quest to
ensure international peace and security with due regard
for international human rights and freedoms.
In 2011, Kenya crossed into Somalia in pursuit
of Al-Shabaab and subsequently joined up with the
African Union Mission in Somalia to vanquish that
movement. That was because Somalia had become the
breeding ground for Al-Qaida in the region as a result
of the activities of the Al-Shabaab militia. Through
the exchange of foreign fighters and ideological and
material support, Al-Shabaab became the link with
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula. Such linkages
have been well documented in successive reports to
the Council by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea. We shall, therefore, not elaborate on them now.
Kenya’s geographical position has made it easier
for Al-Shabaab to recruit and radicalize Kenyan youth.
Apart from radicalizing our youth, the architects
of terrorism have embarked on distributing video
CDs propagating radical ideologies and violently
targeting Islamic teachers who do not subscribe to
their radical interpretation of the Holy Quran. The
messages contained in the CDs urge young people to
move to Somalia and other jihad theatres to wage war
against Governments in an effort to establish Islamic
caliphates. The radicalization and the indoctrination to
adopt violent extremism have been facilitated by the
prevailing economic hardships and unemployment in
countries of the region.
The presence of an established Al-Shabaab
infrastructure in refugee camps and the use of such
refugee cover for terrorist attacks has also greatly
contributed to terrorism in the region. The porous
nature of our borders facilitates the proliferation of
firearms and explosives from Somalia into the camps
Those weapons are used to propagate and perpetuate
criminal activities and acts of terror in the region.
The tentacles of terrorism now encompass other
transnational crimes, such as drug-trafficking,
poaching, commodity smuggling and money

S/PV.7316

laundering, with the proceeds being used to fund
terror activities and extremism in the region. Since
Al-Shabaab publicly declared Kenya a target of terror
attacks, the Kenyan Government has mobilized its law
enforcement machinery to counter the threat. It has
also fostered regional partnerships with neighbouring
countries to tackle the menace. We cannot do it alone.
Similarly, the Government has been engaging
local communities at the grass-roots level through
their respective county governments at the lowest level
and other community leadership to fund programmes
aimed at reducing the vulnerability of youth to
violent extremism. The decentralization of funds and
decision-making to county governments so as to initiate
poverty-eradication programmes is now a cornerstone
policy of the State. It is also enshrined in the country’s
Constitution. In addition, we welcome the current
efforts by the Secretary-General and the World Bank
President, together with other development partners,
to establish sustainable peace in the region through
an ambitious infrastructure development programme,
developed in consultation with the African Union, that
would open the region to trade and investments.
The Government of Kenya is committed to, and has
actually created national versions of, the four pillars of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and has taken
steps to implement the Strategy. Such measures include
the formulation of a national counter-terrorism strategy
that emphasizes the need for inter-agency cooperation
among all the relevant stakeholders. We have enacted
counter-terrorism legislation that gives Kenya
jurisdiction over various terrorist offences in a manner
that corresponds to the universal counter-terrorism
instruments to which we are a party. Kenya has acted
on violations fiercely and fearlessly. Another measure
is aimed at combating the financing of terrorism. To
curb the financing of terror, Kenya has established
a Financial Reporting Centre to analyse financial
transactions and work with competent law enforcement
authorities to investigate the financing of terror, even
activities that are masked by an innocent-looking front.
Another measure relates to border security. In that
regard, Kenya’s established border control is being
enhanced through passenger profiling and screening
procedures imposed on persons entering and leaving
the country. We are also engaged in capacity-building
through continuous training, increasing the number
of police officers and acquiring modern equipment
and technologies. Community policing and counter-

14-6373959/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

terrorism awareness programmes have also been
put in place to enhance general vigilance among the
population.
To counter radicalization and violent extremism, our
authorities liaise with religious leaders and civil society
organizations so as to counter extremist messaging.
Such collaborative efforts between law enforcement
and local communities have actually borne fruit, as
is evident from the latest successes in countering
extremism in the coastal areas of Mombasa. We are
also fostering regional and international cooperation.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that Kenya remains committed to contributing to
regional and international counter-terrorism efforts.
My delegation calls on the international community and
the United Nations system to strengthen their collective
counter-terrorism measures, especially through the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.
That will enhance the gravitas for countering incitement
to violent extremism and disrupting terrorist networks,
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters and illicit
financial flows. Lastly, we urge an intensified, more
structured and effective exchange of information
among Member States to deal with terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Australia, as President of the
Security Council, for organizing this timely and
important debate today. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and the Chairs of the two
Committees for their insightful briefings. Slovenia is
fully aware of the severity of the threat that terrorism
and violent extremism pose to the global community,
and in that context we are grateful for their dedication
in tackling this complex threat in a comprehensive and
inclusive manner.
Allow me to note that Slovenia aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier today by the observer of the
European Union (EU).
Slovenia has already adopted the necessary
normative and operational measures and has
implemented relevant best practices in the area of
preventing and countering terrorism. Together with
some EU actors, we are now also seeking the best
possible way to strengthen the judicial response
to terrorism, and are trying to explore additional
60/83

19/11/2014

measures needed to support the implementation of
the recently adopted resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014). Furthermore, we believe that the current need
to effectively tackle the rapidly expanding phenomenon
may also provide a new momentum for exploring ways
to find a compromise on the comprehensive convention
on international terrorism.
To effectively counter violent extremism, we have
to work with a broad range of partners in order to gain
a better understanding of the behaviours, tactics and
other indicators that could point to potential terrorist
activity and the best ways to mitigate or prevent that
activity. At the same time, we must respect fundamental
rights, including the right to free speech and the right
to privacy. Groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, for instance, which promote extremist
ideologies, represent a threat to moderate Islamic
countries, and one of the most effective ways to combat
that extremist ideology is with counter-ideology. To
that end, the Slovenia-based Euro-Mediterranean
University is planning to establish a centre for Islamic,
Arab and Middle Eastern studies.
Slovenia is actively contributing to global efforts
in countering terrorism and violent extremism,
primarily within EU bodies and institutions and at
the regional level, and therefore advocates the prompt
conclusion of negotiations on the EU Passenger
Name Record Directive and improving control of the
external borders of the Schengen Area. We see further
possibilities for improving the quantity and quality
of criminal intelligence exchanged. Slovenia has, in
cooperation with nine other EU member States, also
put forward a non-paper regarding the EU initiative
on sharing best practices on national counter-terrorism
arrangements with the Western Balkans countries. As
part of that initiative, Slovenia has proposed to use
an integrative and complementary approach that will
reduce overlaps and duplications, streamline existing
and planned activities, and link them with identified
priorities, taking into account available funding. This
initiative was also one of the prime topics at last week’s
ministerial meeting of the Salzburg Forum, which
Slovenia is currently chairing.
Mr. Quinlan took the Chair.
As one of the concrete activities of the initiative,
in October Slovenia hosted a Western Balkans
counter-radicalization workshop co-organized by the
European Union and the United States. Furthermore,
we have been doing outreach to the region in the field
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

of policing since 2008, when the secretariat of the
Police Cooperation Convention for Southeast Europe
established its headquarters in Ljubljana, the capital
of Slovenia. At the operational level, Slovenia is a
promoter of a counter-terrorism initiative based on the
declaration of members of the initiative for international
police cooperation in the field of counter-terrorism.
We believe that a broader approach is required to
prevent and counter radicalization. These efforts must
engage the whole of society and the media, including the
Internet, and should not be focused merely to prohibiting
or removing illegal Internet content. Positive and
carefully focused messages need to be spread widely
enough to offer vulnerable users an easily accessible
alternative to terrorist or violent extremist propaganda.
Those efforts should also include cooperation with the
experts from the relevant industries.
In the context of voluntary and self-regulatory
measures, we should consider creating tools for
Internet users to anonymously report Web content
related to radicalization, violent extremism and
terrorism. In Slovenia, we have already established
a so-called hotline Web eye, which enables Internet
users to anonymously report hate speech and child
sexual abuse images. The main goal is to reduce the
amount of such content, in cooperation with police,
Internet service providers and other governmental
and non-governmental organizations. We believe that
similar strategies could also aid in detecting content on
radicalization and recruitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union (EU), and would like to add a few remarks in its
national capacity.
The lines of action presented by the European
Union are the product of intense discussions within
European institutions and among those institutions and
their traditional partners, as well as stakeholders who
can make a useful contribution to understanding and
countering the various manifestations of terrorism at
the national, regional and global levels.
Both the range and the dimensions of terrorism are
changing rapidly. The constant mutation of the threat
is driven by destabilizing factors, such as political
turbulence, fragile institutions, a lack of socioeconomic
development, radicalization and recruitment, as well as

S/PV.7316

through the use of new technologies. Taken as a whole,
those factors make the threat more dangerous, more
unpredictable, more widespread and more pervasive.
Because of these constant mutations, terrorism requires
new capacities of intervention from international
stakeholders, starting with preventive analysis at the
national level and a multidimensional approach that
exceeds the limits of past experiences.
No area of the world is immune from terrorism.
To a growing extent, it has become a cross-cutting
phenomenon, deeply connected to other global
threats, such as transnational organized crime; illegal
trafficking, including human trafficking; corruption,
cybercrime and piracy. In recent years, the threat has
intensified in specific areas in the Middle East and in
parts of Africa, but it has the ability to strike at the
global level. The rising number of foreign terrorist
fighters is a further index of the risks confronting the
international community.
The main and most dangerous expression of
terrorism today is the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, or Daesh, group. It not only poses a major
threat to the immediate areas of Iraq and Syria, but
extends its reach beyond those areas. Italy believes
that a threat of such gravity and dimensions requires
a joint effort and shared response at the global level
through the key role of the United Nations. In the spirit
of full and effective cooperation, my country advocates
a multilateral, comprehensive and flexible approach in
all the relevant forums, complemented by strengthened
bilateral cooperation, also based on the need to take
into due account the close connections between respect
for human rights, economic and social development,
and stability and security.
At the level of European cooperation, Italy
chairs the European Union Council Working Party
on Terrorism and the Common Position 931 Working
Group, which deals with sanctions and listing and is
implementing Common Position 931 on terrorist groups
and individuals. At the United Nations level, Italy has
participated actively in the drafting and application
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted
by the General Assembly in 2006. We recognize the
importance of adopting and fully applying the counterterrorism resolutions that the Security Council has
progressively adopted, up to the most recent resolutions
2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014).
My country is strongly committed to the effective
and efficient implementation of the sanctions regime

14-6373961/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

aimed at distinguishing the financing and support
for terrorist groups and their affiliates. We are also
active in other relevant international forums, first and
foremost in the Rome-Lyon Group, established in 2001
in the Group of Seven framework at the encouragement
of the Italian presidency. And we are also active in the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, whose initiatives
include, most recently, the creation of the International
Institute for Justice and the Rule of Law, of which Italy
is a founding member.
Countering terrorism and violent extremism must
run parallel to efforts to settle the main political and
institutional crises, in particular the comprehensive
stabilization of the Middle East and North Africa area.
Italy, also in the exercise of its presidency of the
Council of the European Union, considers international
cooperation essential to activating and strengthening
political dialogue with the main partners and
international organizations. Respect for human rights
and the rule of law is crucial to establishing effective
counter-terrorism strategies, so as to build confidence,
including in crisis areas, in the international legal
system and to keep alive in people’s hearts and minds
confidence in the work of existing institutions and
in good relations among peoples and States, which
are alternatives to those adopted and propagated by
terrorist groups.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
Australia for taking the initiative to hold this open
debate on international cooperation on combating
terrorism and violent extremism. I am equally happy to
speak on behalf of a country that has suffered a lot from
that scourge and has suffered it alone. What we would
like to share with the Council is our own experience,
and I hope that lessons will be drawn by everyone.
It is recognized that in the face of new threats, only
renewed international cooperation will make it possible
to effectively prevent and combat the violent extremism
narrative that sows ideas of violence, division, hatred
and disrespect for human life. Under the circumstances,
we think it is first of all the responsibility of individual
States and then of the international community as a whole
to set up appropriate mechanisms for preventing and
deterring any evil soul — be it lodged in an individual
or in organized groups — from inciting terrorist acts
with the help of funding from hidden sources and

62/83

19/11/2014

publications that focus on violent extremism and
lawbreaking. Dialogue with partners at the bilateral,
regional and international levels is an integral part of
Algeria’s approach to countering violent extremism and
the ideology of extremism that underpins the terrorists’
narrative.
We have stated in the recent past that the issue
of foreign terrorist fighters is a serious matter to be
specifically addressed among other aspects of terrorism.
Addressing that issue means bearing in mind all other
aspects of the phenomenon by setting up comprehensive
strategies that encompass the local, regional and
multilateral levels. It is clear that the fight against
the phenomenon cannot be limited to the repressive
dimension. Extreme action must be deployed, based
on prevention, dialogue and an understanding of the
attraction exerted by the violent extremism, conducive
to terrorism, that underpins the terrorists’ narrative.
I would like to share some of our Algerian experience
in combating terrorism and violent extremism.
Since the inception of our counter-terrorism action
and endeavours, Algeria has advocated a comprehensive
approach to preventing and combating terrorism. To
that end, it has adopted at the national level a wide range
of legal instruments that criminalize terrorist acts and
the justification for committing such acts. Through an
amendment to the Constitution, it has banned all parties
and activities contrary to the constitutional order and to
the indivisible values of the Algerian people in order to
strengthen the nation’s peace and stability. No one has
the right to use religion, race, ethnicity or language in
the political arena. If one wants to conquer hearts, it
must be done through ballots, not bullets.
In addition to legal, judicial and operational
measures, the effort to combat transnational terrorism
has made it necessary to take preventive action,
including many initiatives in the areas of education,
religion and communication, to which Algeria has
attached great importance in its strategy. Those ideas
form the basis of a frame of reference consisting of
the policy called “Peace and National Reconciliation”,
advocated by the President of the Republic and endorsed
by popular referendum, which reflects the political
dimension of the counter-terrorism efforts. In the fight
against terrorism it is important to gain the full support
of public opinion and the people as a whole.
Algeria has a legislative framework for preventing
and prohibiting incitement to commit terrorist acts.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The penal code has provisions concerning all forms of
justification, encouragement and financing of terrorist
acts, as well as the reproduction or dissemination of
printed documents or recordings that incite terrorist
acts. It fully respects civil liberties and is always under
the supervision of judges.
Furthermore, as part of the progressive development
of legislation aimed at preventing incitement to commit
terrorist acts, the Algerian penal code has provisions
against anyone who through preaching or by any other
action conducts an activity contrary to the mission of
the mosque or is likely to undermine social cohesion
or to seek to justify and advocate terrorist acts,
whenever they are committed, be it in our country or
elsewhere. The creation of groups, organizations or
associations for subversive ends or for the perpetration
of terrorist acts is combatted in Algeria by legal means.
The recruitment abroad of any Algerian to a terrorist
organization is punishable by law.
The Algerian authorities have connected all sectors
involved in the fight against terrorism and extremism,
including education, culture, religious affairs and
worship and communication, in their efforts to prevent
and combat incitement to commit terrorist acts. Those
sectors have been made increasingly aware of the need
for a coherent response based on appropriate strategies
and with clearly identified goals in order to prevent and
combat the extremism, fanaticism and intolerance that
foment radicalization and terrorist violence.
The appearance of new threats and the proliferation
of terrorist groups with links to transnational organized
crime have led the international community to develop
additional means of combating perverted types of
indoctrination and the dissemination of subversive
publications, including through Internet websites, by
groups and individuals who seek to justify terrorism
and terrorist acts and who provide an ideological and
religious basis to legitimize terrorist activities. That
means that the educational, religious and cultural
dimensions of the counter-terrorism effort are now
fully understood and are in concert with the general
endeavour.
It is in that spirit that Algeria remains convinced
of the need for the international community to assume
genuine responsibility within a framework of effective
cooperation. We are committed to cooperate by
bringing our own experiences to the bear in the fight
against this modern scourge.

S/PV.7316

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Ms. Bolaños Pérez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank Australia for taking the initiative to
organize this open debate and the Foreign Minister
for personally presiding over it. We also would like to
express our gratitude for the concept note (S/2014/787,
annex) that the Australian delegation has prepared,
which I am sure will guide today’s debate. We thank
the Secretary-General for the information provided,
together with the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities.
The Government of Guatemala categorically
rejects all acts of terrorism and reiterates its
commitment to preventing and combating this scourge.
It is discouraging to see that terrorism, in its various
forms and spheres, continues to spread and even
intensify. The number of acts and victims is increasing,
leaving a tragic trail of dead and wounded. The means
used are becoming increasingly grotesque, and no
one — not even United Nations officials, journalists or
humanitarian workers — is immune to the risk of being
involved in a terrorist event.
The concept note raises for discussion various
ways to strengthen international cooperation to combat
terrorism and violent extremism. In that connection, we
would like to make the following remarks.
First, if there has ever been, in our interconnected
world, a challenge that a nation cannot face alone, it
is that of terrorists who cross borders and threaten to
unleash violent extremism. Therefore, it is vital that
we act on several fronts at the same time. The role of
international cooperation and multilateralism at all
levels is critical to neutralizing this threat. Conversely,
any purely national effort will be in vain. We should all
strengthen the mechanisms for border control, exchange
of information and good practices in the prevention
of terrorism. We also believe that international
legal assistance is key to avoiding impunity for the
perpetrators of terrorist acts.
Secondly, we must address as a priority the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism. In the
long run, it is preventive measures that will effectively
contribute to eradicating terrorism. The emergence of
foreign terrorist fighters and violent extremism can
be attributed to situations such as extreme poverty,

14-6373963/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

marginalization, lack of opportunities and, especially,
youth unemployment. We must help all countries
develop their capacities to face this threat and overcome
it. We must build national resilience against terrorism.
States must foster societies in which individuals and
communities are able to resist the ideology of violent
extremism, challenge those who make it their own and
mitigate the impacts of a terrorist attack so as to return
quickly to daily life.
Thirdly, in the course of the past decade, we have
come to count on a number of operating tools to address
this issue and cooperate efficiently, taking into account
the needs and characteristics of each region. However,
we must continue to strengthen our international
legal instruments. The current international situation
requires, as soon as possible, a comprehensive
convention against terrorism. Its conclusion would
be a message of firmness and unity on the part of the
entire international community. In addition, it would
provide us with a definition of terrorism that would
make possible a universal classification of this heinous
act, facilitate cooperation and legal assistance among
States, and fill the existing gaps in the work of the
Security Council, including the legal frameworks for
its sanctions regimes.
Fourthly, I would like to mention the United
Nations efforts in the fight against terrorism. We
recognize the role that the Council and its subsidiary
bodies have played in promoting this cause. But the
Security Council cannot and should not do it alone. The
Council considers measures primarily ex post facto,
while in this case the main focus should be preventive,
addressing the conditions conducive to terrorism.
In that respect, sanctions against terrorism have the
potential to serve as a preventive measure, although
much remains to be done to improve their effectiveness
and implementation. We note with interest the analysis
that counter-terrorism committees are doing in response
to the request contained in resolution 2178 (2014).
What we would like to see is additional measures
to strengthen coordination, coherence, efficiency and
transparency among the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Secretariat and the United Nations
system. We believe that a greater spirit of collaboration
would make it possible to better and more adequately
respond to the particularities of each situation under
consideration and maximize the use of existing
structures and resources. We see no cost benefit in
creating new structures for every threat and challenge

64/83

19/11/2014

that arises. We suggest that existing capacities within
the Organization be reviewed before going ahead with
the proliferation of structures.
Finally, the international community faces a real
and growing threat is not new but is more diverse
and complex. In this lengthy process of combating
terrorism, we cannot forget the victims, who deserve
from us a tribute to their memory today. We express
our solidarity with the victims of terrorism and their
families.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this timely meeting and for the opportunity
to take part in it.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
We welcome the adoption of a strong presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/23) on counter-terrorism as
another step towards vigorous and continued action
within a framework for international cooperation and
response.
It is a fact that international terrorism has proliferated
with alarming speed. Several terrorist groups — the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), the Al-Nusra
Front and Boko Haram — continue to operate, reinforce
and expand. Their extremist agenda is not new, but their
violent propaganda and ideology and their unparalleled,
ruthless tactics have adapted to modern times. Their
unspeakable crimes have shocked the world with their
barbarity and defied human understanding.
The issue of foreign terrorist fighters has become
a central topic in organizing the response to the ISIS
expansion strategy. Determined, well-organized,
tech-savvy fanatics continue, to the world’s dismay, to
appeal to ever-younger people across the world. It has
been amply stressed and loudly repeated — ISIS is in no
way representative of the more than 1 billion Muslims
in the world, nor does it represent the mainstream
teachings of Islam. ISIS is more a sect than the State it
pretends to be. Its religious narrative exploits ignorance
first, but also frustration with the reality and a lost
sense of future for individuals. They take pride in being
ruthless killers, war-crime perpetrators and promoters
of the most obscurantist model of society and not, as
their propaganda seeks to indicate, the United Nations
of Islam.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We applaud the resolute action taken by the United
States, European allies and other States, which, as we
have noticed, is producing encouraging results. ISIS
knows by now that their free walk in both Syria and
Iraq has come to a serious stop. This is important
momentum, which needs to be fully seized and
reinforced through strengthened measures. We know
that the fight to eradicate ISIS will take time, but ISIS
and all fanatics know that that time has begun and has
accelerated.
Since the very beginning of the crisis, Albania has
been part of the international coalition to fight and
eradicate ISIS, and we remain as committed as ever.
We have supported the new Iraqi Government in its
fight against terrorism, and we remain committed to
continuing to provide both military and humanitarian
assistance. We have already contributed in the fight
against ISIS, donating a sizable quantity of weapons
and ammunition, and will continue our support in the
future.
Albania is among the first countries in the region
to have adopted tailored legal measures imposing stiff
criminal penalties for participation, and incitement
to participate, in foreign conflicts and for promoting,
organizing and financing foreign fighters. We have
strengthened regional cooperation, including exchanges
of information on the flow of foreign terrorist fighters.
We are cooperating very closely with our United States
and European allies in identifying foreign terrorist
fighters, determining the best response in every case
and prosecuting those who return from the conflict
area.
There is no doubt that terrorism and violent
extremism, including ISIS in particular, will be
defeated only through a combination of various
measures. The military defeat of ISIS remains the
most important immediate objective, and we think that
everything should be done in that respect. But that is
only one side of the coin. A much closer cooperation
among States — including primarily through early
warning, information-sharing, a proper implementation
of the United Nations counter-terrorism measures at
the country level and sharing of global terrorism best
practices — is needed more than ever. Successfully
countering the extremist ideology at the national level
is the most difficult part of this endeavour, and it is
a long-term objective. Education, communication and
community work remain key.

S/PV.7316

Finally, let us not forget that the world has had
success and gathered extensive experience in degrading
Al-Qaida with careful listing, disrupting financing
and targeted sanctions. That record should be further
strengthened and updated for the new requirements.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Ms. Muthukumarana (Sri Lanka): We thank the
presidency of Australia for organizing this important
open debate and for circulating a useful concept note
(S/2014/787).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The 9/11 terror attack focused the international
community’s attention as a whole on the threat of
international terrorism — a reality which was already
a part of daily experience in some parts of the world
including, Sri Lanka. Led by the United Nations, the
international community achieved significant success
in addressing this menace, particularly through
resolution 1373 (2001).
The recent atrocities committed by the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
associated terror groups have once again brought a
sense of urgency to the international community’s
efforts to combat terrorism. Militarily confronting a
non-State actor that resorts to asymmetric warfare is
extremely challenging, as the international community
has experienced during the decade-long and ongoing
effort to counter Al-Qaida. A terrorist organization
has no compunctions about safeguarding civilian lives
during military confrontations. In fact, many terrorist
groups intentionally and tactically resort to placing
civilians in harm’s way. We have seen this in the recent
brutal tactics that ISIL and associated terror groups
have unleashed on the civilian populations under their
control. Our thoughts and sympathies go out to the
countries whose citizens are subjected to ISIL terror
and torture.
In Sri Lanka, we experienced these tactics firsthand when the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(LTTE) relentlessly placed civilians in danger by using
them as human shields and hostages, despite repeated
calls, including by the United Nations, not to hold
civilians hostage. The LTTE strategy included holding
civilians hostage as a means of attracting international

14-6373965/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

attention and seeking external intervertion to subvert
the humanitarian operation that was under way to
rescue civilians from the clutches of the terrorists.
The complications involved in military engagement
with non-State actors should not deter our resolve to
counter international terrorism. No terrorist group
could survive for long without the critical support
of international linkages and networks. Therefore,
international cooperation to curtail sources of their
sustenance — including ideological, financial and
logistical support and recruitment — should be
prioritized.
Sri Lanka’s efforts to end a three-decade-long
terrorist conflict were assisted substantively by complex,
multifaceted and comprehensive coordination with the
international community. We remain grateful to all our
friends in the international community who assisted
and cooperated with us in numerous ways. Although
the conflict ended in 2009, the LTTE’s extensive
international network, funded by some sections of the
expatriate community, remains intact. There have been
several recent attempts to revive the armed elements of
the group in Sri Lanka in March 2012, December 2012
and April 2014. In the face of such attempts, Sri Lanka
remains vigilant to prevent any resurgence of terrorism
in the country.
The recently adopted resolution 2178 (2014)
recognizes that there is no military solution to the
problem of misguided individuals seeking to join
terrorist organizations. We wish to underline that the
root causes of terrorism and extremism are complex
and that these phenomena cannot be associated with
any ethnicity or religion. In today’s interconnected
world, it is very easy for agents of extremism to spread
their ideologies across national borders. They do not
need arms and ammunition to cause damage. However,
the damage they inflict can be more extensive and longlasting than the most devastating weapons. The end
result of extremist ideology is communities, regions
and even countries being riven apart by suspicion
and hatred. As resolution 2178 (2014) emphasizes,
it is important for States to engage relevant local
communities and other actors in developing strategies
to counter violent extremist narratives.
Sri Lanka takes serious note of its responsibilities
under the relevant Security Council resolutions. We
continue to extend our fullest cooperation to multilateral
and bilateral mechanisms that target international
terrorism. In 2010, we collaborated with the Counter66/83

19/11/2014

Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
in hosting a regional workshop in South Asia. On our
invitation, a CTED team visited Sri Lanka in October.
We work with our neighbours to promote regional
peace and stability through dialogue and cooperation
in the spheres of defence and security. We are party to
several regional counter-terrorism conventions of the
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
In November, Sri Lanka will host the inaugural
South and Southeast Asian Nations Defence Chiefs’
Dialogue 2014, with the participation of defence chiefs
of the region. The annual Galle Dialogue, hosted by
Sri Lanka, focuses on the threat of piracy. As an island
nation, Sri Lanka strives to fulfil its responsibilities
in terms of maritime security. Preventing various
transnational crimes — including drug smuggling,
arms smuggling and human trafficking, which are
connected to international terrorism — is essential to
the long-term security of our country and the wider
region. Together with India and Maldives, Sri Lanka
participates in a trilateral mechanism for cooperation
in maritime security. Moreover, Sri Lanka remains
vigilant about extremist elements transiting through
our territory.
We wholeheartedly support the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We should
also make every effort for the early finalization
and adoption of the United Nations comprehensive
convention on international terrorism. We hope that our
efforts in the Council will have a constructive impact
on strengthening the United Nations counter-terrorism
initiatives and further invigorate the Security Council’s
commitment to strengthening international cooperation
in combating terrorism.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Cuba.
Mr. Reyes Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
fully support the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Cuba reiterates its deepest rejection and
condemnation of all acts, methods and practices
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations; by
whomever, against whomsoever and wherever they may
occur; and whatever their motivations, including cases
in which States are directly or indirectly involved. The
fight against terrorism must include prevention, direct
confrontation and the implementation of concrete
actions against its root causes. Cuba is a party to 16

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international conventions on terrorism, and strictly
fulfils its obligations under resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
My country reiterates its support for the adoption of
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
that would close existing loopholes. It also favours
the convening of an international conference under
United Nations auspices for a coordinated response
of the international community against terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations. Unfortunately, the
opposition of a small number of States has made all
such action impossible.
On 30 April, the Department of State of the
United States of America issued its Country Reports on
Terrorism 2013, in which, for the thrity-second time, it
maintained its absurb designation of Cuba as a State
sponsor of terrorism. Including Cuba on this list is
yet another excuse to continue to justify the blockage
against us that has been in place for more than 50 years
and which has been overwhelmingly repudiated by the
international community.
For decades Cuba has suffered the consequences of
terrorist acts organized, financed and carried out from
United States territory and resulting in 3,478 people
killed and 2,099 disabled, only because they tried to
defend their independence, sovereignty and dignity as
Cubans.
We reject the double standards of the United
States Government’s policy by which it refuses to try
and allows to remain free the perpetrators of terrorist
acts against Cuba, including Luis Posada Carriles, the
mastermind of the first terrorist attack against civil
aviation in the Western hemisphere, which led to the
explosion in mid-flight of a Cubana de Aviación plane
off the Barbados coast on 6 October 1976, killing its
73 passengers. Paradoxically, it continues its prolonged
and unjust incarceration of our Cuban counter-terrorism
fighters, Gerardo Hernández, Ramón Labañino and
Antonio Guerrero, who were tried for crimes that they
had not committed.
Cuba firmly rejects the manipulation of an issue as
delicate as international terrorism to use it as political
tool against Cuba and demands that Cuba be definitely
expunged from that spurious unilateral and arbitrary
list, which is also an affront to the people of Cuba
and a discredit to the United States Government and
its proclaimed commitment to fighting international
terrorism.

S/PV.7316

The international community should not accept
that certain States should commit acts of aggression,
directly or indirectly, against sovereign peoples under
the pretext that they are fighting terrorism. We are
convinced that an effective fight against terrorism will
not be possible if we limit ourselves to condemning
only some terrorist acts while silently tolerating or
justifying others in seeking to promote our own political
and economic interests.
We reaffirm our commitment to continuing to work
to strengthen the central role of the United Nations
in adopting measures and devising a comprehensive
legal framework to tackle international terrorism. We
support multilateral and bilateral cooperation to that
end. Cuba is a victim of this scourge, and we are firmly
committed to continuing to cooperate with all countries
to prevent and punish acts of terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada): I would like to begin by
thanking the Permanent Mission of Australia for
convening this debate and for the presence earlier in
the day of Foreign Minister Bishop.
Canada and Australia enjoy a strong and
multifaceted relationship in many areas, including
counter-terrorism. Our two nations face similar
security challenges, and consequently our approaches
converge in many respects. The solidarity expressed
by Australian leaders following the recent attack in
Ottawa was reflective of our strong bilateral ties and
very much appreciated by the people of Canada.
These heinous and senseless attacks against
members of our armed forces remind us of the threat
posed by those who would commit violence in the name
of radical ideas, beliefs and motives. Such threats are
truly an international problem to which no country is
immune.
However, as tragic and shocking to Canadians as
those attacks were, Canada is still very fortunate. We
have largely been spared the scourge that has afflicted
some of our closest friends and allies. Let me reiterate
Canada’s condemnation of the savage and cowardly
attack in Jerusalem yesterday, only the latest outrage
suffered by Israel, all the more abhorrent for having
cynically targeted civilians in a place of worship. It
is clear to us that the extremist actions of those who
perpetrated this attack are fuelled by incitement,

14-6373967/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

by the irresponsible rhetoric of those in positions of
responsibility.
I would also like to emphasize the waves of
violent extremism that have targeted the world’s
largest democracy. Canada stands in solidarity with
India, and I recall my Government’s condemnation
of the sophisticated, coordinated attacks that targeted
innocent civilians in Mumbai, six years ago next week,
an example that highlights how violent extremism can
become even more dangerous when abetted by the
capacities of a sovereign State.
I would also mention the challenge of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant that confronts us all today.
That group has ambitions to establish a terrorist State,
using the resources of a State to amplify its poisonous,
extremist message; turn naïve and misguided recruits
into hardened terrorists; and export fighters to conduct
attacks around the world. In Iraq, we are confronting
extremism with military force, and Canada is proud to
stand with its allies against this global threat.
(spoke in French)
An
effective
response
requires
genuine
commitment and cooperation on all of our parts.
Canada’s counter-terrorism strategy, “Building
resilience against terrorism”, reflects the Government
of Canada’s commitment to protecting Canadians
at home and abroad. The strategy emphasizes four
mutually reinforcing approaches to combating violent
extremism: prevent, detect, deny and respond.
Domestically, Canada’s approach to countering
violent extremism is built around three mutually
supportive themes: building community capacity;
building law-enforcement capacity; and stopping
radicalization to violence through early intervention.
From a community perspective, our Government
supports family members, peers, religious and
community leaders, who are often best able to identify
and respond to the changes in attitude and behaviour
that can be precursors to violent extremist action. One
Canadian initiative which provides such support is the
Cross-Cultural Round Table on Security. The Round
Table brings together community leaders to exchange
views on emerging developments in national security
issues and their impact on Canada’s diverse and
pluralistic society.
Canadian law-enforcement agencies utilize
community policing as an effective means to counter

68/83

19/11/2014

violent extremism. That approach takes the view that
police officers should understand violent extremism as
well as they would any other type of criminal behavior.
To this end, the Government of Canada is enhancing
existing law-enforcement training on violent extremism,
most notably through the Royal Canadian Mounted
Police (RCMP) Counter-Terrorism Information Officer
initiative, which provides front-line police officers and
other first responders with critical training around the
warnings and indicators of violent extremism.
Early intervention in pre-criminal spaces is no
guarantee that a person will not radicalize to violence
or travel abroad to take part in terrorist activity. But as
a tool for redirecting potential violent extremists, it is a
useful approach to reducing the number of individuals
requiring investigation and prosecution.
(spoke in English)
Prevention techniques do not always succeed, and
once an individual crosses the threshold to actively
supporting terrorism, Canada takes action to detect and
deny such activity. The 2012 Combating Terrorism Act
created the new offences of leaving or attempting to
leave Canada for the purpose of committing terrorismrelated offences. The RCMP leads a High-risk Travel
Case Management Group that involves Government
departments and agencies working closely with law
enforcement. The Group examines cases of extremist
travellers to tailor the best response to the most pressing
cases. The responses have proven timely, effective
and accountable, and comply with the framework that
guides law enforcement and Government action. The
framework identifies a continuum of actions that may
be taken for several purposes — detecting extremist
travellers taking a leave, disrupting attempts to travel
for terrorism-related activities when they do occur, and
responding to extremist travellers’ return to Canada
after participating in terrorism-related activities
abroad.
Cooperation with Canada’s international allies is
also vital. Canada and the United States, for example,
have made significant strides to meet commitments
made under the Beyond the Border Action Plan. The
Action Plan committed both countries to establish and
coordinate entry-exit information systems at our land
borders and to work towards a similar system for air
travel. The information generated by this programme
will improve border management capacity, passenger
screening and the ability of law enforcement and national

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

security officials to conduct timely investigations into
extremist travel abroad.
Violent extremism is a long-term global challenge
that demands effective international cooperation.
In this regard, the United Nations plays a key role in
developing international standards and best practices.
Canada is committed to working with the United
Nations to implement the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and was pleased to participate in the biennial
review in June. Canada encourages Member States
to support multilateral counter-terrorism efforts and
urges United Nations entities to take a coordinated,
action-oriented and results-based approach to counterterrorism efforts. The value of international cooperation
was well illustrated by the recent Security Council
debate on foreign fighters (see S/PV.7272), in which
Canada participated and was pleased to co-sponsor the
resultant resolution 2178 (2014).
Other multilateral forums such as the Global
Counterterrorism Forum (GCTF) serve an important
role in complementing the work of the United Nations.
Canada is active in the GCTF working group on
countering violent extremism, where we lead a project
on measuring the effectiveness of countering violent
extremism programming. The Hedayah Centre, based
in the United Arab Emirates, also provides a key source
of knowledge and best practices related to this issue.
Canada is also pleased to chair the GCTF’s Sahel
working group with Algeria. As Chair, Canada has
focused on organizing training and workshops that are
action-oriented and outcome-driven. The efforts of the
working group have contributed to the development of
best practices, a shared understanding of local threats
and the effective coordination of programming in the
region. Our experience in the Sahel reflects the ability
of the GCTF to mobilize and coordinate resources in
support of counter-terrorism capacity-building and
serves as a useful model for wider multilateral efforts.
Violent extremism is one of the greatest threats to
global peace and security. The international community
must work together to meet this challenge and
counter the appalling violence committed by terrorist
organizations. Canada will continue to work with our
partners to address violent extremism in all its forms.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would like to
express our congratulations to Australia for assuming

S/PV.7316

the presidency of the Security Council. Additionally,
Mr. President, I would like to express my appreciation
for your continuing to preside over this meeting in spite
of the fact that your other colleagues, members of the
Council, do not find it attractive at this time of the day to
remain in the Chamber. It shows personal commitment
on your part, Sir, to the work of the Council and the
subject that we are considering today, and I thank you
for it.
Recent acts of terrorism on our continent and
further afield suggest that, despite concerted efforts by
Members States, the phenomenon continues to grow and
evolve, creating instability and untold consequences
for innocent populations and the regions they inhabit.
No country or continent is immune from the threat.
Given terrorism’s global reach and its changing nature,
international cooperation has become even more
important in Member States’ efforts to counter it.
International efforts should support a comprehensive,
multifaceted and integrated approach to address, inter
alia, the abuse of financial systems by terrorists,
cybersecurity, the increasing use of social media and
the Internet in radicalization, including incitement to
hatred, the merging of the link between ideological
extremism and transnational organized crime, and
kidnapping and hostage-taking for ransom. Terrorism
poses a threat to international peace and security and
to the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It is imperative that the international
community adopt adequate measures to counter it.
The South African Government continues to
pledge its support for the global campaign against
terrorism within the framework of the United Nations,
which my delegation regards as pivotal in coordinating
and facilitating international efforts to that end,
particularly when dealing with the emergence of new
threats. South Africa supports the strengthening of
the multilateral system to deal with such efforts and
acknowledges the work being done by the General
Assembly and the subsidiary structures of the Security
Council in that regard. We also welcome initiatives and
efforts that promote dialogue, tolerance, diversity and
understanding among peoples, cultures and religions.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains a useful collective and flexible tool
for guiding the international community’s response
to terrorism. It provides a holistic and multifaceted
response to the challenge and is premised on respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the

14-6373969/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

rule of law. It is up to each country and subregion to
put the Strategy in its respective context and make it
meaningful to the diverse range of local stakeholders,
which is necessary for its successful implementation.
The growing threat of terrorism has also highlighted
the need for the international community to reach
agreement on a definition of terrorism. It is therefore
important that we continue our efforts to finalize the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
South Africa reiterates its view that terrorism
cannot be defeated militarily and cannot be dealt with
solely through the use of force or coercive measures.
In the medium term, international cooperation must
also address the root causes of terrorism. There is
a need to understand and address the conditions that
make terrorism an attractive option to the disaffected.
Engagement, including through education, eliminating
inequalities and working with disadvantaged groups
in society, particularly young people, and developing
appropriate strategies at the national, regional and
international levels, remains critical.
In that context, it also becomes important to resolve
conflicts in all parts of the globe, including the search
for lasting peace in the Middle East. Illegal occupation
and the denial of freedom and the right to selfdetermination create fertile ground for recruitment.
Political solutions aimed at resolving conflict and
creating the conditions for a better future over the long
term are required.
International cooperation in combating terrorism
should also include a joint commitment to eradicate
poverty and underdevelopment. Countermeasures can
never be sustainable if these factors are not addressed
in tandem with counter-terrorism initiatives.
South Africa stands firm in its condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and believes that terrorist acts
and attacks against civilians cannot be condoned. That
approach is integral to the humanitarian values that
inspired our struggle for freedom and governed our
conduct during that period.
South Africa has taken note of the proposal
to establish the post of a Special Representative
on extremism within the United Nations system.
In considering this option, it is important that the
mandate and scope of the Special Representative’s role
be clarified, as well as the relationship between the
Special Representative and the existing United Nations
structures dealing with terrorism, each of which each
70/83

19/11/2014

has its own specific mandate. My delegation is of the
firm view that the creation of any new office should
be measured in terms of its contribution to facilitating
international efforts to counter terrorism, rather than
duplicating work already being done or by placing
additional burdens on Member States, especially those
in the developing world.
In conclusion, we wish to take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, for including this important
debate in the Council’s programme of work.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate and, in the
process, underscoring Australia’s prominent leadership
on this issue.
Without a doubt, terrorism remains an issue of
pressing and shared concern. Today’s world bears
witness to terrorism in its modern form, eschewing
borders and authority, propagating indiscriminate
violence, and finding refuge and support in fragile
States, in vulnerable communities and, as the
representative of Kyrgyzstan emphasized much earlier,
among the disenfranchised. Terrorism brings real but
not insurmountable threats that demand our collective
action. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
and terrorist entities associated with Al-Qaida bring
those threats into sharp relief. Their barbarous acts,
described yesterday by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights as “monstrous” crimes (see S/PV.7314),
are well documented and sometimes vividly and
provocatively displayed with appalling deliberation.
Foreign fighters are further exacerbating the problem
as bearers of extremism, often into areas between
conflict zones.
New Zealand therefore welcomes the resolve of the
international coalition with its comprehensive strategy
to combat ISIL in Iraq. In the short term, military
action to halt ISIL’s advance is vital, but long-term
solutions will require much more. They will require
support for inclusive governance in Iraq, a political
solution to Syria’s violent stalemate and measures to
counter ISIL’s narrative of violent extremism. We
therefore welcome Iraq’s shared commitment to tackle
that difficult problem.
Like South Africa’s representative speaking
just before me, New Zealand supports the four-pillar
approach in the United Nations Global Counter14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Terrorism Strategy: addressing conditions that spread
terrorism, preventing and combating terrorism,
counter-terrorism capacity-building and respecting
human rights and the rule of law. We also urge States
to draw on mechanisms provided by the Council itself,
such as the Al-Qaida sanctions regime for stemming the
flow of individuals and entities that fund and carry out
terrorist acts, and we urge States to share best legislative
practices to deal with terrorism-related offences. States
must share enforcement and operational information
and must increase the effectiveness of national, regional
and international coordinating mechanisms. Shared
problems require shared solutions, so New Zealand was
very pleased to support the comprehensive approach of
resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign terrorist fighters.
New Zealand’s approach to combating terrorism
is based on a coordinated, whole-of-Government
response, including working at the grass-roots level to
build resilience to radicalization and to recruitment.
We also draw on our own domestic experience to
support our regional and international partners in
countering violent terrorism, and we provide support
to counter-terrorism capacity-building efforts through
community policing, border control, civil aviation and
the detention and reintegration of terrorist detainees.
The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, mentioned by
others, facilitates cooperation between States on those
issues. Its best practices and guidelines for countering
violent extremism and terrorist fighters and for the
adjudication of offences are an excellent resource, and
we urge States to contribute to them and use them to
guide their work.
Terrorism threats also demand that we work
together to confront the problem at the political level.
Specifically, in that regard, we agree with Guatemala,
South Africa and others that we must make progress on
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism.
New Zealand looks forward to next year’s discussion
directed towards moving discussions on that topic
forward.
I thank you again, Mr. President, for calling and
convening this debate. The Council must be not only
a reflective but also a decisive body for international
decisions regarding terrorism, and New Zealand
commits itself to contributing to all such discussions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this

S/PV.7316

open debate on an issue of paramount significance to
international peace and security. The growing threat of
terrorism and violent extremism is indeed a common
challenge that calls for a common and collective
response from States and the international community
as a whole. In that regard, it is appropriate to recall the
2005 World Summit Outcome, which states:
“We strongly condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, committed by whomever,
wherever and for whatever purposes, as it constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security” (General Assembly resolution 60/1,
para. 81).
It is against that backdrop that the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was adopted in 2006
with a view to promoting comprehensive, coordinated
and consistent responses at the national, regional and
international levels. By adopting the Strategy, we, the
Member States, agreed, among others, to refrain from
directly and indirectly encouraging terrorism and to
take appropriate measures to ensure that our territories
are not used for terrorist installations or training camps
or for the preparation or organization of terrorist acts
intended to be committed against other States or their
citizens.
We also agreed to deny safe haven and to bring
to justice any person who supports, facilitates,
participates or attempts to participate in the financing,
planning, preparation or perpetration of terrorist acts
or provides safe havens. It must be emphasized that
those obligations have not always been adhered to. We
therefore need to ask ourselves today how far we have
gone in terms of translating the Strategy into concrete
actions. In numerous instances, a double standard
is clearly apparent, thus undermining our efforts to
respond to the threat posed by terrorism in an effective,
coherent and coordinated manner.
It is no exaggeration to state that terrorists groups
and their affiliates seem to have better cooperation
among themselves than do Member States that claim
to be fighting terrorism. The concept note (S/2014/787,
annex) gives an accurate account of the networks
established by those terrorist groups across many
regions, using the Internet and social media to spread
their extremist ideology and recruit foreign fighters.
Non-profit organizations are also sometimes used or
abused as fronts for the financing of terrorism, and that
is a major concern that came out clearly at a meeting
organized by the Organization for Security and

14-6373971/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Cooperation in Europe held in Bratislava on 28 October
2014. It is therefore unthinkable that one could reverse
the tide of terrorism and violent extremism without
forging genuine, practical and effective cooperation at
all levels. Sadly, we do not see such cooperation, and
frankly speaking, there is a lot of hypocrisy in that
area, which is tragic in the light of the gravity of the
situation and the mortal danger it represents to the
global community.
We in Africa have had some useful experience in the
fight against terrorism. Our continental efforts started
back in the days of the former Organization of African
Unity (OAU), which culminated in the adoption of the
OAU Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism. What has been lacking, however, has been
practical cooperation and effective implementation of
the existing legal instruments. It is in the light of that
fact that the African Union Peace and Security Council
met, as mentioned in the statement of its 455th meeting,
which was held in Nairobi in September 2014 at the level
of heads of State and Government. The outcome of the
Summit provided a practical framework for flexible and
action-oriented processes for intelligence-sharing and
security cooperation, a framework building on existing
national and regional efforts to fight terrorism. In that
context, Ethiopia has already established practical
cooperation and is coordinating its efforts with
countries in the subregion through intelligence-sharing
and the exchange of valuable experiences.
Let me conclude by reiterating Ethiopia’s commitment
to enhancing effective international cooperation in
combating the scourge of terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending my delegation’s appreciation to Australia for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the Chair of the 1267 Committee
and the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee for
their briefings.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
The convening of this open debate is timely, given
the steady momentum and assortment of threats posed

72/83

19/11/2014

by terrorist organizations in the past few months,
particularly by the murderous group that calls itself the
“Islamic State.” Indeed, the rise of the so-called Islamic
State, along with other forbidding developments in the
realm of terrorist groups in various parts of the world,
calls for more robust and integrated counter-terrorism
cooperation. It is extremely critical for us to stay a
long way ahead of terrorist groups. We must be able
to identify new challenges and anticipate developments
that might need a fresh look or approach.
In 2006, we all agreed on the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which remains the comprehensive
strategic policy framework for counter-terrorism
cooperation. While I reiterate Indonesia’s advocacy
of a balanced implementation of the Strategy, I would
like to stress that pillar I of the Plan of Action in the
annex to the Strategy needs to be accorded continuing
special priority. Pillar I deals with measures to address
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
Against that backdrop, Indonesia is very much in line
with the idea in the concept note for today’s meeting
(S/2014/787, annex), which emphasizes the importance
of de-radicalization and counter-radicalization.
Terrorism and other forms of extremism arise out
of pure hatred and bigotry. The resulting sense of
superiority over others offers terrorists and other
extremists the justification to do whatever they please
in order to achieve their intended goals.
In the face of that menace, Indonesia reaffirms that
preventive measures are among the best approaches for
addressing terrorism and extremism. In that context,
we have been an ardent advocate of promoting the
values of tolerance and respect, as critical components
of our efforts to counter the ideology of violence. And
as a multicultural and multi-faith country, we have
learned to believe strongly in the efficacy of dialogue.
Tolerance and respect must be nurtured, as they can
only be cultivated in open minds and fertilized by
education and interaction.
Opening the minds of convicted terrorists
forms the backbone of Indonesia’s deradicalization
programme. It is a nationally-integrated programme
aimed at coordinating all relevant stakeholders in
de-radicalization efforts, and includes not only lawenforcement agencies, but also religious authorities
at the Government and community levels. Our
deradicalization efforts begin in the prisons and
detention centres. Through dialogue and discussion,
we seek to instil the principle of moderation in the

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

convicted terrorists. We even facilitate discussion
between them and moderate clerics in order to ensure
that deradicalization achieves its objectives. Our broadrange deradicalization programme also includes efforts
to rehabilitate convicted terrorists and prepare them for
reintegration into society.
Let me make it clear that deradicalization is a
complex programme with enormous challenges. Hardcore terrorists, for example, are extremely difficult to
re-educate and reintegrate. In some cases, the effort to
reintegrate them carries the high risk of putting them
in a position where they can attempt to spread their
extreme views to other prisoners. That is one reason
behind the inauguration of a deradicalization centre
earlier this year in Indonesia. The centre will serve not
only as a venue for the de-radicalization programme,
but also for research and training in de-radicalization
issues.
International cooperation is increasingly instrumental
in our fight against terrorism. In that regard, I wish to
reiterate Indonesia’s support for the primary role of
the United Nations in orchestrating global counterterrorism cooperation. We remain convinced that
the United Nations can and should play a stronger
role in building States’ capacities to implement the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, including through
deradicalization and counter-radicalization.
Along that line, allow me to highlight the cooperation
between Indonesia and your country, Australia, as
Co-Chairs of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum’s
Detention and Reintegration Working Group. I wish to
recall the message of the Working Group’s inaugural
meeting, held in Indonesia in August earlier this year,
which underlined the importance of sharing countries’
experiences, expertise and best practices in capacitybuilding for deradicalization, counter-radicalization
and detention-management for convicted terrorists.
Indonesia also believes that dialogue is an
effective antidote to the complex challenge of foreign
terrorist fighters. As part of our preventive measures,
the Government has aligned itself with religious
organizations and community leaders to detect and
counter appeals to become a foreign terrorist fighter.
Meanwhile, as part of our law enforcement efforts,
we have also increased surveillance over Indonesians
who travel into conflict areas. We are also stepping
up cooperation with relevant overseas authorities for

S/PV.7316

early detection, should an Indonesian citizen become a
foreign terrorist fighter.
To conclude, Indonesia would like to highlight
the fact that foreign terrorist fighters continue to take
advantage of situations of conflict, instability, and
political turbulence. The obvious challenge before the
United Nations is to work, without delay, to resolve
conflicts throughout the world and help establish peace
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van der Vliet (Netherlands): The Netherlands
welcomes the Council’s strong presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23, and aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the European Union.
I would like to make some additional remarks in my
national capacity.
The direct threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters
concerns us all. Both international peace and security
and national security are at risk. The Netherlands
is actively engaged in addressing extremism and
terrorism in partnership with the United Nations,
the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, the European
Union and other partners. Our participation in the
international military coalition in Iraq is a clear sign of
our determination to contribute to international efforts
to combat terrorism.
I would like to highlight three issues: first, the
action taken in the context of the Global CounterTerrorism Forum; secondly, our national programme
to deal with foreign terrorist fighters; and thirdly, our
vision with regard to the role of the United Nations.
During its ministerial meeting in September, the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum (GCTF) adopted
a comprehensive set of non-binding good practices
to address all aspects of the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon. These recommendations cover not
only counter-terrorism responses, but also preventive
efforts, including efforts aimed at countering violent
extremism, recruitment and facilitation, travel and
return. As co-leader, together with Morocco, of the
GCTF Working Group on Foreign Terrorist Fighters, the
Netherlands will actively promote these good practices.
We stand ready to work closely with all United Nations
Member States and United Nations partners on this
issue.

14-6373973/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The Netherlands has launched a comprehensive
action programme to deal with foreign terrorist fighters.
The action programme has three main objectives: to
protect democracy and the rule of law, to diminish the
threat posed by foreign fighters in the Netherlands, and
to remove the breeding ground for radicalization. The
national action programme contains several measures
to prevent, detect and counter radicalization and to
encourage alternative narratives, enhance resilience and
address social tensions. Front-line professionals from
all sectors of society are closely involved in countering
radicalization, including through the Internet and
social media. The national action programme also
focuses on risk reduction regarding the travel of foreign
terrorist fighters. This includes penal, administrative
and social measures. Potential departures are prevented
or disrupted.
The United Nations is a cornerstone of global efforts
to counter terrorism and violent extremism. It brings all
nations together to share challenges and best practices.
The Netherlands welcomes the active engagement of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force in support of Member States’ efforts to address
the threats posed by international terrorism. The
mainstreaming of measures to prevent radicalization
and to counter terrorism across the United Nations
agenda is a high priority, as is combating the financing
of terrorism through an effective use of the sanctions
regime.
The traditional reluctance of development
programmes to address terrorism should be overcome so
that the United Nations can deliver on its potential and
contribute at the national level to inclusive participation
in societies and equal access for all to opportunities and
basic services. In this manner, it can address the root
causes of terrorism. We would also welcome more work
on the role of long-term counter-terrorism policies in the
context of United Nations peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention.
In conclusion, international cooperation is
essential to combating terrorism and the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. National experiences and
challenges can help others in adjusting their approach
to incorporate best practices. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is ready to be a partner in preventing and
combating terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
74/83

19/11/2014

Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this very important meeting today. Ukraine
fully supports the position of the Security Council that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations constitutes
one of the most serious threats to international peace
and security and that all acts of terrorism are criminal
and unjustifiable regardless of their motivations.
Almost every day we learn with deep sorrow of
new victims of terrorist attacks that occur in all corners
of the world. This world evil can be eliminated only
through consolidated and decisive measures taken
by the international community. Ukraine is deeply
concerned about the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist entities
associated with Al-Qaida, and by the negative impact
of their presence, violent extremist ideology and
actions on the stability of Iraq, Syria and the region,
including their devastating humanitarian impact on
civilian populations.
Ukraine supports the central role of the United
Nations in the global effort to suppress international
terrorism and in promoting international cooperation
in this field. The United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy continues to be central to addressing
the evolving trends of the terrorist phenomenon, and to
doing so in an integrated and balanced way.
Ukraine is a party to about 20 multilateral
conventions and protocols in the field of counterterrorism. The Ukrainian Government is actively
involved in counter-terrorism cooperation with many
international and regional organizations, including
the United Nations, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe, and the
Financial Action Task Force, as well as Organization
for Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM.
Nuclear terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction continue to be among the most
challenging threats to international security. I am proud
to say that my country plays a leading role in preventing
nuclear terrorism. Furthering its long-standing goals
in nuclear nonproliferation, Ukraine has responsibly
implemented its pledge to get rid of all national stocks
of highly enriched uranium. The meaning of this
voluntary step is clear — Ukraine is a consistent and
reliable partner that makes a valuable contribution to
combating nuclear terrorism and strengthening the
entire system of nuclear safety and security. And this
is despite the foreign aggression that my country has
recently experienced.
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Unfortunately, as of recent date, the problem
of terrorism has become pertinent to my country.
As Council members may know, the Government
of Ukraine has been conducting counter-terrorism
operations in the east of Ukraine since March. This
operation fully complies with the Charter of the United
Nations and all their other obligations of Ukraine under
international law, in particular international human
rights law, international refugee law and international
humanitarian law.
It is incredible that terrorism should be occurring
in a country where the terrorist threat was assessed by
United Nations experts as low just a few months before
the occupation of Crimea by the Russian Federation and
the establishment of the terrorist organizations known
as the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s republics. As it
turns out, foreign factors might encourage this evil to
grow rapidly. The situation in the world in general and
in my country in particular shows that the international
community must redouble its efforts in the fight against
terror.
Ukraine is extremely concerned over the blatant
violation of international counter-terrorism treaties on
the part of some States. One of our neighbors continues
to break its international obligations with respect to
terrorism. In particular, it has completely neglected
its obligations under the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism of 1999
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings of 1997. That State, acting
through various State institutions and physical and
legal entities under its direct control, is committing the
crime of terrorism. It was the unlawful actions of this
neighbour that led to the occupation of the Crimea and
the destabilization of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
of Ukraine.
As is evident in the situation in Ukraine, terrorism
can be used as a form of hidden aggression against
sovereign States. We call upon the international
community to continue to take decisive action to
combat State or State-sponsored terrorism against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of its members.
We believe that some of the principles enshrined in the
Declaration adopted by the International Conference on
the Question of Terrorism of 1987 (A/42/307, annex),
reflecting the essence of the notion of State terrorism,
can be taken as a basis for the preparation of a new
legally binding instrument in this field.

S/PV.7316

Without the bona fide fulfillment of international
treaties and the sincere cooperation of all States parties,
any international effort in the area of counter-terrorism,
including the efforts of the Security Council, shall be
in vain. On our part, I would like to underline that
Ukraine will continue to be committed to cooperation
at the international, regional and subregional levels in
order to make the worldwide environment completely
intolerant of terrorism and its supporters.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): Let me start by joining
other delegations in congratulating Australia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month
of November. I also wish to express my delegation’s
sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this
important debate on international cooperation in
combating terrorism and violent extremism.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Botswana strongly condemns acts of terrorism in all
their forms and manifestations and wishes to reiterate its
unwavering support for the efforts of the international
community towards the promotion and protection of
international peace and security. Terrorism and violent
extremism remain serious threats to national, regional
and international peace and security. Acts of terrorism
have shown that terrorism knows no boundaries and
that no country is exempt from such heinous crimes.
My delegation has been following with horror and
disbelief the emergence of violent extremist groups
and foreign terrorist fighters in the Middle East region
who have no regard for human life. There is no doubt
that the existence of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front in Iraq and
Syria is a blatant challenge to international peace and
security. During this year alone, they have committed
atrocious acts against humanity ranging from bombing
neighbourhoods to beheading innocent people.
The recent beheading of a United States
humanitarian worker, Mr. Peter Kassig, has gripped the
consciousness of humankind, while demonstrating how
savage and senseless these terrorists are. My delegation
condemns in the strongest possible terms this barbaric
and grisly killing, which was captured on videotape and
shamelessly broadcast for the entire world to watch.

14-6373975/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

That just goes to show that no nation can
single-handedly fight and root out organized terror.
Therefore, a comprehensive and holistic approach is the
only way to tackle this problem.
Poor
governance,
discrimination,
political
exclusion and inequitable economic development,
among other things, are some of the factors that have
been found to create social tension, which has the
potential to precipitate terrorism. Governments should
therefore guard against such conditions, as they provide
a breeding ground for terrorism.
In that regard, we believe that developing strong
institutions of governance, the promotion of the rule of
law and the promotion and protection of human rights
provide a useful foundation for countering terrorism.
Needless to say, it is the duty and responsibility of
States to ensure that citizens are protected from crimes
against humanity, genocide, war crimes and crimes of
aggression.
We call on the international community to scale
up its cooperation assistance to strengthen institutions
that promote good governance and the rule of law. That
can go a long way in making the world a more secure
and prosperous place for the benefit of both present and
future generations of humankind.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Botswana’s
commitment to the fight against terrorism and
impunity. We remain disheartened by the fact that
the perpetrators of terrorist acts continue to wantonly
undermine international humanitarian law and human
rights law through their activities. Yet they still remain
at large, frustrating the course of justice and continuing
to endanger the lives of innocent women and children.
That state of affairs must cease forthwith.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European Unon.
I should like to add several remarks in my national
capacity.
Croatia welcomes the adoption of today’s
presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/23) and the
Security Council’s strong focus on the ever-increasing
threat of terrorism and violent extremism.
It is obvious that no State can consider itself
immune to from this threat, which has many forms

76/83

19/11/2014

and is carried out with total disregard for moral norms
and legal constraints. We need unified action in order
to respond adequately, efficiently and in a timely
manner. In that regard, we support and encourage the a
regular sharing of best practices by the United Nations
system and Member States, especially in terms of the
implementation of resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014).
It is our strong belief that the United Nations needs
to play a central role in global counter-terrorism efforts.
The United Nations has a variety of tools that can be
used to tackle this issue, be it from the suppressive or
preventive angles. However, we believe that there is still
untapped potential when it comes to dealing with the
conditions conducive to the development and spreading
of violent extremism and radicalization that may lead
to terrorism.
Decisive law-enforcement measures — as well as,
when needed, military operations — are a necessary
part of the efforts in the fight against terrorism.
Nevertheless, the fact that there is a growing number
of foreign terrorist fighters shows that the threat of
imprisonment or even the possible loss of life may not
be sufficient deterrents to discourage future terrorists.
Therefore, we should avoid a simplistic approach
that puts emphasis only the security dimension while
neglecting all other aspects. There is an apparent need
for an integrated approach that incorporates political,
social, economic, environmental and security aspects.
By addressing issues such as political and social
discrimination, exclusion and marginalization and the
lack of economic or any other prospects, we are making
the environment less fertile for further recruitment
of new terrorists. By spreading and nurturing
education, knowledge, mutual tolerance, interfaith and
intercultural understanding and respect among peoples,
we can inflict a significant blow on the misleading
narratives and ideologies of violent extremism and
terrorism.
We believe that special attention should be paid to
the ways and means of incorporating counter-terrorism
programmes within peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities.
We see that terrorist influence can spread fast,
particularly in areas that have suffered the dire
consequences of armed conflicts. Terrorists thrive in
the absence of efficient and legitimate Governments.
The lack of good governance and the rule of law

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

provides the ultimate environment for radicalization.
Terrorists easily find safe havens and recruiting grounds
in contexts of prolonged or unresolved conflicts where
human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy
are constantly at risk or non-existent.
We therefore support the calls for mainstreaming
counter-terrorism programmes throughout the United
Nations agenda, both security- and non-securityrelated. We welcome the significant results already
achieved in that regard, but we believe that we should
ensure greater cooperation, coordination and coherence
within the United Nations system, as well as with
regional and subregional organizations.
Universal threats such as terrorism require
a collective response, including developing new
conventions and protocols against terrorism. Datasharing and strategic communication networks are also
important parts of international cooperation in this
area.
Furthermore, we would like to highlight the
important role of civil society, the private sector,
religious authorities and the media in promoting
tolerance and respect for religious and cultural
diversity, which contributes to preventing terrorism.
Each Member State should seek to find the best way
to effectively empower them and engage for this cause.
In today’s world, the Internet can have a very
important role in spreading violent extremist messages.
However, it can also be an important tool to counter
the appeal of terrorism and to reach out to younger
generations who might be susceptible to radical
propaganda. We believe that it is worth further
exploring the potential of the Internet as a platform for
deradicalization.
Allow me to assure you, Sir, that Croatia is firmly
committed to the goal of preventing and suppressing
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations at the
national, regional and global levels. In that we are
guided by the principles and values set out in the
Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other relevant
international legal instruments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important meeting devoted to counter-terrorism

S/PV.7316

and extremism. These two scourges are the cause of
untold suffering across the world. The international
community should galvanize its efforts through
international cooperation, which is increasingly
important, to tackle the challenges of international
peace and security undermined by acts of terrorism
perpetrated by extremist groups, which pose a threat to
numerous regions across the world.
The Kingdom of Bahrain has joined the international
coalition. In the statement delivered on behalf of my
country during the general debate of the current session
of the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.17), the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain, His
Excellency Shaikh Khalid Bin Ahmed Al-Khalifa,
stressed three main areas for action. The first of these
is the security and military area, owing to the growing
threat posed by these terrorist groups as they acquire
heavy weapons that enable them to occupy cities for use
as safe havens and bases from which to launch terrorist
operations that disrupt the stability and security of our
region. Secondly, we must combat all ideology that
runs counter to human nature and betrays true Islam by
distorting its precepts. Thirdly, we must deal with the
financing of terrorism, which enables them to purchase
weapons and materiel and attract vulnerable young
people.
In the framework of international efforts to combat
terrorism, on 9 November the Kingdom of Bahrain
hosted a meeting in Manama on combating the financing
of terrorism within the context of efforts to eradicate
financing in all its forms and manifestations. It was
part of an effort to implement the Kingdom’s policy
in the framework of the International Conference for
Peace and Security in Iraq, held in Paris in September.
We have also put forth an initiative to host a conference
to coordinate international efforts to combat terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations.
The Kingdom reiterates the need to curb the
financing of terrorism, which represents half the battle
in the fight against terrorism. There is also a need
to ensure effective mechanisms to put an end to all
financial support for terrorist groups and organizations.
In that regard, specialized conferences aimed at finding
ways eradicate all forms and manifestations of terrorists
and terrorist groups that pose a significant threat
to international peace and security are of growing
importance.
The meeting I spoke of reflected the importance
of bank and financing flows in the framework of

14-6373977/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

international efforts and counter-terrorism. The
meeting emphasized the need for collective efforts
to halt the financing of terrorism and deal with any
suspicious transfers through three means, including
the implementation of all international resolutions to
combat the financing of terrorism, primarily Security
Council resolutions, and the recommendations of the
working groups and the Financial Action Task Force,
as well as strengthening cooperation internationally
and through specialized bodies and exchanges of
experiences and approaches in combating the financing
of terrorism.
Many experts participated in those meetings,
in addition to representatives of numerous regional
and international organizations, including the United
Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the European
Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy and the Financial Action Task Force,
as well as various bodies working in the Middle East.
The end of the meeting saw the issuance of the Manama
declaration on combating the financing of terrorism.
The declaration contains many recommendations in
line with international law and its provisions, as well as
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
It underscored the need for follow up on the prosecution
of terrorists and the collective need for sanctions in
combating the financing of terrorism.
Among the recommendations put forth was a
reference to the importance of follow up on evaluating
the financing of terrorism and its sources, considering
their means of implementation, and following up on all
relevant activities, for example the financing of terrorist
groups through the Internet and social media, the use of
electronic payments or virtual currency by individuals
or terrorist groups, the use of religious or academic
institutions to finance terrorism or illegal financing
through natural resources, the illicit trafficking
of narcotics and even financing through charities.
The statement stressed the need for participation in
international efforts to combat terrorism, inter alia
through legal assistance between countries and legal
assistance to counter the financing of terrorism.
The meeting considered the possibility of holding a
ministerial conference on the implementation of the
declaration. The participants of the meeting would like
to cooperate in combating terrorism with the United
Nations Centre for Counter-Terrorism, co-founded by
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
78/83

19/11/2014

Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): In aligning itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union and in adding a few thoughts in its
national capacity, Romania joins all the other speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, and your country for
preparing and convening this debate. It is yet another
product of an excellent presidency of the Security
Council.
The reality we face today is that, despite sustained
efforts the virus of terrorism continues its genetic
mutations, periodically challenging our values,
presenting us with new legal and political dilemmas
and forcing the international community to constantly
adapt and rethink its counter-terrorism arsenal. That is
why this debate is a meaningful and necessary exercise,
and we welcome the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/23.
It is in view of a long-standing concern with the
rules of international law on terrorism that my country
takes the floor today. Romania was one of the early and
strong promoters of a convention to render terrorism
universally punishable, and I cannot refrain from
mentioning in this context the work of the Romanian
jurist Vespasian Pella, who contributed directly to the
drafting of the 1937 Convention for the Prevention and
Punishment of Terrorism.
At the international level today, we are working
with a complex framework made up of sectoral
anti-terrorism treaties and Security Council resolutions
that keep the framework updated as the phenomenon
evolves and that contain important material and
procedural obligations for international criminal law.
Resolution 1373 (2001) and its most recent updates in
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) are fundamental
elements of that framework.
In view of the time constraints and the concept
note prepared by the presidency (S/2014/787, annex),
in particular the third topic suggested for discussion,
I will focus only on a technical aspect of international
judicial cooperation that raises particular challenges, in
our view. It is a matter on which the United Nations
could provide valuable support and guidance to
Member States and regional actors with regard to
implementation. We refer to judicial cooperation for the
collection of evidence needed for criminal proceedings
against foreign fighters.
Paragraph 12 of resolution 2178 (2014) recalls the
obligation of Member States to provide one another
with the greatest measure of assistance, including
14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV.7316

evidence-gathering, in connection with criminal
investigations or proceedings relating to the financing
or support of terrorist acts. The paragraph then
underlines the importance of fulfilling that obligation
in investigations and proceedings involving foreign
fighters. The wording of the provision is closely
connected to paragraph 6, which asks States to ensure
that they incriminate and prosecute as serious offences
three forms of conduct involving foreign fighters.

compliance across different legal systems and to
facilitate the work of those who are on the front line of
our common endeavour, namely, national investigators
and prosecutors. Their efforts contribute not only to the
safety and security of our communities in the context
of a world we all know to be seriously haunted by
increasingly barbaric forms of terrorism and extreme
violence, but also to the values of the rule of law that
are the foundations of democracy.

As the scope being considered is universal,
rather than regional or bilateral, the question that
arises is whether the existing framework for mutual
legal assistance in counter-terrorism proceedings is
adequate and sufficient for all the offences referred to
in paragraph 12 of the resolution, read in conjunction
with paragraph 6. In the situation that prevailed prior to
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), the assessment
was that the sectoral conventions, although confined
to the specific acts that they criminalize, together
with related instruments such as the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
offer a sufficient legal basis for mutual legal assistance,
including for the offences covered by resolution
1373 (2001). The situation following the adoption of
resolution 2178 (2014) has yet to be assessed.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Montenegro.

What is the impact of extending the catalogue
of offences within the same mutual legal assistance
convention framework? We believe that now is
the right time to ask that question. Transnational
evidence-gathering is a particularly sensitive aspect of
mutual legal assistance. Therefore, an early assessment
of possible options would be of added value. States are
currently evaluating legislation and exploring the most
efficient ways to comply with their new obligations,
including in the framework of regional organizations.
We propose that the Council’s subsidiary bodies
consider that topic in the exercise of their mandates.
The
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate is ideally placed to look into that specific
question from a global perspective and to engage in a
dialogue with the competent national authorities and
regional actors. While regional systems might be better
equipped, we need to address the question globally, as
we are facing a global phenomenon, and we need to
consider instruments of universal applicability. Further
follow-up, either normative or technical, could also be
envisaged.
Let me conclude by underlining that we encourage
this specific exercise at the level of the Council’s
subsidiary bodies in order to support uniform

Mr. Šćepanović (Montenegro): First of all, I
would like to congratulate Australia for successfully
presiding over the Security Council this month and for
organizing this open debate. I commend your country’s
commitment and leading role in this matter, Sir. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
earlier today and the two Chairs of the Security Council
Committees for their presentations.
Montenegro welcomes the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/23, on international cooperation
in combating terrorism and violent extremism, adopted
earlier today, and fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
However, I would like to add some remarks of particular
importance to my country.
The current upsurge in terrorist activities
underscores the fact that they constitute one of the
major threats to global security in the twenty-first
century. Terrorism and violent extremism are both
highly concentrated and globally distributed. The fight
against that global challenge demands an integrated
and well-coordinated international response and the
commitment of all States to continuing to analyse and
monitor all aspects of potential threats and to acting
appropriately to prevent them.
Strengthening international cooperation in order
to prevent, detect and suppress terrorist activities and
violent extremism requires the full implementation
of the relevant international counter-terrorism
conventions, as well as the resolutions of the Security
Council in that area. Fully cognizant of the fact that
international cooperation, as the most effective and
irreplaceable tool, has to be a priority, Montenegro
actively participates in the prevention and suppression
of terrorism at all levels, multilateral and bilateral, and
contributes to the strengthening and development of
counter-terrorism cooperation.

14-6373979/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Montenegro condemns terrorism and violent
extremism in all their forms and fully commits itself to
fighting such phenomena. The fight against terrorism,
violent extremism and their root causes is now viewed
as a collective effort on the part of all members of the
international community. We share the view that the
role of the United Nations in that fight is crucial, both
at the global level and in assisting Member States in
their efforts to strengthen their ability to prevent such
acts. Montenegro strongly supports the efforts of the
United Nations to promote the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
which serves as the foundation for an effective and
comprehensive response to counter-terrorism at
all levels. We also recognize the important role of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
which works to promote and coordinate international
cooperation in this field, and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, with which
Montenegro is also actively cooperating.
The threat that foreign fighters pose to our security
system is far greater today than it has ever been before.
Not only is terrorism increasing, but its breadth is
increasing as well. We recognize that there is no military
solution to the problem. We therefore stress the need to
work together to counter violent extremism, which can
radicalize, recruit and mobilize individuals to engage in
terrorism and violent extremism. In that light, I would
like to refer to the recently adopted resolution 2178
(2014), which Montenegro was pleased to co-sponsor.
Once again, I would like to convey our commitment to
actively implementing that resolution by amending our
Criminal Code with respect to prescribing penalties for
the participation of mercenaries in third countries.
With regard to fighting terrorism, we must not
forget that fundamental freedoms, such as human
rights and the rule of law, are essential institutional
pillars that must be respected, even in the most difficult
situations. We must, therefore, take all necessary
measures to ensure that our fight against the threat
we face complies with international law, international
humanitarian law and international refugee law. All of
the means and methods of preventing terrorism present
a litmus test for the sustainability of those instruments
and for the rule of law as a whole, and we must not fail
in that task. In that light, I would like to emphasize
the critical role that the United Nations Ombudsperson
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated
80/83

19/11/2014

individuals and entitieshas been playing in ensuring
that human rights are fully respected in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism.
Montenegro has never faced a terrorist act, but given
that terrorism and organized crime pose a serious threat
to international peace and security, we are continuously
improving our system for preventing terrorist activities.
Such measures call for cooperation among the relevant
institutions at the national and international levels.
Allow me to recall that Montenegro is a party to all
major international counter-terrorism instruments and
is dedicated to promoting cooperation in accordance
with the relevant United Nations resolutions,
international conventions and other mechanisms. In
order to establish strong international cooperation in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism in all
its forms, our Governments must take appropriate steps
in their national agenda, especially in countering the
financing of terrorism.
International cooperation in adopting international
legal instruments, applying conventions and protocols,
and exchanging information, experience and good
practice in the implementation of counter-terrorist
measures will remain our priority in order to strengthen
efforts in international legal assistance for fighting
terrorism.
In closing, I would like to reiterate my country’s
commitment to take decisive action to create a strong
front against the core source of terrorism wherever
it may arise and to work with all other delegations to
promote cooperation so we can eliminate terrorism and
violent extremism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Makharoblishvili (Georgia): At the outset, I
would like to express my delegation’s gratitude to the
Australian presidency for convening today’s debate.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.
We acknowledge the growing threat of international
terrorism and its new forms. In order to effectively
respond to that threat, Georgia is developing national
anti-terrorist capabilities. Accordingly, to avoid the
misuse of Georgian territory for transit by international
terrorist groups, the Government of Georgia is

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

strengthening border protection and is cooperating
closely with neighbouring countries in anti-terrorist
activities. We have ratified all United Nations counterterrorism conventions and continue to take the necessary
measures to facilitate the implementation of sanctions
imposed by the relevant international organizations.
We recognize the need to fully implement resolution
1540 (2004), on preventing non-State actors from
obtaining weapons of mass destruction, their means
of delivery and related materials. As that resolution
is a vital component of the international community’s
toolbox for combating the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, we welcome the extension of its
mandate to 2021.
The risk posed by the occupation of a large part
of our territory is our most important problem. The
occupied territories of Georgia, like other grey zones of
the world where international control mechanisms are
either non-existent or very weak, have a serious potential
to be used for a variety of illegal activities, including
those related to terrorism. The fact that in recent years
there have been several attempts to smuggle nuclear
and radioactive materials through occupied Georgian
territory further amplifies the sense of danger. It must
be stressed that such challenges should be a matter of
concern not only for individual countries but for the
international community as a whole.
Before concluding, I wish to reiterate Georgia’s
readiness to offer constructive and open cooperation
aimed at strengthening security and minimizing the
possible negative impact of the emerging challenges
that are typical in our rapidly developing world. In that
regard, I would like to mention Georgia’s support for
and active contribution to international anti-terrorist
operations. To give one example, Georgia is one of the
largest non-NATO troop contributors to the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan
and continues to serve as a transit country for ISAF
supplies. Bearing in mind the tremendous efforts and
sacrifices made in Afghanistan, Georgia intends to
remain the largest non-NATO troop contributor, with
no draw-down until the end of ISAF operations. Let me
also reiterate our determination to play an active role in
NATO’s Resolute Support Mission to train, assist and
advise the Afghan National Security Forces.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Australia, as Council President

S/PV.7316

for November, for taking the initiative to convene
today’s open debate on international cooperation to
combat terrorism and violent extremism. This is a
timely opportunity for us to assess the progress made
by the international community in combating terrorism
and to examine the gaps, fragilities and shortcomings
in our efforts. It follows the conclusion of the fourth
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, conducted earlier this year.
There is no doubt that the phenomenon of terrorism
is a danger to the existence of societies, a threat on
the same scale as that posed by devastating natural
disasters. My country has long had to grapple with
terrorism. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is still
attempting to undermine the sovereignty and authority
of our State, taking advantage of the humanitarian,
social and economic situation that we in Yemen must
confront. Yemen calls for international efforts to
establish partnerships and to pool efforts to address
terrorism.
My Government has developed a national strategy
to combat terrorism in accordance with Ministerial
Decree No. 147 of 18 September 2012. The decree
covers several areas of action, including political and
economic issues and money laundering. There is also
a component that focuses on training in the judicial
arena. It provides for raising awareness in the military
and law-enforcement sectors. There is also a project
designed to bring together all the laws on the matter.
In addition, we are facing difficulties because of
the lack of financial resources. Our ministries and
Government agencies entrusted with the implementation
of that strategy are hamstrung by resource constraints.
As is well known, Yemen is undergoing a difficult
political transition, in addition to a very difficult
humanitarian, economic and social situation. Despite
robust military campaigns to eliminate Al-Qaida and
its affiliates in various areas, and notwithstanding some
success in that regard, the political climate remains
unstable. Furthermore, our resources have been
severely taxed and stretched thin because of problems
compounded by the return of displaced persons. That
means that we need our international donors to honour
their commitments. We are still waiting for them to
deliver on their pledges. Furthermore, the Government
of my country has discovered that most Al-Qaida
combatants are foreigners; some 70 per cent of them
come from a wide geographical area. We therefore need
all countries to exchange information to stem the flow
of foreign terrorist fighters from many countries.

14-6373981/83

S/PV.7316

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We wish to reiterate that efforts to combat
terrorism must address the roots of the problem. Yemen
was one of the first countries to call for addressing the
underlying causes of terrorism’s spread. We believe
that poverty and unemployment lead to the spread of
terrorism. Based on the latest assessments, there are
terrorist fighters earning $500 per month, whereas
our Government soldiers are earning a mere $100 per
month.
Despite the many conferences and meetings that
we have had on the economic, social and cultural
underpinnings of terrorism, the international
community should look further into the consequences
of military operations, air raids and drone strikes, and
their impact on civilian areas where terrorists are hiding.
If we are to combat terrorism, we need military, legal
and security monitoring at the highest levels — that is
something that we all know.
Transnational terrorist groups have at their
disposal a wide range of modern technologies that
enable them to adjust to current realities and work
around our attempts to combat terrorism. The solution
can come only through an international coalition to
combat terrorism so that we can effectively stem the
spread of this scourge and ensure that the international
community is rid of it once and for all.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Given the lateness of the hour, I shall make
only a brief comment.
Some delegations in today’s meeting have made
inappropriate allusions to, and interpretations of,
matters that have nothing to do with the topic under
consideration. We believe that this distracts members
from the Council’s discussion of the dangerous threat
posed by terrorism and from the options for collectively
countering it, which is our subject today. We suggest
that the Security Council be used not for sharing random
ideas but for participating in constructive discussions
on agenda items.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iran, who has asked to make a further
statement.
Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): The Security
Council today heard the representative of a main sponsor
of State terrorism and the occupier of the Palestinian
82/83

19/11/2014

territory make some unacceptable false remarks with
respect to my country. These were the same baseless
remarks that have been repeated here time and again,
and my delegation rejects them categorically. Indeed,
we should not be surprised that the representative
of a regime that is the manifestation of State terror
should accuse a nation that has witnessed the loss of
over 17,000 of its citizens during the past 35 years, a
number of whom fell victim to heinous terrorist attacks
that have been directly sponsored by elements of that
regime. A well-known example of this was the incident
in which Iranian nuclear scientists were brutally killed
before the very eyes of their terrified family members.
It is regrettable and ironic that those who are behind
the most horrific terrorist attacks of our time should
venture to preach to us about its counter-terrorism
measures. They exude terror and violence. We consider
the statement made by the representative of Israel today
to be simply a tactic to divert the public’s attention
from the illegal and criminal activities that their terror
network has committed constantly for more than six
decades. But the international community cannot be so
easily deceived.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel, who has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Heumann (Israel): I will also be very brief, but
I would like to respond to some of the allegations we
have heard made against my country today.
I think it is truly absurd to hear the representative
of the dictatorship of Saudi Arabia criticize the Middle
East’s only democracy. Under the guise of combating
terrorism, Saudi Arabia has aggressively repressed
the rights and freedoms of its own people. It even
proclaimed atheism to be a terrorist offence and jailed a
poet named Hamza Kashgari, whose only offence was
posting harmless tweets. Saudi Arabia may have given
$100 million to the United Nations counter-terrorism
programme but it is worth remembering that the Saudi
regime has made far larger and more generous donations
to extremist terror groups that promote radicalization
and terror attacks around the world.
I will not respond to the ridiculous allegations
made by the Syrian representative against my country.
The Syrian delegation represents a Government with
zero credibility that cares nothing about the needs of its
own people. Its remarks are another cheap attempt to
divert attention from the massacre of the Syrian people.

14-63739

19/11/2014

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Lastly, I am pleased to see that the Iranian
representative is taking full advantage of the freedom
of expression in this Chamber. I suppose it is fitting,
given that the Iranian people do not enjoy that right at
home. It seems to me that he got a little carried away
with the novelty and has used this forum to spread tall
tales at Israel’s expense.
But the truth is that Iran is today the main sponsor
of terrorism around the globe. For decades, Iran has
funded hundreds of terror campaigns that have taken
thousands of innocent lives in Africa, Europe, Latin
America and the Middle East. In Syria, Iran has sent
its Revolutionary Guards to fight alongside Al-Assad’s
force and spent billions sustaining the bloody civil war
that has taken almost 200,000 lives.
In Lebanon, Iranian-backed Hizbullah terrorist
groups have built a militia larger and stronger than
many armies. The international community has
realized the need for a robust strategy that will contain
the threat posed by terrorist groups like Daesh. The
same thinking is needed with regard to sponsors of
terror like Iran.

S/PV.7316

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Aldahhak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I will be brief, but I would nevertheless like to
respond to the statement made by the representative of
Israel who just took the floor. I would simply say that the
Middle East region has known terrorism only since the
Israeli occupation, which in the 1940s brought with it
terrorist organizations that began to perpetrate terrorist
attacks against the Arab inhabitants of the occupied
Arab territories of Palestine, Syria and Lebanon. Those
crimes spread to other regions of the world after that.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. We have had a very long
day, with almost 70 Member States speaking. Selfevidently, that is in itself a measure of how dangerous
and decisive the threat of terrorism is globally. I thank
all who participated.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6.20 p.m.

14-6373983/83
