TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

st

MEETING: 24 JUNE 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l48 1) , . , , 1 ( , , . ,, , , . , , . . . , . . . . , . . . . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda

, , . , , . . . . . , . , , . , , , +. , . , . . . (. . . . . . . . . . .

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
‘Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwart,
Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Vclta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add. l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and S/9252) . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

S/PV.1481

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

F

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-FIRST MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 24 une 1969, at 3 p.m.
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and
Add.1 -2)

President: Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).
&sent:
The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist, Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia,

Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and
S/9252)

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l481)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): In accordance with previous decisions taken by the Security Council
and with the consent of its members, I shall invite the
representatives of Mauritania, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Guinea, Somalia, India, Sudan, Saudi Arabia and
Burundi to participate, without the right to vote, in the
debate on the item before the Council.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

/

2. Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June I969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand,
Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add.l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and
S/9252).

2. In view of the limited space at the Council table, I
propose, in accordance with past practice in similar cases,
to invite the aforementioned representatives to ttike the
seats reserved for them in the Council chamber, on the
understanding that when they wish to address the Council
they will be invited to take seats at the Council table,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. 5’. A. Ould Daddah
(Mauritunia), Mr. W. E. Waldron-Ramsey (United Republic
of Tanzania), Mr. A. Tour& (Guinea), Mr. M. Warsama
(Somalia), Mr. A. S. Gonsulves (India), Mr. M. Fakhreddine
(Sudan), Mr, J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia) and Mr. Nsanze
Terence (Burundi) took the places reserved for them in the
Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spanish): The
Council will now continue its consideration of the question
concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia.

Adoption of the agenda

4. The first speaker on my list is the representative of the
Soviet Union, whom I now call upon to speak,

The agenda was adopted.

5. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): Mr. President, it is the intention
of the Soviet delegation to make a statement on the
substance of the draft resolution before the Security
Council, which has been submitted by five of its members.

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia
Letter dated 8 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi,- Cameroon, Central African
Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Bratzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland,

6. The members of the Security Council have almost
unanimously judged the referendum carried out by the
racist regime in Southern Rhodesia to be illegal. This
“referendum” has also been condemned by the SecretatyGeneral of the United Nations in a statement he has issued.
They have condemned the so-called constitutional proposals as devoid of any Iegality, and have stated that no
1

Committeeof Sevenconcerningthe effectsof th4sanctions
on Southern Rhodesia’seconomy, officially admittedthat
in spite of the implementation of mandatory sanctions
Rhodesianexports in 1968 had declined only Iby sli&tly
more than 3 per cent. from those of 1967andthLatimports
had increasedby 12 per cent. That is official United
Kingdom testimony to the ineffectivenessandfailureof the
sanctions,

“constitution” proclaimed by a racist minority rkgime can
have any legal force.
7. Thus the discussion on the question of Southern
Rhodesia in the Security Council has given a clear and
unambiguous warning to the racist fascist rkgime in
Salisbury and has shown that to whatever falsified referenda or constitutions that rhgime may resort, it has been and
continues to be illegal and should not be recognized by any
State.

13. Why hasthis occurred? The answeris not difficult to
find if one examinesthe statistical data on the volumeof
trade betweenWesterncountries and South Africa for the
first eleven months of the, past year: that is to say,
approximately for the period since the introductionof
sanctionsagainstSouthern Rhodesia.

8. Those who have considered that a mere condemnation
of the racist regime of Southern Rhodesia and of its
criminal acts was inadequate and wh9 have called for the
adoption of the most effective measures against it have
once again been proven right. In fact, this question is ‘still
unresolved.

14. Those data provide evidence of the hugevolumeof
this trade. During that period trade betweenthe United
Kingdom and South Africa, for example, amountedto
$1,236 million, and trade between the United Statesof
America and South Africa totalled $654.7 million,Furthermore, attention must be drawn to the fact that duringthis
period there was a considerableincreasein the volumeof
trade between Western countries and the l?ortugucse
coloniesof Angola and Mozambique. Data concerning
these
matters are included in the surveysfor January1969of the
International Monetary Fund and the InternationalBank
for Reconstructionand Development.

9. A number of views and proposals along those lines have
been put forward during the discussion. That is also the
purpose of the draft resolution submitted by the representatives of Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal and Zambia. The
overwhelming majority of the members of the Security
Council and the representatives of other States Members of
the United Nations who have spoken here have resolutely
and justly criticized and condemned the policies of the
administering Power with regard to the racist rigime in
Southern Rhodesia, a minority rkgime of foreign invaders
who have illegally usurped power over the four million
people of Zimbabwe. It is the duty of the administering
Power to take effective measures that could really put an
end to that bloodthirsty regime of terror, racial violence
and oppression.

15. South Africa and those two Portuguesecoloniesare
neighboursof Southern Rhodesia. Goods imbortedinto
those countriesfrom Westerncountriesareeasilypassed
on
to SouthernRhodesia.

10. All the representatives who have spoken here, and the
Security Council’s Committee of Seven on Southern
Rhodesia in its official report, have recognized that the
sanctions applied so far have proved ineffective: they have
not led and cannot lead to the removal of the racist rkgir;ie.
Even the Southern Rhodesian racists declare them ineffective.

16. This hasbeen confirmed by United Kingdomsources
as well. JeromeCaminada,the foreign trade editor of the
United Kingdom newspaperThe Times, a leadin,gorganof
major monopolisticcapital in the United Kingdom,recently
visited South Africa and Rhodesia.Upon his return to
London he publishedan article in that newspaper
on 20
May of this year, in which he frankly stated(I quote):

11. In the economic survey submtited by the Smith
regime to the Southern Rhodesian “parliament” on 17
April of this year it is stated openly, with cynical frankness
and in mockery of the United Nations, that the past year,
1968, was successful for Southern Rhodesia, despite the
sanctions. According to official data compiled by the
United Nations Secretariat and submitted to the Committee
of Seven on Southern Rhodesia, imports into that country
in the past year rose to $290 million compared to $262
million in 1967~an increase of $28 million. It is not
difficult to see that the Southern Rhodesian racists have
every reason to be satisfied with that state of affairs and to
say openly that 1968 was successful for them despite the
sanctions.

“British goodsare still entering SouthernRhodesia
by
various routes, and the British exporters. . . lrnow this.
West Germanand Japaneseproducts arecertainly going
in . +. But if anyoneabroadstill wondershow it is that in
spite of the ‘mandatory sanctions’,Rhodesiacolntinues
to
be served,particularly in petrol and oil, the key liesin
South Africa.”
Thus the explanation is quite simple. The camouflage
is
perfectly obvious.
17. It is not difficult to seethat there ire alsoindirectand
hidden ways and meansof circumventing andviolatingthe
sanctions.And the responsibility for this is not borneonly
by South Africa and Portugal. Considerableresponsibility
restson thoseStateswhich trade on suchalargescaleWith
those two United Nations Member States which are
violating the Security Council resolutionson the application of sanctionsagainstSouthern Rhodesia.

12. Let us hope that the representative of the administering Power will-not dispute thk accuracy of those data, as he
attempted to do at the 1476th meeting of the Council. The
United Kingdom Mission to the United Nations, even in its
note sent on 24 May 19691 to the Chairman of the
1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Twenty-fourth
Year Supplement for April, May and June 1969, document
S/9252
and Add.1, Annex II, pages 294-295.

18. In this connexion the attention of the Security
Council andthe United Nations asa whole should1
be drawn

2

to the flouting and systematic violation of United Nations
decisions on sanctions against Southern Rhodesia by a State
which is not a Member of the United Nations-West
Germany. According to official data submitted to the
Security Council by the Committee of Seven on Southern
Rhodesia, in 1968 West Germany’s trade with Southern
Rhodesia amounted to $26 million.

25. While our assessment
of the draft resolutionsponsored
by the five Afro-Asian countriesmembersof the Security
Council-Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan, Senegaland Zambia-is
on the whole positive, we should of courseprefer the
Security Council to adopt a strongerresolution. In this
connexion we cannot refrain from makingsomecomments
on the separateparagraphsof the draft resolution.Operative paragraph5 refers to the need to apply sanctions
againstthe Portuguesecolony of Mozambique.During the
discussion,many representativeshave rightly pointed out
that the main reasonfor the ineffectivenessof the sanctions
against Southern Rhodesiais the assistance
and support
given to the Rhodesianracistsby Portugaland the Republic
of South Africa. This paragraph of the draft should
therefore refer, not to the Portuguesecolony of Mozambique, but rather to Portugalitself,

19. By continuing its large-scale trade co-operation with
Southern Rhodesia, West Germany is challenging not only
the United Nations but all the African States and their
peoples. It also continues to maintain official consular
relations with the racist rdgime of Southern Rhodesia; it has
a trade mission and an agency of its airline in Salisbury. At
the same time it is also expanding its trade and economic
links with South Africa and Portugal.
20. In point of fact, West Germany is now one of the main
actual allies and patrons of the anti-African fascist and
racist military bloc which consists of South Africa,
Portugal and Southern Rhodesia. All these facts fully
support the appraisal made of the policies of West German
imperialism in the basic document of the International
Congress of Communist and Workers’ Parties in Moscow,
adopted on 17 June of this year.

26. A positive factor is that the sponsorsof the draft
resolution havestudiedthe views expressed
duringconsultations by a number of representativesto the effect that
sanctions against Southern Rhodesiashould be implemented not only by StatesMembersof the United Nations
but by all States without exception. Otherwisethe obligation to apply sanctionswould not extend to Stateswhich
are not Membersof the United Nationsand which, ashas
already been pointed out here, include cou’ntriesthat are.
continuing to maintain diversified and broad ties with
Southern Rhodesia.In our view, however, there are also
other provisionsof the draft which, if it is adopted,should
be executed not only by Membersof the United Nations
and specializedagenciesbut by all States.Wealsoconsider
that, in general, appealsby the Security Council for the
implementation of suchdecisionsshouldbe addressed
to all
States without any exception, and not only to Membersof
the United Nations, the specializedagenciesand the
In&national Atomic Energy Agency.

21. The document points out that West German imperialism is pursuing a policy of neo-colonialism and expansion
towards the countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America.
West German imperialists, together with the imperialists of
other Powers, are giving political and military support to
the fascist and racist regimes in South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia. The States and peoples of Africa cannot fail to
draw attention to this anti-African policy of West Germany.
22. In the light of all those facts, the. Council must
obviously take a decision that will not only strengthen the
earlier sanctions against the racist rkgime in Southern
Rhodesia but also close other gaps through which flows the
illegal trade with Southern Rhodesia.

‘27. On the whole, the Soviet Union delegationconsiders
the ‘draft resolutionacceptableandit intendsto vote for it.
Approval of the draft will be of some importance in
implementing the Security Council’s decisionsand the
General Assembly resolutions directed againstthe racist
rkgime in Southern Rhodesiaand in assisting
the peopleof
Zimbabwein their just strugglefor independence.

23. In order to achieve this, as many representatives here
have already pointed out, there is no other way than to
extend the sanctions to South Africa and Portugal.
Unfortunately, in regard to the proposals for this most
urgent and just measure which have been properly put
forward by the representatives of the African and Asian
countries, the sponsors of this draft resolution have
encountered stubborn resistance and opposition from the
representatives of certain Western countries, primarily the
representative of the United Kingdom.

28. In conclusion,Mr. President,we shouldIiKe to state
with all possiblegravity that the Security Council will be
assuminga heavy responsibility if it provesincapableof
taking effective stepsin the presentsituation.
29. The representativesof African and AsianStateshave
stressedin their statementsthat the African peoplesdo not
wish for bloodshed; but they have alsowarnedthat the
Zimbabwe people’scup of sorrow,which wasalreadyfull
to the brim, is now spilling over andthat thereis alimit to
human patience. History and the examplesof many
countries that have won their freedomand independence
through force of armsshow that no amountof resistance
by the imperialistsand colonialistsand their racistalliescan
halt the sacred struggle of peoples for their national
freedom and independence.There can be no doubt that no
one and nothing will halt the struggleof the Zimbabwe
people againstthe racist tyrants and oppressors,
a straggle
supportedby all freedom-lovingpeoples.

24. The Soviet Union, like all other States which cherish
the ideals of freedom and independence and which do not
limit themselves to words but are actively opposing racism,
colonialism and neo-colonialism, cannot fail to condemn
such conduct in the most categorical manner. That is why
the Soviet Union delegation considers that the draft
resolution which has been submitted by five States
members of the Council, and which provides for the
application of effective measures not only against the racist
r(?gime of Southern Rhodesia but also against the South
African and Portugueseallies,deservesattention, approval
and support.
3

30. Those who continue indirectly to connive at and
support the racist regime will inevitably be faced by a wave
of anger from the African peoples that will not stop when it
has swept that regime from the face of the earth; the
mighty wrath of the peoples will also fall upon the entire
system of imperialist oppression and exploitation.

law, order, justice, tolerance and a gradual civi:lization to
what was the jungle. May God forgive them, lest through
their fervour and madness everything once again turns
into a jungle.”
38. Obviously this appeal, carried in a newspaper that is
traditionally close to the British military authorities in
another colony, must have produced its effect cm Smith’s
followers.

31. As has been rightly pointed out in the basic document
of the Moscow Congress to which I have already referred,
imperialism uses racism to divide peoples and preserve its
domination, and therefore the eradication of racism is
closely linked with the struggle against imperialism as a
whole, against its ideological foundations.

39. My delegation has on numerous occasions heard the
representative of the United Kingdom state emphatically,
when referring to another group of settlers 1iv:ing in the
south of my country, that the desires of the population are
“paramount”, according to the United Nations Charter.
Well, in Rhodesia there is also a population, and one
consisting of almost five million blacks, whose desires
should be “paramount’‘-a
word which according to the
Oxford dictionary means “supreme” or “pre-eminent”,
unless of course’the “paramount” desires of the population
are in both cases those of the iitrported settlers who are
alien to the territory.

32. Mr. CARADAS (Spain): My delegation has listened
with close attention to all that has been said in this debate.
For this reason, to assist the Council in its search for
solutions I should like to refer to the conclusions which my
delegation has reached by the application of pure logic.
33. In the view of my delegation not only is the situation
prevailing in Rhodesia unjust, illegal and inhuman but it
also endangers coexistence between the races over an entire
continent and may degenerate into a conflict of vast
proportions and incalculable consequences.

I want the position of my delegationto be clearly
understood. As a Member of the United Nations, my
country fulfils its obligationsandupholdsthe principle that
all Members,all without exception, must alsofulfil theirs.
We therefore disagreewith those who ignoreth’eir obliga.
tions or refuseto abideby them. In the first place, there are
some who contemptuously flout their obligations, and
somewho put forward legalargumentswith which onemay
or may not agreebut which shouldbe answered.Secondly,
what my country will never accept is open injusticein any
measure,or one scaleof valuesfor the greatandanother for
the small.
40.

34. The responsibility for anything that my occur is
primarily and eminently British, since the United Kingdom
is the administering Power. In support of this statement I
.might cite all the African representatives whom we have
heard here. British responsibility, however, has very deep
roots; it goes back a long way into the past, practically to
the very origins of the colony, to the time when a white
population began to be brought in, Here it is relevant to
recall the statement of the representative of Tanzania at the
1477th meeting of the Council.

41. I will state clearly and frankly that my delegationhas
seriousobjections to the draft resolution which is to be
voted upon.

35. Furthermore, the causes of the failure of the measures
applied up to the present time are well known. The main
cause has been the policy of the administering Power; then
there have been the subsidies and support given in various
degrees by some States which seem to have continued trade
with Rhodesia at such a rate that the economic system of
the Smith regime has not suffered perceptibly.

42. For reasonsof justice, asI explaineda few moments
ago, my delegationcannot accept that the main weight of
the proposedmeasures
shouldbe discriminatory.
43. For reasonsof balance my delegationalso falls to
understandhow it is possible to state that the United
Kingdom hasa specialduty to do somethingor other, and
at the sametime to decide that other Statessh.ouldtake
specificmeasures.

36. To refer to the first of these, it is obvious that, from
the very beginning of the rebellion, the rebels knew that
they could trust the attitude of the administering Power to
be indulgent, and that the economic interests involved in
the territory, primarily British, would endeavour to help
them by all possible means,

44. For reasonsof utility too it fails, sincewe fear that by
spreadingthe duties over different countries instead of
concentratingon those which should be dischargedby the
United Kingdom, we should be helping the rebel settler
group and not protecting the Zimbabwe peopleaswe are
trying to do.

37. If anyone should doubt this, I should like at this point
to quote word for word an extract from the Gibraltar
Chronicle of 13 December 1966, about the interview
between Mr. Wilson and Mr. Smith. The paper reported that
the Dean of the Anglican Cathedral of Gibraltar had said
these words on the occasion of a great religious ceremony
held to pray for the success of that interview:

45. And it fails for purely technical reasons,since to
emphasizea responsibility doesnot imply positive actionas is stated in paragraphl-and since paragraph5 is
ambiguouslyphrased, quite apart from the in.justice to
which I referredbefore.

“May God forgive Wilson and his collaborators for
betraying those much-maligned men: Ian Sniith and his
people, for betraying all the British colonial authorities
who since the days of Cecil Rhodes have worked to bring

46. My delegation, however, wishes to thank the cosponsorsfor the efforts they have devoted to the subject,
4

c

and would draw attention to the flexibility and patience
they have shown in listening to and even adopting other
objections which I expressed in my private meetings with
them; nevertheless, my delegation would have preferred a
more simple and more forceful resolution which would
have laid exclusively at the door of the administering Power
the responsibility which is its alone.

I

favour of comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions
against that regime and have faithfully carried out the
obligations under the relevant resolutions of the Council.
We are committed to the support of any appropriate action
calculated to protect the rights and interests of the people
in Rhodesia, realizlng that the main burden of any
enforcement action ‘necessarily falls on the administering
Power.

47. I should also like to say *that the decision to ask the
United Kingdom to take determined measures does not
seem out of proportion to the situation facing us. Pragmatism should not operate only in the interests of those who
prefer the status quo. There have been times in history
when drastic action was not taken in time, and the result
was more painful or cruel than what had been rejected out
of self-interested pragmatism.

55. It may thus be said that my delegation’s views are in
large measure reflected in the draft resolution contained in
document S/9270/Rev.l,
56. With regard to paragraph 5 of the draft resolution,
however, my delegation has some reservations. We are not
convinced that commercial relations with Rhodesia have
been maintained by only the two countries named in that
paragraph; nor are we satisfied that the extension of
sanctions to those two countries will be the most effective
means of defeating the.illegal regime of Ian Smith. At the
present stage we are not prepared to concede that the
sanctions thus far invoked against the Smith regime have
proved totally futile, and we would urge that all Member
States reaffirm their soIemn obligations and redouble their
efforts to enforce the measuresdesigned to inflict damage
on the Rhodesian economy. My delegation will have to
abstain on paragraph 5 if and when it is put to the vote
separately.

48. My delegation understands how serious is the use of
force, but also accepts with full awarenessof its implications the idea that sooner or later force may have to be
used. We feel it better that force should be used in time, on
a limited scale, than that it should be unleashed when no
one can hope to keep it within bounds. Furthermore, force
does not alwaysmean military action. The mere mention of
it by the administering Power might be a sufficiently
serious warning to the Rhodesian leaders.

49. In any casethe administering Power can in no way feel
repelled by such use of force, because it had resorted to
force quite recently.
J57. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Before
calling on the’ next speaker, I should like to inform
50. Up to the last moment we had hoped that British
members of the Council, and particularly the representative
pragmatism would find a clear-cut course of action which
of Spain, that I have been able to consult the co-sponsorsof
would lead to a just and equitable solution of the problem.
the draft resolution [S/9270/Rev.l] about the possibility
We still hope so; but if all the administering Power can of a vote by division. They have indicated that they wish
suggest at this hour is what we have just heard, and if it
the draft resolution to be put to the vote as a whole and
does not offer us a valid alternative which, while safeguard- not by division. Since a condition was implicit in the
ing the rights of the Zimbabwe people, brings peace to a request by the representative of Spain, that is the cowhole region of Africa, then, with the reservationswe have sponsors’ reply.
entered, and requesting a separate vote on the paragraph of
the preamble which begins “Noting” and on operative 58. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
paragraphs 4 and 5, my delegation could vote in favour of
Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take his seat at the Council
table, and call on him to speak.
the rest of the draft resolution contained in document
S/9270/Rev.l.
59. Mr, BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I wish once again to
thank the President and the other members of the Security
51. Lastly, my delegation would emphasize that it is not
Council for granting me permission to make a further
insensitive to the argument that it would be desirable to
maintain the unity of the Council and to ensure that our statement on the item under discussion.
resolutions are unanimously adopted, But what can we do
60. I have asked to speak before the vote is taken because
if the members who are not in agreement with this draft do
I feel it behooves me to make a particular appeal to
not even suggestother more promising alternatives?
members of the Council, and especially to my good friend
Lord Caradon, to initiate action that will yield some
52. My delegation haa expressed its point of view, its
palpable results in the not too distant future, lest the
reservations and its opinions very frankly but, rather than
situation
worsen and get out of hand. If the situation were
remain petrified in the face of this situation, prefers to
to worsen and get out of hand, regretswould be of no avail.
speak out for the only possible solution open to US.
61. I am sure that most, if not all, of us are thankful to
Lord Caradon for summing up with candour the plight of
his Government regarding the situation in Southern
Rhodesia. A dastardly, unjust Constitution has been promulgated by the white regime in Salisbury which bars the
indigenous population from enjoying the primordial human
right: the right of self-determination. We find that, while

53. Mr. LIU (China): I have asked to speak in order to give
a very brief explanation of vote.
54. The position of my delegation on the question of
Southern Rhodesia has been made clear at previous
meetings of the Security Council. We are unalterably
opposed to the illegal racist regime in Salisbury. We are in
5

c
$.

Government are sincere in what they are going to under.
take, in talks and conferences and in holding caucuseswith
the black and the white in their political arrangement, But
what would be the result for the indigenous people of
Southern Rhodesia, and for that matter for the people
living irr South?West Africa, given the name “N;amibia”?
The result would be zero. Conversations conduct,:d in this
manner would be outside the scope of serving any purpose
or yielding any fruits to the indigenous people of that
region.

almost every country is emerging from antiquated formS of
government, Mr. Ian Smith and his clique are retrogressing

into the dayswhen spurious racial superiority Was glorified.
They have set themselves apart from the rest of Africa as
belonging to an exclusive species of human being. Wetd
know that racial discrimination is no longer permissible in
the era of the United Nations.
62. Members of the Council will be taking a vote this
afternoon. The die is cast. Only the sponsorsof the draft
resolution and possibly two other members-the representatives of Hungary and the Soviet Union-will v&t? in ffl@
affirmative. Certainly we shall immediately thereafter hear
the reasonswhy the other members had to abstain, But I
submit that even if the draft resolution were adopted
unanimously the result would still be negative. The reason
is simple. Neither the United Kingdom nor any of the great
Powers that wield world influence are willing or prepared to
intervene in Southern Rhodesia. Lord Caradon told US
unequivocally that his Government is in no position t0
wage war against the white minority in Southern Rhodesia,
I anticipated Lord Caradon; I said before he spoke that the
United Kingdom could not be blamed if it could not afford
the financial burden of waging such a war. No intelligent
person, not to speak of a Government, would embark on
such a disastrous venture. On the other hand, I did some
research on the question by writing to some friends in the
United Kingdom-what you would call friends of the liberal
type-and they told me that any Government in the United
Kingdom would fall if it tried to dislodge Mr. Ian Smith’s
regime by force of arms.

65, If I have taken the floor today, it is to make surethat
the Government of the United Kingdom will not make the
same mistake it has made irreparably in another part of the
world, in one of its Mandates-in the Middle East. I do not
want anybody to think that I am going to drag the Palestine
question into our deliberations. Far be it’from me to mix
issues; but I am drawing a parallel and it is a dangerous
parallel. I remember that, in the thirties when I was in
London immersed in negotiations with the Arab leaders
who came to the British capital to find a solution for the
Palestine question, the United Kingdom did its very best,
especially under the Labour Government, to find a solution, They sent commissions, called Royal Commissions-I
am not going to enumerate them-but finally, when the
British had economically lost the Second World War,
although they were victors, they could no longer afford to
be confronted with that situation in Palestine and in 1947
they threw the Palestine question into the lap of the United
Nations. What has happened since then? Although some of
us warned them that they were doing wrong, that they were
responsible when the Mandate was given to them for
preparing the indigenous people for self-determination.
They washed their hands of it. They said, “There is an
organization called the United Nations, which should be
seized of the situation.” The situation in the Middle East is
one of the gravest confronting the world today, What
assurance do we have that the Government of the United
Kingdom will not finally give up and say, “After iall, we did
what we could; we held conversations; even our Prime
Minister left his homeland to meet this usurper, Mr. Ian
Smith”? He met him somewhere twice, I believe-I do not
know how many times. Once it was near Gibraltar, and I do
not think Spain raised any objection then. The negotiations
came to nought,

63. Therefore, what should the world community do? We
are 126 Members here in the United Nations, and this
Council is entrusted with keeping peace and security in the
world. Mr. Ian Smith and his clique have not only defied
the United Nations but they have violated the most
rudimentary elements of decency, not only by ‘their
sanctimonious attitude but by adopting a constitution
which, to say the least, will fossilize the white community
in Africa. One day, when Africa rises, this fossil will be
broken into smithereens. We decry this, because,after all, I
do not believe that all the white people in Southern
Rhodesia; or in South Africa, for that matter, are of the
same persuasion that there should be white supremacy in
that continent. What could be worsethan barring a people
from shaping its own destiny in its own homeland-and in
the era of the United Nations? But it has been proved time
and again that economics is more important than politics,
Policies of States are like satellites that revolve around the
sun of economic national interests. Many wars have been
rationalized by propaganda asbeing wagedto uphdld noble
principles. The youth of today and the youthful among us,
even of my age-we have some youthful adults among us, I
hope-know very well that wars are being wagedto protect
certain economic interests.

66. I am confident that the United Kingdom Governmutt
will pursue the task and not leave any stone unturned. But
from the way in which Mr. Ian Smith is behaving I cannot
see that anything good will come of it for our African
brothers who are still under the yoke of this rnad white
clique. How do f know that? I did not read out the whole
dispatch that wasgiven to me the other day by none other
than a correspondent of the IJPI. I did not want to vitiate
my argument by reading out everything that the telegram
contained in one dose. But to bolster my argument today I
shall read out two paragraphs of that dispatch which
contain the important part of the declaration made by
Mr. Ian Smith: “The Premier”-of course they had to call
him the Premier; I do not know what the United Kingdom
would call him: the usurper. But this dispatch is from
Salisbury and the correspondent would have been shown
the door if he had said “the usurper”, he had to cdl him
the Premier, meaning Mr. Ian Smith. I respect him, 1 tail

64. Lord Caradon no doubt will assure us that his
Government will steadfastly continue to be seized of this
problem and will conduct conversationswith African States
and with members of the Commonwealth, I do not know
how this Commonwealth works now. It is a Commonwealth
for whom? There must be a ledger in this Commonwealth
arrangement. I am sure that Lord Caradon and his
6

him Mr. Ian Smith-“defended
constitutional proposals
basing parliamentary representation on tax payments. He
said European residents paid most of the taxes and deserved
the seats in Parliament”.

his Government-not
necessarily today, of course-that
once they give up trying to persuade Ian Smith, they will
not then be tempted to throw this question into the lap of
the United Nations, as they did the question of Palestine in
1947? We should have that assurance; otherwise some of
my African friends might be caught napping,

67, But Rhodesia did not get its name until the great Cecil
Rhodes built up that part of Africa for the Empire less than
a century ago. They went and exploited the land. It is good
for people from outside to exploit the land if they treat the
.other members of the community-who
may not have the
“know-how”-as
themselves. They are supposed to be
Christians, I am sure that they go to Church every Sunday
and pray to God Almighty. I do not know; they may think
they are the shadows of God because they set themselves
apart sanctimoniously, as people who are above other home
sapiens, forgetting that they could also get pigmented by
freckles, if they have sensitive skins. I have seen some white
men apd women with such freckled sensitive skins that you
did not know if they were brown or white. This is not
funny any more. They set themselves up as a superior race.

1

71. That is the least I can say, because I know that this
draft resolution, even if it gets a unanimous vote, has no
teeth to it. Nobody will comply with the sanctions. And I
do not blame them. As I said, economics is more important
than politics, not only in Europe but in other parts of the
world as well-in almost every part of the world; let us be
frank. We have not transcended our national economic
interests; were it otherwise, this world would be a utopia.
72. If my colleague from the United Kingdom wil1 allow
me, I should like to draw his attention to another point.
Let us assume that the United Kingdom, in its own wisdom
and in co-operation with others, does find some sort of
solution short of waging war against Mr. Ian Smith and his
cohorts; would they be willing to see to it that that solution
was a practicable one, not .merely a piece of paper, like
many other resolutions of the Security Council adopted
thus far; and second, are they willing to set a target date for
carrying out that solution?

68. But that is not all. There is something more serious. I
am glad I am not a Zambian. If I were a Zambian I would
hit the ceiling. The telegram goes on: “Smith also called on
the memory of Rhodesia’s founder, Cecil Rhodes, and said
he believed in ‘equal rights for civilized men’ “. Then the
telegram quotes the following from Mr. Ian Smith: “If we
do not maintain civilized standards we could end up like
Zambia, a neighbouring negro nation.” Zambia, they are
subhuman, they are uncivilized. I would like to ask Mr. Ian
Smith if he cares to read some of the proceedings of the
Security Council, Perhaps he does not deign to do so. What
does he mean by civilization? Is it having bathtubs, is it
having hippy clothes, is it having perfume? I address this to
many white men who think that because of the colour of
their skin they are superior. Do these people think that
those who are inventing lethal weapons, bacteriological
weapons, poison gases and napalm, are civilized? Thank
God that Africa and Asia did not go that far in civilization,
that spurious civilization. This reminds me of two lines by
none other than Thomas Hardy, who was a poet as well as a
novelist. He said that after two thousand years of Christian
mass we have got as far as poison gas.

73. Some of us have become hard-boiled by experience;
we cannot go floating along on hopes for solutions that no
longer can beguile the peoples of the world, not even the
peoples living in Asia and Africa.
74. First, we should have the assurance that the United
Kingdom will not give up and throw this problem into the
lap of the United Nations, with the announcement that
Southern Rhodesia is no longer its colony. No one would
then believe the United Kingdom’s claim that it acted in
good faith, even though they may have acted by default.
Secondly, should there be some solution worked out by the
United Kingdom and its friends, including African States,
would it be a practical solution, and would they be willing
to fuc. and state a target-date for its implementation?
Otherwise, everything will be of but academic value and not
worth the ink and paper used to write it.

69. When will the white man wake up and think that he is
a brother to all homo sapiens whatever the colour? If the
British Government is not in a position to do anything,
whar assurance do we have that these people will not
colonize the indigenous population of that region in the
African continent, not only in South Africa? Whatever is
said about Portugal-and I do not hold a brief for any of its
policies-at least I think that they are more human than
those people who come with lily-white skins. This does not
apply to all lily-white-skinned people; I have known some
who are very human and who are very good friends of
mine. Most of the Portuguese are brown. We must
remember what happened in Brazil. Brazil is a multiracial
society because of the presence of Portugal in Brazil at one
time. And we should also salute Spain, another Mediterranean country that has not set itself apart from those
with tinted skins. I am white, I am not brown. I must say
that I am ashamed of many white people-as if human
rights reside in the skin.

75. I know that my colleagues here are eager to vote and
go away. I know also very well that there are some bitter
representatives who have precipitated this vote. They told
me, those bitter representatives, “We want to show the
whole world how the white man is treating our most vital
problems-problems
touching upon the dignity of the
human person-in a cavalier manner that is tantamount to
hypocrisy”. I tried my best to tell them that they should
exercise patience and give the United Kingdom another
chance to work out something that may in the end bring
about a solution. But if the United Kingdom fails, then we
have to turn to the two world Powers that can do
something about this question, Where there is a will there is
a way. When one of those Powers thinks certain treaties
have been violated, it mobilizes an army, with its allies, of
close to a million. I am not going to drag another item into
the discussion, however. And when another Power thinks
its interests are threatened, it mobilizes its forces and
marches out Into other parts of the world. But what are

70. Now, what we should be trying to get out of our good
colleague Lord Caradon is this: Will we have assurance from
7

Abstaining: Colombia, Finland, France, Paraguay, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.

they going to do, as Members of the United Nations, about
Africa? Just watch the difficulties of the, United Kingdom
and do nothing about the whole situation? Is that right? Is
that in conformity with the high purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations? I do not think so. That
is why in my first statement on this item I suggested
/1478th meeting, paru. 671 that the representative of the
United Kingdom try to consult with those two Powers,
both of which are more solvent financially than is the
United Kingdom nowadays; that they could perhaps jointly
send a warning or use more persuasive arguments with
Mr. Ian Smith to change his policy, to get him to stop
degrading himself by setting himself on a level higher than
his fellow men, the indigenous people of Southern Rhodesia.

The result of the vote was eight in favour, none against,
with seven abstentions.
The draft resolution was not adopted having failed to
obtain the affirmative votes of nine members.

79. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those representa.
tives who have asked to explain their vote after the voting,
80. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I wish to speak
briefly in explanation of my vote. I shall not at this stage
reply further to the speecheswhich have been made in this
Council. I would only say that it has been remarkable to
hear the representative of Hungary speak of self-determination, and the representative of the Soviet Union speak of
the freedom and independence of small peoples, and the
representative of Spain speak to the theme that the
interests of the inhabitants should be peramount.

76. Let us be frank, let us not fool ourselves any further.
Why cannot these two world Powers assume some responsibility here? Of course, the main responsibility rests with
the United Kingdom. It has not disengaged itself from
Southern Rhodesia, it is still the metropolitan Power. The
danger is that it might disengage itself and leave the whole
question hanging in the air. This is what my African
brothers and colleagues should bear in mind. They should
not exasperate the United Kingdom at this stage. They
should doggedly keep asking the United Kingdom and other
Powers: What are you going to do about this problem?

81, I thank my friend the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia for
speaking to us in a sincere spirit. I have carefully noted
what he said. I do not think that he should discount what
my country has been prepared to do and is certainly
prepared to continue to do. He spoke of the fear that my
country would disengage from its responsibilities. I would
tell him as a matter of information that earlier today‘ in the
House of Commons in London my Foreign Secretary
announced that Her Majesty’s Government has decided that
it would serve no useful purpose to maintain the United
Kingdom residual mission in Salisbury and that Rhodesia
House in London should be closed. That was a necessary
act in view of what has taken place, but it is certainly not
an act of disengagement from our responsibilities. For, in
the course of his speech in the House of Commons today,
the Foreign Secretary said:

77. There is an alternative: if nothing is done in due time
those African States should put their heads together. Today
they are weak, but they are not going to be weak for ever.
They are buying arms, and there will be massacresmassacres by the masses-not necessarily in Southern
Rhodesia or South Africa. The whites there can fortify
themselves, but I dare say that when the masses are aroused
and mobs are enraged, they may slaughter any white man in
Africa, What will prevent them from doing so? It will be a
calamity, because we shall have anarchy followed by
dictatorship. AI1 the wisdom of the.African leaders will not
be able to restrain the mobs ‘or the crowds. There will be
some sort of revolution against man’s inhumanity to man.
We do not want to see that happen, and that is why I asked
to speak-in order to make sure that things are put in their
real perspective and to express the hope that with the
wisdom that we wiIl think the United Kingdom has,
something novel will be devised in order to put an end to
this very sad situation.

“The action in the Security Council which is imperatively needed is the rigorous observance of the existing
sanctions, Her Majesty’s Government have been most
careful to observe sanctions and to co-operate fully with
the United Nations Supervisory Committee in dealing
with any casesof reported evasions of sanctions, We shall
press strongly at the Security Council for the resolute
observance of the policy which the Council has already
laid down.”

78. The PRESIDENT
(translated from Spanish): At
yesterday’s meeting I informed the members of the Council
that the five States sponsoring the draft resolution contained in document S/9720/Rev.l had postponed their
request for a vote on that draft resolution until today’s
meeting. I have no representative listed as wishing to speak
to this draft or to explain his vote before the voting.
Accordingly, in compliance with the request of the cosponsors, I shall put to the vote of this Council the draft
resolution submitted by Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan, Senegal
and Zambia, contained in document S/927O/Rev.l.

82. I have endeavoured to explain thoroughly and carefully-and, I believe the Council would be prepared to
admit, honestly-what can be done and what cannot be
done at this particular stage. The Council well knows that I
have advocated that we should act together and act
unanimously and act within our clear capacity. I greatly
regret that we have not done so, We have not gone forward;
we have gone backward.

A vote was taken by show of hands,

83. I equally regret that our offers of consultations with
other members were not accepted. The tradition of this
Council, as we all very well know, is that even when we
disagree, there should be consultation between us. Indeed,
particularly when we disagree, consultation is our obliga-

In favour: Algeria, China, Hungary, Nepal, Pakistan,
Senegal, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
Against: None.
8

tion. Our overriding duty as members of this Council, so I
have always believed, is not to cause or intensify divisions
and disputes but to search diligently for agreement. I
greatly regret that the promoters of this draft resolution
were not prepared to observe that duty.

nation is also expressed by others outside the Council, one
can only be delighted, even if one does not agree on the
methods to be used to defeat that rkgime. One can only be
delighted that there is unanimity about what the regime is
doing in Rhodesia.

84. As to the so-called referendum, I need only refer to
the Secretary-General’s forthright statement, and to the
statement made by you, Mr. President, on behalf of all of
us last week. We are all fully agreed, as you stated, that the
referendum was illegal. We are all fully agreed in condemning the so-called constitutional proposals as invalid. We are
all fully agreed in declaring that any constitution promulgated by the regime of the racist minority could have no
legal effect. We are all fully agreed, moreover, in renewing
our call to all Member States not to recognize the illegal
rkgime in any way.

89. I should now like to go back to the draft resolution
that has just been rejected. I go back to it for one simple
reason. The matter is still with us. And if the matter is still
with us, I have no doubt that the arguments that we have
heard in the past and during the last two weeks will also
come back. Instead of leaving those arguments for yet
anothei debate on the matter-for J have no doubt that
there will be another debate-it might be useful to deal with
some of them at this stage.
90. My delegation listened with great attention to the
representative of the United Kingdom when, on 19 June in
this chamber, he asked the question: What can be done?
(1479th meeting, para. 29.1 Indeed he asked that question
again this afternoon. Clearly that is the question that
everybody in this Council has been asking. It is the same
question that the United Kingdom asked when Smith and,
his men unilaterally declared Rhodesia independent. It is
the same question that the United Kingdom asked when it
came to the United Nations with a view to finding a
solution to the Rhodesian question. To our mind the
answer has been obvious; and we have no doubt that the
United Kingdom Government too must have been aware of
the answer. It is a simple answer. What can be done? Quell
the rebellion. In adopting resolution 232 (1966) and
resolution 253 (1968) the Security Council was, of course,
trying to find an answer to the question, “What can be
done? “, by adopting measures such as those suggested to
this Council by the United Kingdom Government. The
measures imposed under the two resolutions, unfortunately, have failed to bring about the required politica
change in Southern Rhodesia, and four-and-a-half million
Africans still groan under the yoke of 220,000 white
oppressors. Experience in the application of economic
sanctions against any State has S~OWII that sanctions not
backed by force from the start are doomed to failure.

8.5. As for my Government, we stand by our commitments. We shall not give up. We shall press on. We shall
maintain, and wherever possible intensify, sanctions. We
shall continue to play our ful1 part in the work of the
Security Council Sahctions Committee. We shall, as we have
undertaken,
consult with Commonwealth
and other
Governments, particularly African Governments, We shall
not recognize the illegal r&me or any of its illegal acts. We
have openly and clearly stated in this Council what we can
do and what we cannot do. We shall continue to honour
our commitments and our undertakings.
86. Mr. MUUKA (Zambia): At this stage we should like to
thank all those who supported the draft resolution on
which the Council has just voted. We should like to thank
the various Members of the United Nations that participated in the debate on the question. We should like to
thank the sixty nations that saw fit to tail for a meeting of
the Security Council to deal with the problem. Indeed, we
should like to thank even those who abstained from the
vote on the draft resolution. Why do we thank them? We
thank them first of all because of the contributions they
made to the debate. Furthermore, wB thank them because
they agreed that this matter should be discussed; that id to
say, they too saw the seriousness of the situation, as we saw
it ourselves.

9 1. My Government and my delegation have on numerous
occasions called upon the United Kingdom as administering
Power to use force to re.establish its own authority which
has been usurped by a clique of power-hungry settlers.
Many other representatives in this chamber also have made
a similar call. In doing so, we have explained that it is not
because blood enchants us-far from it-but rather it is
because we are truly convinced that unless we take that
action now we shall soon be faced with an uglier situation.
We must take preventive measures before southern Africa is
completely engulfed in a racial war.

87. During the statements both of members of the Council
and of other representatives who had asked for an
opportunity to address the Council on the question, it was
very clear that everyone condemned Rhodesia’s defiance of
the decisions of the United Nations and the Security
Council, indeed Rhodesia’s defiance of world opinion. But
condemnation was extended to Portugal and South Africa.
88. Every one of the speakers condemned the Ian Smith
regime for continuing to trample on human rights and to
oppress the people of Rhodesia, using the sdle criterion of
colour. We were delighted to hear the unanimous condemnation of the illegal detention of the liberation leaders in
Rhodesia, the unjustifiable restrictions, the imprisonments,
and ‘so forth. Indeed, this very Council addressed itself
earlier to the unfortunate assassinations that ghad taken
place in Rhodesia. When such a broad ,cross-section as is
represented in this Council condemns everything that the
illegal Smith regime has done, and when such condem-

92. I still return to the question, “What can be done? “.
My delegation has never been convinced that efforts by the
United Nations can succeed unless the United Kingdom, as
the Power responsible for Rhodesia, changes its policy.
Britain has treated the rebellion with duplicity. On the one
hand, it has sought to quell the rebellion, and has told the
world so; on the other, it has proceeded to give the rebel
rbgime the assurances of success and survival by stating
unambiguously that the.use of force against white fascist
9

-rebels is out of the question. It has sought to impose
effective economic mandatory sanctions, and at the same
time it is opposed to measures that are intended to tighten
the stranglehold on Rhodesia-namely, measures of the
kind we suggested in the draft resolution that has just failed
of adoption.
93. We reject the assertion by the representative of the
United Kingdom that the use of force by that country
against Rhodesia would be tantamount to invasion. Rhodesia is a colony of Britain and therefore a territory of
Britain, and the exercise of discipline on the part of that
State cannot legally amount to an invasion. Britain would
not be starting a war, It was asserted last week in this
Council that we should not encourage measures designed to
start a war in southern Africa, If Britain were to intervene,
would it be a question of starting a war in southern Africa?
Our view is that Britain would not be starting a war, for it
cannot start a war against itself. In any case, by intervening
with force, Britain would only be averting an armed
conflict which has already started between the fascist ‘forces
and the freedom fighters. It is not fear of invasion or of
starting i war in Rhodesia; it is, as one British Conservative
Member of Parliament said, fear of shooting their kith and
kin. Had the coloured people been in rebellion, Her
Majesty’s forces would have been there to shoot. Last week
we were reminded that the various examples of Anguilla,
Cyprus and several other places were, after all, removed
from this question, basically because in Rhodesia since
1923 the white minority has been enjoying a large measure
of self-government, I should like to know what the political
status of both Anguilla and Cyprus was at the time the
British Government took action to deal with the situations
in those Territories. In any case, the fact that Rhodesia
enjoys a measure of self-government does not, I submit, in
itself imply that it can with impunity declare itself
independent and oppress the majority of the people, while
the United Kingdom stands by and watches, merely because
it is self-governing. If the situation demands the use of
force, pacifism facilitates escalation-and Munich is a
reminder. Besides, Chapter VII of the Charter was, in OUI
view, meant for situations like that of Rhodesia, and there
is no doubt in our minds that, if force had been used in
1965 immediately after the unilateral declaration of
independence, it would have had the least ugly. consequences.

British and southern African minority shareholders arc
combined with local Rhodesian capital-sometimes in
private companies and disguised as bank nominees.”
95. The position is likely to be the same today. Thisvery
year another British newspaper reported:
“ . . . it is in fact open to any British firm to continue to
develop normal relations with its South African associate
and for that South African associate to act as agent for a
Rhodesian company. For as long as elementary prccautions are taken to disguise the origin of Rhodesian
exports and the destination of imports, a large proportion
of international business can go on as usual.”
It has gone on, and it is for this reason that the rebel colony
has been able to defy hostile international opinion ;and
survive the sanctions measures. The same newspaper recently reported:
“Today, there are nearly 400 British companies will1
subsidiary or associate companies in southern Africa. and
more than 190 subsidiary or associate companies in
Rhodesia. Among the latter are giants of British indu!;try
such as ICI, Courtalds, Unilever, Shell and BP, Britisll
Leyland Motor Holdings, Hawker Siddeley, . . .”
and several others, If you are to enforce sanctions against
Rhodesia and yet allow this open trade to go on, what do
you intend to achieve?
96. Enough has been said about other States involved in
this monopolistic network, and I will not endeavour to go
into further details. I think the appeals made to them arc
sufficient, even though we do not think the sanctions roacl
is the right one to follow.
97. It was in the light of those failures that my delegation
co-sponsored the draft resolution just rejected by this
Council. If Britain still claims any moral responsibility lover
Rhodesia, we believe this was the time for it to act
positively to avert further bloodshed-not to start a new
war,

94. In his speech on 19 June the United Kingdom
Ambassador stated that his country could not now justify
an economic war against southern Africa [ibid., para. 431.
What, then, is this exercise in sanctions about? How, then,
is the Security Council policy of economic sanctions to be
intensified and tightened? It is all very well to talk about
tightening the sanctions, but we know that South Africa
and Portugal still frustrate the policy we have followed for
the past three-and-a-half years. Is it still possible, is it still
meaningful, to talk about tightening the sanctions now, if
we are not prepared to take action against those two
countries?
In any case there are numerous clandestine
arrangements that have been made between British and
South African firms to help Rhodesia beat the sanctions.
The Financial Times of London reported in October 1965:

98. Last week the representative of the United Kingdom
said he understood that quite a number of the represcntatives who had spoken in the debate might have been
emotional or felt strongly over the situation and he saildhc
would be surprised if the opposite were true [ibid.,
para. 30/. Much as we believe that the Rhodesian u&r is
most painful to the African body politic, it is obvious that
the situation existing in Rhodesia at the moment has been
condemned by the whole international community. And if
some of our speeches appeared a little emotional, it was not
because we are very easily given to emotion; rather it wzs
because we are confronted with a situation whose gravity
we cannot underestimate. Besides-and this is the important
factor-it is our feeling that what we really are agreeingnot
to deal with at the, moment is going to develop into
something more serious in the future, and it is that feeeiing
which perhaps makes us emotional in what we say.

“British companies operate in Rhodesia through subsidiaries of their southern Africa subsidiaries; in others,

99. But I am very happy because I do realize that the
representative of the United Kingdom himself felt vew

strongly about the Rhodesian question even before there
was a situation as SeriOUS
as the present one, At that
particular time he decided to resign. There are very few of
us who can leave our jobs for the sake of vhat is happening
in another part of the world even if that part of the world is
under the authority of our Government. I have taken pains
to try and imagine how he must have felt at a later stage
when the British Prime Minister and Ian Smith were trying
to fmd a solution, so-called, ,to the Rhodesian question
without any consultations whatsoever. I think that that
must have been another painful moment for our colleague
because he believes as he has demonstrated that it is
important that there must be the element of consent in
whatever is done in Rhodesia,
100. Again to prove that emotions are not just on one
side, I should like to cite a statement by somebody who is
ve;l well known to quite a number of us. He .is a very
distinguished British Member of Parliament, Mr. Michael
Foot, and this is what he said immediately after the
unilateral declaration of independence:

the PrOPOsals which have just been put to the vote and are
intended t0 declare a sort of economic war On the whole Of
southern Africa.
104. For those reasons my delegation has found it
necessary to abstain on the text submitted to US.
105. Mr. l&ALES
SUAREZ (Colombia) (translated
from Spanish): With regard to the vote which the Colombian delegation has just cast, I should say this.
106. First, the countries of Latin America actually came
intO international life through the ending of a colonial
rbghe. They cannot fail to regard with sympathy the
efforts and struggles of those peoples which still d0 not
enjOY the prerogatives and rights which result from full
independence and a genuinely democratic form of govemment.
10’7. Secondly, the rigime which prevails in Southern
Rhodesia has from the outset contravened every rule Of
law, not only by the procedures it h& adopted but also by
the very act which created it. Colombia could in n0
circumstances appear to participate or sympathize with the
illegal adventure of the Southern Rhodesian rdglme.

“If, in six months or a year’s time the situation were to
be that Mr. Smith and his illegal Government still hold
plenary power in Rhodesia, still clamping their police
state on the 4 million Africans, this country”-that
is to
say, the United Kingdom-“will
have suffered one of the
most humiliating defeats in its history-a defeat from
which our reputation could never recover all over Africa.
Our position would be utterly devoid of its moral
authority throughout the world.”

108. Thirdly, within the United Nations the Colombian
delegation has shown the African countries complete
understanding and given them equitable and honest treatment; it has also given abundant proof of an hnfailing
interest in their problems.

101. Now that is an emotional speech. We do understand
that one carinot but look at that problem with emotion
because it concerns human beings.

109. My delegation felt compelled to abstain in the vote
on the draft resolution on Southern Rhodesia simply
because the use of force is essentially a step of such
extreme gravity a’nd such unpredictable consequences that
only after every alternative had been exhausted could force
be used, and then only with the high sense of responsibility
which should mark the acts of this Council.

102. Today we have decided not to act in the only way
that we could have acted if we were going to do something
in Rhodesia. It is not for me to try to analyse the motives
for which delegations voted this way or that. It is certainly
not my Government’s right in any way to try and find out
how the other Governments of the world look at the
question of Rhodesia. But what I do believe is that given
the Security Council, given the United Nations, and
concerned as we all are about international peace and
security, we cannot but find a meaningful solution to the
Rhodesian question, We may have postponed that decision
today, but I have no doubt that we shall come back to the
problem. I am only hoping that it will not be too late then.

110. Mr. YOST (United States of America): The United
States deeply deplores the spectacle of one per cent of the
population of Rhodesia deciding to impose on the vast
majority of voteless Rhodesians Smith’s proposals for a new
constitution which would clearly intensify and institutionalize political control of Southern Rhodesia by that
minority, As I said on 13 June in this Council [1475th
meeting/, my Government believes that this Council should
condemn both the illegal rtSgimeand the proposed constitution. I argued that we should have taken such action before
20 June. Unfortunately, we could not seem to reach a
conbnsus on a form of wording which would have
expressed the condemnation we all believe is both deserved
and required.

103. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): My
delegation has already several times set forth the views Of
the French Government on the illegality of the Salisbury
regime and on ways of putting an end to the rebellion. It
will therefore be sufficient for me to recall that my
delegation, despite its reservations of principle, voted for
resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968 as a concession to
the deep feeling sustained in Africa by the continuation of
this regrettable Rhodesian crisis. My country has scrupulously applied the measures then unanimously adopted, but
it still entertains doubts about this barely feasible project,
from which it was to be feared that the United Nations
might emerge with diminished prestige. The concern my
delegation felt at that time is bound to be strengthened by

111. We have been faced with a draft resolution which my
Gbvemment could not support. I regret that we have all
been placed in this situation, because the only beneficiary
of our differences is the illegal regime we seek to condemn.
This Council has exerted an effective influence on the
Rhodesian situation only when it has worked on the bask
of unanimity. i find it disturbing that in consideration of’ a
subject On which we have previously acted effectively, we
now find ourselves divided in opinion as to what our next
11

a
meeting] on the present situation in Southern Rhodf:sia.

step should be. Clearly, the only ones who will find any
solace in this state of affairs are Mr, Smith and his friends.

We underlined the self-evident responsibility of the ad&istering Power in respect of the situation, as well as the
dangers inherent in it. We also commented in detail upon
the failure of the present sanctio?s and we indicated what,
in our opinion, would constitute the minimum measure of
action that would be commensurate with the requirements
of the case. I need not recapitulate our views on the farcical
referendum staged by the illegal Smith rigime, nor cornment on its result. As a matter of fact, the position in
Southern Rhodesia is crystal-clear to all of us, There is no
ambiguity whatsoever in anybody’s mind in this chamber
regarding either the facts of this case or its merits from the
point of view of the Charter or of the vital interests of the
international community. We are all agreed that a catastro.
phe may be impending in southern Africa, and that the
dangerous and tragic trend of events in that part al’ the
world must be reversed.Despite this agreement in principle,
however,,there is a lamentable lack of political will to take
action that would be commensurate with the requiremenls
of the present situation. National economic interests
prevail.

112. To turn specifically to the language of the resolution
we had before us, I should like to point out that while the
United States finds itself in broad agreement with its aims
and agreesfully with many of its provisions, there are other
portions to which our objections are well known. In
particular, we have consistently maintained that the use of
force is not the appropriate way to bring this problem to a
solution. We have heard the representative of the United
Kingdom say that his ‘Government is not prep.ared to use
force in this situation, and we respect the cogent reasonshe
has set forth for not doing so. The duty of this Council is to
maintain international peace and security. The use of force
in this case would, in our view, serve to jeopardize rather
than to support that objective.

113. Another major defect in the draft resolution was its
extension of economic sanctions to South Africa and
Portugal. The United States has frequently explained why
we consider that such an extension would not be productive in dealing with the situation in Southern Rhodesia. To
apply sanctions to neighbouring countries simply because
they have not yet been adequately or successfully applied
to Rhodesia itself would seem to us to be a dubious course,
introducing additional grave complications into a situation
already complicated enough. We cannot agreethat it would
be either wiseor responsible for this Council tb do so.

119. It is said that resolution 253 (1968) should continue
to be applied and strengthened, and that we should do a
little more of what we are already doing, and this time a
little more diligently. No one need disagree with that
advice. That would probably be done, with or without
another resolution, perhaps through the already-existing
mechanism of the Council’s Sanctions Committee.
120. None of the co-sponsors of the draft resollution
which this Council has just declined to adopt-in any case,
definitely not Pakistan-will withhold its full co-operation
from such efforts. But that has not been either the principal
issue or the main hurdle. The question that needed an
answer was whether the Council would take the action
which wasclearly called for to meet Smith’s challenge. That
wis the main concern of the co-sponsors of this draft
resolution. A mere condemnation of the sham referendum
in Southern Rhodesia was not the aim of the sixty
Afro-Asian States which called ‘for a meeting ol’ this
Council. That referendum stands condemned from the
standpoint of all that is decent and wholesome in the values
which all of us hold dear and sacred. Members as well as
non-members of this Council have, one after the other, said
so in unmistakable terms.

114. Finally, my Government also had difficulty with
operative paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, in view of our
traditional position supporting a free flow of information
throughout the world.
115. In sum, the United States deeply regrets the travesty
foisted upon the world by Mr, Smith and his friends in
Southern Rhodesia, and we are particularly distressed that
the members of this Council have been unable to find
agreement as to how we should proceed in the face of this
contQu&g injustice.
116. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The representative of
the United Kingdom in his brief remarks referred to the
socialist countries, including my own, with caustic comments. He sought to avoid the merits of the question under
our scrutiny, the main problem being the self.determination
of ‘the Zimbabwe people, That wasthe idea we advanced in
our statements, in complete unison with the African and
Asian representatives in the Council. It seems to me tl!at
the reply and the references of the representative of the
United Kingdom applied at the same time, and even
principally, to the statements of the African and Asian
delegations on this Council.

121. The Afro-Asian request was made to stir the CCNIscience of this august body, the Security Council, which
holds the key to coercive action by the international
community. In that respect, today, and during the course
of last week, we have been* disappointed. But we believe
that we must not relent. Our efforts to achieve our aim
must continue in concert with ,other Member States in the
hope that an effective solution acceptable to 211will bc
found, and that the justice of the cause of the Ziibabwc
people will prevail.

117. The representative of the United Kingdom tried in
vain to create here the impression that this question is a
problem between the East and the West. It is a colonial
issue, and it is a lost issue. And I would emphasize that, as
regards self-determination, we have nothing to learn from
the biggest colonialist Power in the world.

122. The PRESIDENT (trunshzted from Spanish): [ now
call upon the representative of the Union of Soviet SociaM
Republics to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
123. Mr. MALIK

118. Mr. YUNUS (Pakistan): At the very outset of this
debate, we placed before this Council our views [1475th

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translatedfrom Russian): Mr. President, I only wish (0

make some brief comments in exercise of my right of reply.
12

124. Experience of life shows that malice and slander have
always been and continue to be signs of falsehood and
impotence. We have been witnessing this over the more
than fifty years of the existence of the Soviet State. During
the post-war period this kind of slander and malice has been
heard frequently in the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies, directed against other socialist countries.

129. The PRESIDENT(translatedfrom Spanish):At this
stageof our discussions
I should like to speakas the
representativeof PARAGUAY to explain fhe reasonsfor
my delegation’sabstention in the vote on the draft
resolutionsubmittedby Algeria, Nepal, Pakistan,Senegal
andZambia.
130. The generalpositionof my country with regardto
the unilateraldeclarationof independence,
the validity of
which we do not recognize,and to the illegal minority
racist regimein SouthernRhodesia,which alsowe do not
recognizeandwith whichwe haveno relationswhatsoever,
is well known and need not be reiterated at this time.
Within this generalsettingour ideasand aimsare thoseof
the greaterpart of the provisionscontainedin the draft
resolutionwhichhasjust beenput to the vote.

125. There was a weak echo of this today in the remarks
made by the representative of the administering Power
about the socialist countries, including the Soviet Union.
We, the Soviet peoples, are proud of our contribution to
the cause of the liberation of peoples. Our country lost
twenty million persons in order to save the peoples of
Europe and the rest of the world-including
the people of
the United Kingdom-from
fascist enslavement under
Hitler’s imperialism. Without that great sacrifice the representatives neither of the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union
nor of other countries would be able to sit round this table
and discuss problems concerning the liberation of peoples
from racism, colonialism and imperialism, because the
entire yrorld would be under the heel of Hitler’s Reich. As
we know, Hitler proclaimed that the Reich’s domination of
the entire world, including the United Kingdom, would last
a thousand years. It was our sacrifices, together with those
made by all other freedom-loving peoples, that made it
possible to save mankind from that dreadful threat. That is
why we are so merciless in our condemnation of imperialism, racism, colonialism and neo-colonialism.

131. However,the following provisionspreventedusfrom
voting for the draft resolutionand thus supportingits
adoption.
132. In the report [S/9252 and Add.11 submittedby the
Committeeset up in pursuanceof resolution253 (1968),
and particularly in its paragraph45, the Committee-of
which my country is a member-drewattention to the
conduct of South Africa and Portugalwith regard to the
implementationof that sameresolution,
133. That statementthereforerepresents
the viewsof my
country. I should add that, althoughSouth Africa and
Portugalarethe chief countrieswhich trade with Southern
Rhodesiaandthussupportthe illegalSalisburyrhgime,they
are not the only ones. In the present circumstancesnamely,on the first occasionthat the Councilconsidersthe
subject sincethe report was submitted and assesses
the
resultsof the above-mentioned
resolution-we feel that
operative pdragraph4of the draft resolutionreflects the
findingsof the report.

126. Of course my friend Mr. Csatorday and I are honoured by the special attention shown us ‘by the representative of the administering Power: he replied only to us and
to the representative of Spain-but here the question of
Gibraltar is involved. The representatives of the African and
Asian countries have received no reply from the representative of the administering Power, despite the criticism and
serious condemnation contained in all their statements. The
fact that those against whom such criticism and condemnation were directed found nothirig to say in reply speaks for
itself,
127. What conclusions may be drawn? What has been
shown by the debate and in the vote on the draft resolution
submitted by five African and Asian countries on behalf of
the sixty countries of Asia and Africa on such an urgent
question of our time, the question of racism and of man’s
inhumanity to man? They have shown quite clearly that,
first, racism ‘is a product of imperialism and colonialism;
secondly, that imperialism continues to defend racism; and,
thirdly, that the vote dealt a serious blow to the hopes of
those States, Governments and peoples of the sixty African
and Asian countries which had faith in the Security Council
and believed that it would really do something this time.
However, that has not happened. Everyone knows who is
responsiblefor that situation; it wasvividly demonstrated
in the vote and therefore no amount of maliciousand
slanderousinsinuationsdirected at the socialistcountries
can conceal the facts, There can be no doubt that the
peoplesof Asia and Africa and all the other freedom-loving
peoplesof the world will draw the appropriateconclusions
from .&is.

134. The draft resolutioli,however,alsoincludesoperative
paragraph5, which would decide“that MemberStatesand
membersof the specializedagencies
shall carry out the
measuresdealingwith imports and exports envisagedin
resolution253 (1968) andin the presentresolutionagainst
the Republicof South Africa andthe Portuguese
colony of
Mozambique”, Incidentally I wish to state quite clearly
that, if there is any trade betweenmy country and South
Africa or Mozambique-whichI doubt-it is in any case
very small,of no relevanceto our own economy, and of
evenlessto the economies
of thosetwo political entities.
135. The decisionto extend the proposedmeasuresto
south Africa and Mozambiqueis one which my Govemment could take only after a detailedandcarefulexamination of their scope,significanceandadvisability.Just as my
country faithfully andconscientiously
fulfils all its dutiesas
a Member of the United Nations,it basesits attitude to
decisionsof the type that we areaskedto adopt on a full
awareness
of its responsibility.Such a decisioncould be
takenonly at the very highestleveland,I repeat,after a full
and conscientious
study. Theserequirements
havenot been
met.
136. Operativeparagraph2 of the draft resolution,generally speaking,reiteratesthe exhortations contained in

128. I do not insist on consecutiveinterpretation on the
usualunderstanding.
13

bear on the United Kingdom, since, as its highest represen.
tatives have stated, the United Kingdom cannot exercise
that right, With or without this paragraph, everyone knows
that pressure is exerted by a large number of Member Stat.es
of the United Nations; the resolution with which we art:
concerned would not add anything effective.

operative paragraph 2 of resolution 253 (1968), with some
variations such as the change from an exhortation to an
urgent appeal, and with one important addition: that of
“the use of force” to the measures which the Council urges
the United Kingdom to adopt.
137. The exhortation contained in the second paragraph
of resolution 253 (1968) is obviously wide enough to cover
all the alternatives available to the Territory’s administering
Power-that is to the United Kingdom. The use of force to
quell the Rhodesian rebellion is certainly one of the rights
of that Power; and this right, as such, is incontestable. Since
it is a right, the decision whether and when it should be
exercised is for the administering Power. In any case, the
feelings of a great many members of the international
community on this alternative have already been repeatedly
expressed.

;!

139. My delegation believes that there are many ways of
using resolution 253 (1968) and the powers of the Corn.
mittee set up under its article 20 to give effect to the
sanctions already adopted and obtain universal compiiancc
with them. We believe that the Sanctions Committee should
diligently explore those ways.
140. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I wish to state that there
are no other speakers on my list.

138. It would be illusory to think that the adoption of the
paragraph in question would bring some kind of pressure to

The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m.

;I
1’

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 0.50 (or equival6nt

in other

currencies)

82090-November

1972-Z,M
