S/2022/8

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 January 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 4 January 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2584 (2021) on the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA), by which the Council requested me, addressing perspectives from all
relevant actors, including my Special Representative for Mali, in consultation with
the Force Commander, to provide the Council with information focusing on:
(a) progress in Mission operations, security challenges and coordinati on between
security actors, including discussions in the Instance de coordination au Mali;
(b) overall performance, including implementation of the adaptation plan, roll -out of
the integrated peacekeeping performance and accountability framework and the
Comprehensive Planning and Performance Assessment System, improvement and
performance of the casualty evacuation system, rotations of uniformed personnel and
how reported cases of underperformance are addressed; and (c) an update on the
integration of all Mission components, including implementation of the integrated
strategic framework and the related transition plan, in line with my road map dated
25 March 2021 (S/2021/300, annex).
Progress in Mission operations
As outlined in my report (S/2021/1117), the security situation remains
precarious. In northern and central Mali, the prevalence of improvised explosive
devices targeting main supply routes has had a significant impact on the Mission’s
mobility and security coverage. MINUSMA camps and convoys are also increasingly
subjected to direct and indirect attacks, which are increasingly sophisticated, as
demonstrated by the spate of attacks against MINUSMA between 3 and 9 December
2021, including an attack on 8 December on a MINUSMA convoy in the area of
Bandiagara, killing seven peacekeepers and wounding three. The attacks appear to be
a way for terrorist armed groups to demonstrate their continued capacity t o harass
national and international forces, to project their dominance over terrain and to
intimidate populations. The campaign is likely further motivated by perceived
successes, including the repositioning of international forces away from Kidal
Region.
The deteriorating security environment is also characterized by renewed and
continued attacks against civilians in central Mali, armed clashes involving radical
elements and self-defence groups, as well as intercommunity violence, resulting in
casualties among the civilian population, forced displacement, loss of livelihoods and
the destruction of critical infrastructure, in particular bridges and telecommunication
installations. Local communities have also been compelled to sign so-called “survival

21-19669 (E)

070122

*2119669*

S/2022/8

pacts” with extremist armed groups. Overall, violent extremist elements have
continued to expand their activities towards the south and west of the country.
These challenges notwithstanding, Mission activities continued apace in support
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, as well as essential reforms to
support the transition and ongoing stabilization and protection of civilian efforts in
the centre of the country. Increasingly integrated operations contributed to these
efforts, supporting the Malian authorities and security forces in the exercise of their
core functions. However, their limited presence, coupled with the lack of consolidated
redeployment and security plans for the centre and the north, and for sustaining a
security presence in these areas, resulted in gains often being short-lived and easily
reversed.
The centre of Mali remains the most significant area of protection concern.
Operations in this area continue to have a localized positive impact. Operation Beaver
is designed to integrate the Mission’s security, protection and stabilization efforts with
the support of MINUSMA police in and around Douentza, to protect civilians and to
facilitate the return of State authorities. As part of the operation, following several
alerts over the past months of imminent threats of attacks on the village of Petaka,
MINUSMA carried out joint force and police patrols in and around the village, which
helped to deter attacks and contributed to reducing attacks on the road to Douentza
on market days. Operation Camel was carried out between 8 and 16 December 2021
to enhance the security of national route 15 between the towns of Sevaré and
Bandiagara. It included land and air reconnaissance and deterrence activities, long range patrols and the establishment of a temporary operating base.
The force-led Operation Buffalo Wet has continued to help in securing areas in
Bandiagara, Bankass, Koro and Mopti cercles by providing a protective environment
for local communities and enabling freedom of movement by containing and
disrupting armed groups’ activities, in coordination with the Malian Defence and
Security Forces. MINUSMA police contributed by undertaking coordinated patrols
with the gendarmerie, as well as long-range patrols along the roads to Djenné, Konna
and Bandiagara. These positive effects notwithstanding, the threat continued to
migrate further to the west and south, with armed groups exploiting community fault
lines. This is further complicated by the inadequate presence and limited capacity of
the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
This has been evidenced in Farabougou, Niono cercle, Ségou Region, which is
facing a humanitarian and security crisis, following an effective siege by extremist
armed groups since October 2020, despite Malian armed forces being deployed in the
village.
Similarly, in Gao Region, MINUSMA operations had a positive impact in Gao,
Labbezenga and Ménaka, under the umbrella of Operation Seka, which began in 2019
to respond to violent incidents and continues to secure major transit routes. Daily
long-range patrols are designed to ensure freedom of movement for both the United
Nations and civilians, including for convoys from the Niger. MINUSMA police also
continued their long-range patrols along the Gao-Ansongo axis to secure access to
markets through the route. Several attacks used to occur regularly at locations on the
route around Bara and Tacharane, but regular patrolling has contributed to reducing
their numbers.
The mobile task force conducted its first operation in the vicinity of Ménaka
and Ansongo from June to November 2021. It focused on sustained protection and
security operations and was diverted to Ouattagouna in the south of Ansongo
following attacks on the commune on 8 August, during which over 50 civilians were
killed. The extended presence of the mobile task force in the area helped to stabilize
the situation and facilitated several investigations and the provision of support to
2/9

21-19669

S/2022/8

affected communities. Owing to its robust posture, a significant decrease in the
activities of extremist and criminal groups was observed during the operation.
However, extremist violence and criminality increased following the withdrawal of
the unit.
Until a sustained presence of the Malian Defence and Security Forces is ensured,
extremist groups and criminal gangs risk returning after the withdrawal of MINUSMA
at the end of these operations. Complementary Mission good offices activities are
aimed at mitigating this, including the delivery of 12 projects in these areas, wi th the
objective of facilitating mobility and upgrading facilities for the Malian Defence and
Security Forces, while improving livelihoods and infrastructure for local communities
in surrounding areas.
Operation Farrier continued, which is aimed at implem enting measures agreed
by the Technical Commission on Security to control the movement of combatants and
weapons of compliant armed groups. In the context of the Permanent Strategic
Framework gatherings in Timbuktu on 7 and 8 November and in Gao from 17 to
19 November, MINUSMA was able to control and monitor over 150 vehicles and
1,000 persons using checkpoints, patrols, quick reaction force and unmanned aerial
vehicle monitoring. This operation was welcomed by both Malian authorities and the
Permanent Strategic Framework.
To improve the safety and security of MINUSMA peacekeepers, significant
efforts were expended on the reconnaissance of alternative main supply routes into
Mali, given that MINUSMA convoys along the current routes remain a prime target
for attacks with improvised explosive devices. A ground mission in October,
Operation Northern Gate, demonstrated the viability in principle of the main supply
route from Algeria into Mali, and the Mission is currently assessing its logistical
feasibility. In addition, an air reconnaissance mission, Operation Western Gate, was
successfully conducted in November, demonstrating the initial viability of the main
supply route from Mauritania into Mali, to be confirmed during an upcoming ground
operation. Discussions have been held with officials of Algeria and Mauritania and
both countries have pledged to extend the necessary support.
The Mission continued its efforts to facilitate humanitarian access in both
northern and central Mali. This included providing security assistance for the World
Food Programme in October during its humanitarian missions to Goundam, Tonka,
Niafunké and Soumpi cercles, and MINUSMA force and police provided security for
the Ménaka airfield to facilitate humanitarian flights. The Mission also supported a
humanitarian assessment to Farabougou on 8 December.
Coordination of security presences
The Instance de coordination au Mali continued to serve as the main forum for
the coordination of activities among security actors in Mali. Discussions on 4 October
were focused on the reconfiguration of Operation Barkhane and its withdrawal from
Kidal, Tessalit and Timbuktu, which has operational implications for MINUSMA,
including with regard to the protection of MINUSMA personnel and instal lations, as
a result of the limited availability of armed helicopters capable of providing in
extremis support.
During the meeting of the Instance de coordination Mali-Sécurité interieure held
on 23 November, discussions were focused on the security situa tion in the centre; the
Ménaka Without Weapons initiative; preparations for securing the elections and the
deployment of female members of the Malian Security Forces to the centre and the
north.

21-19669

3/9

S/2022/8

MINUSMA police, in coordination with the Centre de coordination et de gestion
de crise, the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the European Union
capacity-building mission in Mali and the Malian Security Forces, conducted a
simulation exercise on 3 October aimed at securing a polling centre followi ng a
terrorist incident and the escalation of violence.
In addition, MINUSMA police stepped up their cooperation with the Malian
Security Forces, including through co-location with Malian police in 67 locations, 47
of which are in the north and the centre, which greatly facilitates technical assistance
and experience-sharing. Greater effort is needed to ensure more effective
investigation of the 674 criminal cases identified by MINUSMA police in the centre
and the north. Only 212 have been investigated by the Malian Security Forces to date.
United Nations police were asked to support the investigation of only 24 of the cases
during the reporting period, in Gao (16), Timbuktu (5) and Ménaka (3).
The Mission continued its focus on assisting the redeployment and
operationalization of the reconstituted units. It provided training, transportation and
logistical support to the units, including the transport of 241 soldiers from Bamako to
Gao on 23 August, from where they were transported to Ménaka under Operation
Barkhane. MINUSMA also provided operational training to the reconstituted
battalion and accompanied its first patrol in Kidal in August, with a quick reaction
force on standby to intervene if necessary.
Mission performance
The political and security situation in Mali remains highly complex, and the
Mission continued to adapt its operations and support to the Malian Defence and
Security Forces to meet the challenges. It made notable progress in relation to the
Action for Peacekeeping Plus agenda, notably with regard to ensuring collective
coherence behind a political strategy and strategic and operational integration.
Following the renewal of its mandate in June 2021, MINUSMA revised its mission
concept and developed a mission plan, which provide strate gic direction to all
Mission components. In line with the integrated peacekeeping performance and
accountability framework, a revised Comprehensive Planning and Performance
Assessment System process is under development to monitor quarterly progress by
all components and divisions under the new mission plan results framework. This will
support increased Mission-wide data collection and assessment and ultimately
support greater evidence-based decision-making by senior leadership and the exercise
of internal accountability for the delivery of mandated results.
MINUSMA peacekeepers continued to robustly repel hostile attacks, in
particular in Aguelhok where there were 26 attacks between July and December alone.
A platoon reinforced Aguelhok on a rotational basis from Kidal or Tessalit. The
Mission also undertook significant efforts to enhance camp protection. Further
measures are envisaged as part of the adaptation plan, including transforming a
reserve battalion into a more mobile quick reaction force. A comme rcial intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance asset is also expected to arrive in Kidal in the first
quarter of 2022.
In parallel, MINUSMA enhanced its good offices efforts to address concerns
expressed by segments of the population, carrying out three integrated trust-building
missions to Aguelhok, meeting with local authorities, community leaders, signatory
armed groups and civil society. Trust fund and quick impact projects are also being
implemented, focusing on water supply, electricity and inco me generation.
Protection of civilians is among the areas in which the Mission demonstrated
improved performance and accountability. For instance, in early 2021, it began to
leverage its temporary operating bases as forward staging points for civilian mis sion
4/9

21-19669

S/2022/8

components to join ongoing operations and remain overnight in areas where they are
not present under normal circumstances. This has enabled the civilian components of
MINUSMA to launch and conduct activities, including dialogue, community
engagement and investigations in otherwise out-of-reach areas. Positive impacts
include the signing on 8 October of a local peace agreement between two communities
in Ogossogou, where some 200 civilians were killed in attacks in March 2019 and
February 2020. In addition, following a threat against civilians in Tassiga, Gao
Region, on 1 December 2021, the Mission’s early warning and rapid response
mechanism was activated, resulting in the force establishing a temporary operating
base in the area.
These efforts notwithstanding, significant limitations remain, as demonstrated
by the massacre on 8 August of over 50 civilians in Ouattagouna, Gao Region, and
the attack on a bus on 3 December in Songo, Bandiagara, in which more than 30
civilians were killed. Lessons learned include the importance of early activation of
the early warning and rapid response mechanism; improved joint field -level analysis
and integrated processing of information; enhanced analysis of trends, including
cross-border dynamics; and critical force enablers, as envisioned in the adaptation
plan, among others.
In relation to integrated analysis, joint efforts are under way to harmonize data
entry and verification of protection of civilians and other incidents in the United
Nations situation awareness geo-enterprise information management system, which
is mainly used to track security-related incidents. Early warnings, which assist the
Mission in achieving a more concrete representation of threats against civilians, are
also now included in the system. Greater data coherence across sections and
components will improve patrol planning to areas of concern and help to assess the
medium- to long-term impact of the MINUSMA police or force presence, avoid
duplication of effort and help all components to better synergize their activities.
The Mission continued to take steps to improve the number of women personnel,
which is critical for effective engagement with the population across all sectors.
Under the Elsie Initiative, improvements include the provision of to ilets in
accommodation for female personnel from troop- and police-contributing countries,
the provision of safe recreational facilities and the construction of hard -wall
structures in place of prefabricated accommodation. MINUSMA police submitted a
proposal in December to Headquarters aimed at expanding female accommodation
and sanitary infrastructure in all 11 camps housing its formed police units.
The Mission is recognizing the outstanding performance of uniformed
personnel, in line with integrated peacekeeping performance and accountability
framework performance priorities. During the reporting period, MINUSMA police
nominated two formed police units for the risk premium award for performing above
and beyond the call of duty, for having escorted civilian and other personnel in areas
where there are no local security forces to offer support, and providing effective
crowd control during protests against the presence of MINUSMA and other
international forces.
Implementation of the adaptation plan
MINUSMA continues to implement its force adaptation plan, which increases
Mission capabilities in central Mali, following delays due to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the force generation process. The level 2 hospital in Mopti
became fully operational on 1 October. The explosive ordnance disposal capacity also
grew in the past six months, with six teams now deployed in theatre. A medium utility
helicopter unit was deployed to Gao. In the next six months, additional units are
expected to arrive in the Mission or change from their current configuration,
21-19669

5/9

S/2022/8

following planned rotations. In addition, the Mission stood up a commercial
intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance capability in Timbuktu, greatly
increasing its monitoring and intelligence-gathering capacity.
This progress notwithstanding, the lack of sufficient and adequate air lift
capability, in particular with regard to medium utility and armed helicopters,
continues to hamper the Mission’s performance. These enablers are critical f or
MINUSMA to continue to implement its mandate across its area of operation and to
ensure the safety and security of its personnel and installations in the light of the
increasingly complex threats, especially in the context of the closure of Operation
Barkhane camps in the north, although French forces continue to provide critical air
support. I renew my call for all Member States to continue to support the Mission’s
adaptation plan and actively contribute to the generation of outstanding air assets.
Evaluations of the Mission’s force and police components
During the reporting period, in line with integrated peacekeeping performance
and accountability framework performance priorities, a total of seven evaluation
reports were completed, for three military infantry, two aviation and two engineer
units. A further eight are close to completion. The overall performance of the
evaluated units was satisfactory, including comprehension and support of the Mission
mandate, training, logistics, protection of civilians, training and discipline,
sustainability and health.
Shortfalls identified in the Force Commander’s evaluation reports included the
need to increase the number of female peacekeepers; to adhere to scheduled major
equipment maintenance plans; to report in a timely fashion on serviceable and
unserviceable mine-protected vehicles; and to replace and increase the number of
mine-protected vehicles and/or replace damaged ones. During the reporting period,
six mine-protected vehicles and armed personnel carriers were destroyed as a result
of improvised explosive device incidents. MINUSMA convoy combat battalions are
particularly affected: 23 of the 85 mine-protected vehicles and armed personnel
carriers belonging to combat convoy companies currently in theat re have been
destroyed. Considering the evolution of attacks against peacekeepers, adequate mine protected vehicles remain key life-saving equipment to prevent higher numbers of
fatalities and severe injuries. Performance improvement plans are in place to address
these shortfalls and recommendations for improvement provided to troop contributing countries.
MINUSMA police conducted 20 performance assessment and evaluation
reports. These revealed generally satisfactory performance of the formed police units.
Areas for improvement included the quality of equipment, in particular vehicles, and
the units were directed to undertake remedial action to improve their operational
readiness. All 10 formed police units continue to undergo an operational inspection
every month.
Troop rotations
The Mission made progress in speeding up the operability of battalions by
halving – from 16 to 8 weeks – the rotation cycle for infantry battalions. These eight
weeks will still consist of two weeks’ mandatory quarantine for C OVID-19, a
maximum of one week of preparation and screening and one week of in -theatre
training. While effective in containing the spread of the virus, the mandatory two week in-mission quarantine period continues to significantly affect the Mission’s
operational capacity.
MINUSMA police completed two rotations. The incomplete deployment of the
second Egyptian formed police unit based in Mopti remains of concern as a result of
6/9

21-19669

S/2022/8

its equipment having been grounded in Dakar since March 2020 owing to a financia l
dispute between the contractor and the subcontractor.
Challenges and efforts to overcome them
The myriad challenges facing the Mission require a dedicated focus on
enhancing mitigating measures. Of particular note are efforts by MINUSMA to
mitigate risks associated with improvised explosive devices and mines and
investigating, reporting and putting in place strategies to minimize fatalities and
injuries while maintaining the operational tempo.
The threat posed by improvised explosive devices and min es is evolving and
remains one of the main challenges to MINUSMA. Recent attacks with such devices
indicate a clear evolution in the threat in terms of both tactics and the lethality of
devices. The intensity and nature of explosive incidents affecting MIN USMA so far
in 2021 have resulted in the largest number of peacekeeping casualties since 2013:
136 in 2021 as at 13 December (15 killed and 121 injured) compared with 102 victims
in 2016. In 2021, attacks on main routes, convoys and temporary operating bas es
increased, including the two suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
attacks against MINUSMA temporary operating bases in Kerena, Douentza and near
Ichagara in Bourem cercle, Gao Region, earlier in 2021 that caused the death of
1 peacekeeper and wounded 40. MINUSMA responded to the increasing threat with
a comprehensive approach, including the reinforcement of explosive threat mitigation
planning along with threat-specific specialist training and support for peacekeepers
deployed in northern Mali. MINUSMA police have been regularly involved in post blast investigations, and the Mine Action Service continued to provide training on
post-blast investigations to MINUSMA military and police personnel in the regions.
These efforts have resulted in a high percentage of explosive devices being
detected and neutralized, preventing numerous peacekeeper casualties and the
destruction of assets. Since January 2021, of the 98 improvised explosive devices
targeting MINUSMA, 45 were collected and neutralized by the Mission and 53
exploded.
The high numbers of fatalities, serious injuries and damage to United Nations
and contingent-owned equipment call for robust prevention mechanisms. The Mission
revised the standard operating procedure on the collection, analysis, management and
transfer of evidence and/or information and put systems in place to enhance
efficiency, improve coordination between components and raise awareness and
capacities. Overall, MINUSMA significantly increased the number of Board of
Inquiry reports completed, from 48 in 2018 to about 80 (out of over 100 cases) at the
end of 2021. Several challenges remain, including the lack of specialized skill sets
among uniformed personnel to conduct complex investigations, as well as difficulties
with some contingents in accessing information as well as victims and witnesses.
The Mission recognizes the importance of enhancing the capacity of national
counterparts in countering improvised explosive devices. During the reporting period,
the Mine Action Service delivered and advised on specialized training on improvised
explosive device disposal and threat mitigation to 136 Malian Defence and Security
Forces personnel (58 were trained by Malian personnel previously trained by the Mine
Action Service, while 78 were directly trained by the Service). MINUSMA police
also carried out specialized training for 739 personnel (including 92 women) during
66 sessions, in improvised explosive device threat mitigation, post-attack
investigations, crime scene management, international humanitarian law, counterterrorism, the use of telephony in criminal investigations, judicial investigation acts,
shooting incident reconstruction, general intelligence, intelligence in the fight against
terrorism and the training of trainers. In addition, the Mission continued to collect
21-19669

7/9

S/2022/8

and process material evidence from various crime scenes. The MINUSMA police
laboratory is also functional, enabling forensic analysis that can be handed over to
the Malian authorities to assist in prosecutions. Six cases were processed and analysed
during the reporting period.
As outlined in my previous letter (S/2021/520), the full operationalization of the
Mission mobile task force, a core piece of the adaption plan, is hampered by concerns
expressed by some troop-contributing countries, including regarding casualty
evacuations, thus significantly restricting the areas of deployment of the contingents
comprising the task force.
At the same time, MINUSMA continued efforts to enhance its casualty
evacuation procedures, including through a Headquarters review in July. In
December, the Mission launched an e-performance tool to allow it to better measure
and monitor its capacity. Casualty evacuation continues to constitute an important
aspect of the Mission’s support to the Malian Defence and Security Forces: since
January 2021, MINUSMA has undertaken the evacuation of at least 187 individuals
on behalf of the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
Implementation of the integrated strategic framework and transition plan
The Mission increased its cross-component coordination by strengthening
relevant mechanisms and initiatives for integrated strategic planning and operational
coordination. Integrated planning and cross-component coordination efforts were
enhanced through the revised mission concept and the subsequent development of a
mission plan. In articulating the vision and key considerations for mandate
implementation in the evolving context, the mission concept and mission plan have
provided for clearer strategic prioritization and sequencing of Mission interventions,
as well as providing a results framework against which to assess performance on an
ongoing basis, in line with integrated peacekeeping performance and accountability
framework accountability priorities.
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team strengthened integrated
support for the current political transition process and return to democratic
constitutional order. Phase I of the Mission’s road map for mandate implementation
(S/2021/300, annex) is focused on key objectives to be achieved during the political
transition, which is expected to culminate in national elections. The co nclusion of
phase I will be defined by the achievement of the political transition benchmarks and
conditions set out in the road map. During this phase, the Mission is coordinating
joint action with the country team in the framework of the integrated trans ition
support plan developed in late 2020. The plan meets the requirements of an integrated
strategic framework for phase I, including an overall vision, joint priorities and the
division of labour to sustain peace in Mali that ensures complementarity of e fforts
between MINUSMA and the country team. Once the political transition has been
concluded, MINUSMA will move to phase II, which will, among other things,
continue to address major remaining challenges in the north and the centre. Longer term transition planning under phase II will be a strategic and collaborative process
with the Government of Mali and other partners, including the country team, to
consolidate peacebuilding gains and prevent future conflict. It is in this context that
the development of a new integrated strategic framework and transition calendar,
aligned with revised system-wide policy guidance on integration, is envisaged.
As part of the integrated United Nations-wide effort to provide dynamic and
results-oriented support to the Government throughout the political transition, a joint
MINUSMA-United Nations country team senior leadership forum retreat was held in
July to assess priorities and better focus coordinated efforts for phase I of the political

8/9

21-19669

S/2022/8

transition period. To this end, MINUSMA and the country team jointly identified a
set of flagship projects for integrated action during the political transition.
For example, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
and MINUSMA, in partnership with other United Nations entities and main
international actors, recently developed the Programme d’appui à la stabilisation du
Mali à travers le renforcement de l’état de droit for the next four years (20 21–2024)
to bring support to the Malian population to improve their resilience in the face of the
conflicts and allow them to live in an environment respectful of the rule of law. In
addition, the United Nations Integrated Electoral Team, composed of MINUS MA,
UNDP and UN-Women, has supported voter registration exercises, including by
deploying material and expertise and training Malian Defence and Security Forces as
well as Malian officials, in support of the electoral process.
The United Nations Integrated Electoral Team has also provided experts and
technical advice on the electoral cycle to the transition legislative body, the National
Transition Council, and the Constitutional Court. Technical and financial support also
continues to be provided under this integrated approach to government ministries
responsible for political and institutional reforms for consultations with political
parties, signatories to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, civil
society, professional associations, traditional and religious leaders and the diaspora.
Another example of integrated United Nations action is a joint project under
way between MINUSMA and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations to support improved transhumance management in D jenné cercle to restore
social cohesion and reduce tensions between sedentary farmers and pastoralist
herders. Integrated efforts are being undertaken to better demarcate transhumance
corridors, promote community-level consensus-building and support local
community members in establishing village and municipal transhumance
management committees. In a separate initiative, MINUSMA coordinates closely
with UNDP on projects aimed at strengthening the capacity of municipal and village
land commissions, ensuring complementarity in geographic coverage throughout the
centre of Mali.
In conclusion, in spite of the increasingly challenging environment, MINUSMA
and the United Nations country team have worked effectively with their partners to
implement their mandate in support of the people of Mali. This includes efforts to
foster greater national ownership of the processes under way. To this end, in August
and September, the Mission held a series of workshops and meetings with the
Government, signatory movements, civil society and the media as part of efforts to
improve understanding of its mandate and promote mutual accountability based on
respective responsibilities.
I wish to commend the men and women of MINUSMA for their tireless efforts,
in spite of the challenges and the daily dangers that they face. Their role, and the role
of MINUSMA, remain critical to support the implementation of the Agreement, as
well as the stabilization of the centre of Mali. The Mission’s good offices, together
with the mediation by the Economic Community of West African States, continues to
be invaluable during this extended period of political transition.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-19669

9/9
