NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 374) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . . .
Complaints of the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8218) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .

qpv.1374

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

UNDRED

AND SEVENTY-FOURTPI

Held in New York on Friday, 10 November
president: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTE (Mali),
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 374)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaints of the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/821 8).
Adoption of the agenda.
Theugenda was adopted.
Complaints of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the President of the Security Council
wl218)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated fiorn French): In accordancewith the decision taken at the 1372nd meeting on 8
November 1967, I propose with the consent of the Council
to invite the representatives of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Portugal, Burundi, Zambia and Algeria to
participate, without vote, in the discussion and to take the
Placesreservedfor them,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. Umba di Lutete
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Mr. F. de Miranda
(Portugal) took places at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. T. Nsanze’
(Burundi), Mr. J. B. Mwemba (Zambia) and Mr. T.
BWttoura (Algeria) took the places reserved for them.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): Tile
Council will now proceed with the examination of the
question before it. The first speaker on my list is the
representativeof Portugal and I now call upon him.
3. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): My delegation takes the
flccr this afternoon with extreme regret because we are
ccastrainedto analyse some ugly and distasteful aspectsof
the question under consideration.

1967,

MEETING
at 3.30 p.m.

4. I must begin with the opening statement made by the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
last Wednesday, 8 November [1372nd meeting]. In the
course of that statement he circulated two exhibits to the
members of the Council and read from a photostat copy of
what he said was a letter and an internal .document of the
Government of Belgium. He also cited certain so-called
facts from a recent issue of The New York Times, in a clear
and studied attempt to expand the basis of the original
complaint of “collusion ” on the part of Portugal with the
mercenaries mentioned
in the letter from the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic RepubIic of the Congo of
3 November 1967 [see S/8218]. I shall deal with each of
these in turn.
5. First, the photos-what
do they prove? Nothing,
absolutely nothing. The exhibition of such photos must be
regarded, therefore, as an attempt to buttress a baseless
complaint in the style of a pettifogging Iawyer who seeks to
impress the court. with irrelevant matters. But in presenting
the photos the representative of the Congo permitted
himself some disparaging remarks about Portuguese
soldiers. Those remarks were in bad taste and I hope that
on reflection the Congolese representative wili withdraw
them. His other considerations on the photos were equally
subjective and beside the point, Nothing indicates that the
figures in the photos are mercenaries, and if the jeeps have
no licence plates, as he contends, that does not mean that
they were in the service of mercenaries. The photographs
might have been taken anywhere. There is nothing to
indicate that they were taken in Angola. In any case,
photographs can always be faked.
6. The representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo was hardly more fortunate in his other exhibits. The
Belgian magazine in question has a curious history, which I
am sure the Congolese Government knows quite intimately,
and the fact that a member of the Congolese Government
now brings an issue of that magazine to the Secuiity
Council seems to confirm that history. Be that as it may,
the magazine proves nothing either.
7. I now come to the alleged letter taken from the internal
document files of the Belgian Government. Is it genuine? Is
it a forgery? Was its use authorized by the Belgian
Government? Was it a leakage? These are highly pertinent
questions and they involve other questions of a serious
nature. For this is an incredible story. It is not normal for
one Government to furnish its internal documents to
another for public use against a third Government, and we
do not see any special reason why the Congolese Government should have appealed to Belgian documents as

evidence. Soon after the Council meeting last Wednesday
we approached the Congolese delegation with the request
that we be shown what was said to be a photostat copy of
that letter, which the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo had so ostentatiously flourished
before the Council. Our request was refused. In the
circumstances we do not feel bound to analyse the contents
of that document and would be entitled to draw the
necessary conclusions. Neverthless, since that document has
been vouched for by an official delegation of a sovereign
State in the course of a grave accusation against my country
brought before the Security Council, I think the following
observations are called for.
8. Assuming for the sake of argument that that letter is
authentic, is it open or even proper to produce asevidence
an internal document of a third government? Is it going to
be the future practice of the Security Council to admit such
evidence? How does a government have accessto the secret
dispatches of another government? Will the internal
correspondence of the Portuguese Government-say a letter
from one of our Ambassadors to our Ministry of Foreign
Affairs-be likewise accepted as evidence against a third
country? More concretely, if an internal letter of the
Portuguese Government is brought here stating that there
are Belgian, French, British or United States mercenaries in
the Congo, will such a letter be accepted as evidence?
9, In the light of all the foregoing considerations, I feel
that we are right to request the Council to view the letter
from the internal Belgian files with the greatest reservations. However, let us for the sake of argument, and
notwithstanding all those considerations, accept the authenticity of the so-called “Belgian letter”, flourished but not
submitted to examination by this Council. What does the
letter say?
10. The letter says that some eighteen mercenaries and
Katangese gendarmes entered Kisenge on bicycles, having
advanced from Luashi, both localities being inside the
Congo; that they were under the command of a Frenchman, Major Piret, and that the majority were French, there
being in their number one Colombian and one Viet-Namese;
that some of the sick and wounded refugees crossed the
Congo border into Angola and from there were evacuated
to Belgium.
11. What does all that amount to? That the Portuguese
authorities may have accepted in a humanitarian spirit some
wounded and dying refugees escaping from a fighting zone
inside the Congo. I think my delegation is entitled to ask in
what manner the Portuguese authorities contravened any
international convention by acting in this way.
12. It is essential to remember that even the “Belgian
letter” does not say that the mercenaries were Portuguese
nationals or were sent by the Portuguese Government on
their alleged mission inside the Congo.
13, Next, the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo referred to The New York Times and quoted
from its issue of 5 November 1967 to adduce additional
evidence against Portugal in the case of this alleged
mercenary incursion into the Congo. He was supported in

that by the representative of Ethiopia, wllo alsOcites
another article of the same paper, and later by the
representative of the Soviet Union,
14. My delegation is, of course, aware of the standingad
well-deserved reputation of The New York Times+Wemu~3
confess, however, that we do not take our argumentsfrMT
that newspaper or, for that matter, from my erl&
newspaper; nor do we entirely always agree with wbat$
New York Times publishes. However, since those ,++,E
would accuse US have thought it proper to rely on article
published in The New York Times, and since suchednrr:t
members of the Council have supported them in that, &e
may as well make an exception for once, and examinewkrt
that newspaper says.
15. NOW what does The New York Times article is;
question reveal? In a report signed by its correspondenr,
the paper gives a longish account, running into sometin
columns, of alleged clandestine movement by seaaml aircf
men and arms to Africa, in particular to tire Congo,tbroug+
and from Lisbon. Shorn of all sensational trimmings, eZe
facts alleged by l?he New York Times correspondentbZl
down to the following.
16. Planes fly through and between Lisbon and Africa
carrying men and arms. Some of those planes are owned
and operated by a United States concern, namesAerodyne
Corporation, with offices at North Hollywood, California.
and Miami, Florida. Those planes are flown by Belgian&
French pilots, who are not named, and by Mr.Henr)l A
Wharton and Mr. Larry Raab, both United Statescitizens
The men they ferry to Africa are all non-PortugueseIP:
nationality. The names of one Colonel Robert Denard,3.
French national, who was hired by the CongoleseGovern,
ment and who was kept in his job by the Presidentof the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and who wassaidto be
commander of mercenaries, and another French citizen.
M. Pierre Laures, apparently a recruiting agent for mrcenaries, are listed. At least twenty Spanish nationalsX?
listed ashaving volunteered for the mercenary forces.
17. The arms shipped across to Africa are alsOnet ,f
Portuguese origin or manufacture. According to The&e%:
York Times, “Arms merchants in France, Switzerlandaef:f
Spain” are alleged to have been concerned in the sUPPlY~-9~
arms and one “French-registered transport tircrafr %Q$
reported to have arrived in Lisbon” in the weekbefore‘I
November “from Ireland with Czechoslovak-rnanufacturc~?
weapons” on its way to Africa (Ilze New York nmf$,
5 November 1967, p. 24).
18. All the above facts, if accepted at face value,imPlYr%’
following grave conclusions: that the countries exPmiy
mentioned in the article in The New York Times fl “:
involved and yet none of those countries is aeeusedbefLX’
the Security Council. I am not accusing a.nY ecuntryJ ‘7
stating the facts as presented by The New ycrk Times*”
the accused contries wish to deny them, then meY
deny that paper itself. And if it be advanced cfl their
that they have all given guarantees that they dcnot
in such traffic then I must also point cut that Portu
given exactly the same guarantees.

correspondent of The New Yorlc Times even though he
happens to cite chapter and verse. For, after proclaiming to
the world with such fanfare the incursion of the merce.
naries which is alleged to have taken place from the
Portuguese province of Angola into Katanga, The New
York Times published on 9 November, that is, yesterday,
another equally sensational report which stated, to our
bewilderment,
“A Congo Mystery: Invaders Vanish”,
adding that: “The armed force that had invaded the Congo’s
copper-rich Katanga Province seemed today to have
vanished as . , , mysteriously as it had entered the country
last Wednesday.” (The New York Times, 9 November
1967, p. IS.]

19. Unjustifiably, however, Portugal is prominently named
by The New York Times. The apparent reason is that
mercenaries and planes with arms and weapons have passed
through Portuguese territory in transit. 27ze New Y0Fk
Times correspondent himself states in this connexion: “In a
statement to a correspondent of The New York Times
Thursday night, a Portuguese Government spokesman
acknowledged that ‘there is traffic going through the
Lisbon airport’ . . . . But, he said, it consists of foreign
aircraft transporting foreign goods, and Portugal, therefore,
‘has nothing to do with it’ ”
20. Here I must ask some pertinent questions: why do the
countries of which the mercenaries are nationals not cancel
their passports and inform the Portuguese Government
accordingly? Have the countries of their respective origin
informed the Portuguese Government that they had declared those individuals as “mercenaries” and that their
passports and other travel documents had been cancelled or
invalidated? They have not. Is the Portuguese Government
to take upon itself the burden of investigating whether a
particular Belgian or Frenchman or some other foreigner is
or is not a mercenary? And is the Portuguese Government
also to bear the odium which their own Governments
avoid? Was timely action taken against the California-based
air corporation, the Aerodyne Corporation, and were the
passports of the two pilots, Mr. Henry Wharton and
Mr. Larry Raab, cancelled? Did the Governments, whose
nationals are said to form the bulk of mercenaries, inform
the Portuguese Government that their passports were not to
be recognized as valid? The same applies to planes and/or
ships
having valid documents. Who grants those documents? Not the Portuguese Government. And yet everyone
else is supposed to be immaculate or at any rate much less
guilty than the Portuguese Government. Why did the
Governments concerned for the manufacture and sale of
arms listed in The New York Times article not take timely
action intended to ensure that those arms did not reach the
mercenaries and the Congo?

24. Since we are dealing with The New Yorlc Times, I
think we should bring this story up to date. This morning,
The New York Times carries an article which I am sure the
members of the Council have already seen. It is an article
by the distinguished journalist, C. L. Sulzberger, entitled,
‘The bloody land”. It tells a tale and I am sure the
members of the Council have drawn their own conclusions,
All that I should like to say in that connexion is that after
reading that article one gets the impression that it lies ill in
the mouth of the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Congo to
speak about intelligence and natural resources of any
country.
2.5. The representative of the Congo said here last Wednesday [1372nd meeting,l that we have an efficient police, and
he even permitted himself some remarks in ba,d taste about
our police just as he did about our soldiers. I must tell him
that our police have more than enough work on their hands
watching over the security of our own population which is
threatened by murderers sent from the Congo with the aid
and encouragement of the Congolese Government. And
here I must remark that while so many countries seem to be
concerned, and rightly, about the security of the Congo
and of the Congolese population, one would have liked to
see similar concern expressed about the security of lives in
Angola which are threatened by murderers sent from the
Congo. After all, human lives have the same value whether
in the Congo or in Angola. On the other hand, the
representative of the Congo cannot expect our police to
watch over the security of the Congo as well, except in so
far as it is possible to take all reasonable measures to
impede unlawful activities launched against the Congo from
Portuguese territory. This we have always been doing. But
our task would be immensely facilitated if the Congolese
Government were to co-operate. The Congolese Government does not seem to understand the value OF good
neighbourly co-operation with us and does not seem to
want it. We shall draw the right conclusions.

21. I ask that the members of the Council consider well
those and other related questions before hastening to reach
a judgement hostile to Portugal.
22. It is said that Portugal has a “positive” duty to see
that no mercenaries are sent to the Congo. Would not the
responsibility fall rather on the country or countries of
which those mercenaries are nationals and on the country
where they are recruited? And ought not those Governments that are preoccupied with the possibility of their
entry into the Congo be concerned also.about the activities
of their own nationals who provide such soldiers of fortune
with the means of travel and take timely action to nip the
mischief in the bud. Again, by what criterion are the
Portuguese authorities to distinguish which planes passing
through the Lisbon airport with legally valid documentation are to be impeded without incurring liability for
loss in case the aircraft that is so dealt with happens to be
engaged in legitimate business? It is our view that once the
documentation presented on arrival in transit is found to be
in order by international standards the Portuguese authorities are freed from all responsibility.

26. Co-operation, I repeat, is not what the Congolese
Government wants. Yet it is the Congolese Government
that is in the best position to know and identify the
mercenaries since they were first employed by the Congolese Government. It could easily circulate lists of known
mercenaries to all Governments, including the Government
of Portugal, requesting that those individuals be impeded
from returning to the Congo. Such a move would greatly
facilitate the task of assisting the Congo in its difficulties.
27. We sympathize with the people of the Congo, despite
all the hostility that is daily directed against US from their

23. However, my delegation asks if we ought indeed to
believe all this that is based on the reports of some
3

territory. For, we too abhor the troubles brought on that
country by those soldiers of fortune just as much as we
abhor and detest the murdering bands of terrorists that the
Congo sends against us across its frontiers into Angola. But
these mutual difficulties can be resolved by the realistic and
sensible method of agreeing upon mutually acceptable
co-operation and good neighbourly relations.
28. I reserve my delegation’s right to intervene again should
we deem it necessary.
29. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the next speaker, the representative of Burundi.
30. Mr. NSANZE (Burundi) (translatedfrom French): Mr.
President, I should like first of all to thank the speakers
whose names appeared on the list ahead of me and who
very kindly agreed to give up their turn to speak.
31. First and foremost, Mr. President, the delegation of
the Republic of Burundi has a preliminary duty to perform,
namely to pay you the tribute due to you as President of
the Security Council for this month.
32. In addition to paying this well-deserved tribute to your
qualities and talents, my Government has pleasure in
proclaiming its whole-hearted support for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo at a time when you are presiding
over a debate called for by a colonial issue. This for you,
Mr. President, is a distressing event of no mere academic
concern, since you have suffered its effects in your own
person and felt them in your heart.
33. Two, concurrent motives have prompted Burundi to
participate in the discussions on the Kinshasa Government’s
complaint against Lisbon: first, the key position occupied
by my country compels it to play the role which nature
entrusted to it by situating it at the crossroads where the
four cardinal points of Africa meet. But Burundi assumes
special responsibilities in addition to this geographical
mission in the event of an attack on th:: Congo, for the
interests of that country fuse with our own on the shores of
Lake Tanganyika-the key to our future and the secret of
our past. The second reason which has prompted Burundi
to take part in the discussions on the Congo is the mandate
given to my country by the African delegation to be their
spokesman before this great tribunal.
34. Because the destiny of, our two nations is closely
linked, the Government of Burundi has been closely
associated with the heroic struggle of the Kinshasa authorities against the common enemy ever since the launching of
the mercenary venture last July. Our support for the Congo
has not been limited to mere promises or to moral support,
but has been translated into concrete acts.
35. My Government’s part in the crusade against the
mercenaries has brought down on our heads the full fury of
Schramme’s anathema. Our contribution $0 the expulsion
of the forces bent on the ddvastation of part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has caused the mercenary chief to cut off our electricity supply from the central
source at Bukavu and then to threaten the country with
invasion.

36. Despite the threats uttered by the ringleader of tile
mercenaries, our participation in the measures desi@;rled to
avert the danger has gone on without interruption.
our
unshakable determination
to root out the evil
was
prompted by three factors: first, the fact that the sccUritY
of Burundi is directly bound up with the fate of the Congo,
secondly, the nearness of the danger which wasthreatening
our brother in the neighbouring country with fire and
sword and thirdly, our unwillingness to shirk our respon’
sibilities towards a State with which we are linked by tie5 Of
brotherhood and history, now confirmed since 131irundi
entrusted its destiny to the new Blite under the iIlustri~us
leadership of the President of the Republic, His ExceilencY
Colonel Michel Micombero.
37. The latest acts committed by Portugal against
the
Congo are merely a last desperate attempt to mainttirl
its
iron grip on Africa. It is imperative that the menlbers
of
this august Council should understand fully the exact
nature of the problem to which their attention is called.
The subject of the present debate is the same as that of th
debates of October last year and of last July. Tile
day
before yesterday, 8 November 1967, and again yesterday,
the Security Council witnessed the Portuguese
representative’s brazen defence of the outrages perpetrated
bY
the mercenaries.
38. There could be no better refutation of Lisbon’s dcr~ids
than public notoriety backed by facts, documents,
news.
papers and some Governments. Some newspapers
have
already been challenged, but here the delegation of Dttrundi
would like to put a question for the accused Govern r’318r1t to
answer. It is well known urbi et orbi, and it must bc stated
that the Governments which have recently been iI1 corltact
with the Portuguese Ambassadors at WashingtoIl
and
Brussels did not make the move without having good reason
for entering into contact with the Government in question.
It is also well known that these were Governments
svvhich,
in other circumstances, had not dissociated themselves
front
the Portuguese cause. Thus it is reasonable to suppose
that
those Governments wished to ask questions and even to
express their concern, because they had weighty a~ld serious
reasons for believing that an invasion was in fact irrsll~inent
and that an attack on the Congo was being prepared from a
territory under Portuguese domination.
39. Since all the sources referred to above agriee that
eIements coming from Angola have violated the rtational
sovereignty of the Congo, are we to give credence
ta tile
statements of Portugal, the party against which. tfje charge
is made? Portugal’s situation is of course desperate.
since
its economic salvation lies in Africa and its survival depe&
exclusively on the fabulous resources of OUT curltinent.
There is no doubt that Portugal is striving hard tu retaiIl its
position as the eternal parasite, and this means resorting to
every imaginable expedient, however perverse, caIct~ tated to
perpetuate its domination, the only weapon it car1 wield to
achieve its material salvation.
40. However, an objective examination reveals tllnt tile
many attacks against Kinshasa represent a series of sinister
“swan songs” and distress signals. By that 1 rllcan glat,
despite its fierce resistance to decolonization, tlw cou,,tu
we are discussing will one day be forced to recogrlize
that

even Powers far greater than Portugal have had to resign
themselves to the facts of life and agree to the granting of
independence to colonized peoples. For in spite of its
astonishing blindness in the face of the sorry reality of its
growing inability to stem the irresistible tide of independence for which the. African nationalists are so valiantly
fighting, Lisbon will one day be forced to recognize that it
is defending a lost cause.

contact Lisbon’s Ambassador to Brussels twice in twenty
four hours, while the United States Department of State
expressed some concern in that respect. In the light of their
usual sense of responsibility, those Governments must have
had certain facts at their disposal to be concerned about the
invasion which was on the point of taking place. This was a
long-range large-scale Machiavellian scheme designed to
perpetuate the foreign monopoly in Africa.

41. Indeed it must be distressing for Portugal, having only
Africa to count on, to be haunted by the certainty that
once it is cut off from Africa it will quickly and surely
breathe its last. Hence it is easy to understand the very
cogent reasons which have led the Portuguese Government
SO persistently
to defy law and morality,
since the
restoration of Angola, Mozambique and Bissau to their
rightful owners would mean automatic suicide for Portugal.
This is a subtle manoeuvre to distract the attention of the
African continent from the assault made on the last
bastions of colonialism.

46. An analysis, in the cold light of day, of the depth as
well as the extent of colonialist intentions reveals a
complex enterprise with all kinds of ramifications. The
periodic attacks against one or other of the countries
bordering the Territories under Portuguese domination are
merely symptoms of a global conspiracy organized against
Africa by the racist traffickers’ club.
47. The action we are witnessing today is characterized by
the incarnation of colonialism as inspired by the worshippers of apartheid in South Africa, the new devotees of
segregation in Rhodesia, and the proponents of the policy
of assimiladosin the Territories under the heel of Lisbon. It
goes without saying that the terrible dangers threatening
Africa do not emanate from Portugal alone, impotent as it
undeniably is in many respects. African perspicacity has
seen through the conspiracy brewed for the purpose of
perpetuating foreign monopolistic
domination over the
abundant wealth with which our continent has been SO
generously endowed by nature.

42. The representative of the country in question has
merely given his usual recital of exoneration, doing everything in his power to throw dust in the eyes of this august
Council. According to the Lisbon delegation, the Portuguese Government is merely an innocent party victimized
by the Democratic Republic of the Congo as a smokescreen for its own internal difficulties. Such brazen
subterfuges prompt my delegation to ask a number of
questions.

48. Consequently, we are forced to conclude that the
aggressive acts committed by Portugal against the Congo
can only be considered one step in the execution of a
long-range plan, on a vast scale, aimed at consolidating
for ever the position of the foreign usurpers as overlords of
the best of Africa, that is, the southern and central part of
our young continent.

43. Are the Lisbon authorities prepared to deny that they
have played any part, direct or indirect, in the mercenary
manoeuvres? Is Portugal in a position to certify that it had
no knowledge whatsoever of the recruitment of mercenaries
in the territories under its jurisdiction?
In the same
context, we would be grateful if the colonial Power would
give us an assurance that it was completely unaware of the
training of forces on any soil under Portuguese control for
the purpose of carrying out subversive activities against the
security of the Congo. While we are dealing with hypotheses, we should also like to ask whether the Lisbon
Government is in a position to state that it is completely
unaware that any country under its jurisdiction has
afforded shelter to the aggressors who have for several
weeks been plotting an invasion of the Congo.

49. Mr. Raymond Cartier, writing in Paris Match towards
the end of 1953, strongly supports my delegation’s views
on this subject. A quotation from his article incontestably
corroborates the facts of the problem we have posed. Let US
see how this French journalist describes objective number 1
of colonization, the source of the danger now threatening
the existence of African nations:
“Today, the European in Africa exerts all his ingenuity
to find excuses for his presence there. He depicts himself
as a guardian whose mission will be completed as soon as
the peoples he governs have attained maturity. The white
man is in Africa to stay, because it is in his interest to be
there and to stay there . . . this a precise and sufficient
reason for not relaxing his hold, even if he has to fight to
retain it.”

44. Unfortunately for the accused! This time at least all
sources of information have been unanimous in condemning Portugal and have joined forces to drive it into a
position where it cannot give a negative reply to the
questions I have just asked, The evidence against Lisbon is
all the more incontrovertible in that it emanates from
governmental and journalistic circles which are customarily
on the side of the Portuguese Government. But now, in
order to extricate themselves from their dilemma, these
sources have allowed the evidence of the facts to prevail
over their usual inclination to side with Lisbon.

50. This article is so clear that further comment is
unnecessary. It follows that the activities of the mercenaries
which can now be laid at Portugal’s door, far from being
isolated acts, are part of a vast subversive plan drawn up
with the definite aim of achieving a permanent monopoly
of the inexhaustible storehouse of wealth over which that
trio of vandals, Pretoria, Salisbury and Lisbon, stands guard
like fierce sentries, watching over the vital interests in
Africa of the foreign exploiters and beneficiaries who
dictate the policy.

45. As I said a few moments ago, the Council is aware of
the contacts which the Governments of Washington and
Brussels have had with Lisbon in the hope of thwarting the
threatened invasion in Angola. Thus, if my memory serves
me correctly, the Foreign Ministry at Brussels had to
5

have broughf them back to the’ old metropolitan coun.
tries. Not wthout excellent results: palaces, cathedrals
industrial capitals; then, When crisis threatened, tlli
colonial rnarke ts were there to ease or divert it,>’

51. Africa has a hypnotic attraction for their insatiable
economic appetites, and the Congo is the main target for
their industrial rapacity, To those who are alive to what is
going on, the fact that the Congo has been the victim of
repeated harassment by Portugal means that war has been
declared for the wholesale execution of the plan to gather
all central and southern Africa in the embrace of the
Powers which are striving with all their might to plunder
the resources of the continent.
52.

While

the

climax

in

the

escalation

of

the

war

I have borrowed the quotation from Jean-Paul sartrejs
preface to LXS Damcfs de la TCUV by Franz Fanon.
59.

AS

1 am

lOat

t0

CatalOgLle

the

elltire

schedule

of

traumas caused by colonization and to present the full
picture of the evils it has wrought throu&out
AfdcaS
history, I feel bound to place special emphasis on the
strategy of those in Africa desirous of perpetuating colonial
occupation. Although most African countries havesow
shaken off the chains of colonialism, it is still true tllat its
economically most vital region is still being C.&d
between two jaws which will not let go of their PreY1
apartlzeid and colonial dictatorship. The community of
interests shared by the racist zealots and the obdurate

con-

templated against Africa has not yet been reached, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is still the principal
target for the Portuguese attacks. There are three reasons
for this.
53. First of all Portugal, in a last-ditch stand against the
imminent blows which history-with some help from the
African militants-is preparing to deal it, is organizing raids
by way of reprisals against the Congo. For as the Lisbon
Government sees it, if the liberation movements are
deprived of the support of General Mobutu’s Government,
the Angolan leaders will be denied that support and will
find themselves in an impasse.

coloIlists
justifies
the perpetuation

our

aScribiIlg

the

Same

purpose

to them;

of exploitation
in Africa so as to apply a
firm brake to the ever-increasing impoverishment of some
of their trading partners whose lands are becoming 6~.
hausted.

60. The Pretoria-Lisbon axis partners are outdoing eac1l
in
inflicting cruel outrages on the innocent people and doing
injury to all mankind. Despite their individual peculiarities,
despite the apparent differences between the policy of
apartkid
and the Portuguese policy of domination, the
goal pursued by Pretoria and Lisbon hides one and thesame
reality: the systematic dehumanization and the shameles

54. Secondly, the Congo is a more accessible prey, and
Portugal has pounced upon it in view of its proximity to
Angola and most of all, in view of its tempting riches within
easy reach.
5.5. Thirdiy, the Congo is exposed to repeated raids
because it acts as a shield for Angola, which has become or
is regarded as Portuguese property. Today Angola is the
springboard for invasions; tomorrow it will degenerate into
a major centre for a general attack, as part of the great
strategy.

eXploitati0n

of their

fellow-men.

61. The preceding observations are corroborated beyond
any

doubt

in the following

statements.

62. First of all the revelations of Ian Smith in the Daily
Mail of 19 July 1965. He stated that the establishmentof

56. Reason and common sense unanimously condemn the
ingratitude of those eternally ravenous wolves that first
attack the nerve centre, the Congo, and then turn their
attention to the other areas which the colonial Powers are
seeking to malce available to the profiteers. The unparalleled variety, the inexhaustible abundance and the high
quality of Africa’s vast natural resources have made it a
most tempting prize for foreign interference. Thus, the
assiduous diabolical activities pursued both within and
without to stifle our young continent are increasing.

increasingly closer tics between Rhodesia and the other
Southern white States was regarded in Johannesburgasthe
beginning of closer association with the white States,
Provision was even being made to create a powerfulWhite
bloc across the continent, from Angola in the, Westto
Mozambique in the cast.
63. Turning now to the theoretician of @artkid, we find
a statement made by Verwocrd in August 1961 to the
effect that the goal of the Nationalist Party, whatever
it
Iniglit
have been in the past, was to ensure that the white
man, and hence a white Government, stayed jn South
Africa,

57. States which yesterday were incited to violence and
oppression by the economic greed of their nationals today
seem darkly and perversely determined to deal solely with
an African continent that has been completely despoiled.
That is the initial and major factor in the outbreak and
persistence of warfare on Congolese territory. The crux of
the problem is the unsatisfied greed of the invaders seeking
to impose their laws.

64. Thirdly,
from

any
segregationist

number of quotations can be Produced
philosophy.
Here are the wordsOf

another Afrikaaner:

58. Portugal’s major objective in its pathetic venture is
vividly exposed by Jean-Paul Sartre, who at least states his
position clearly and frankly. I should like to quote him:

“The history of the Afrikaaner reveals a determlllation
and a ‘definiteness of purpose which make one fee1t”at
Afrikaanerdom is not the work of man but a creationof
God. We have a Divine right to be AfrikaanerssOur

“You know perfectly well that we are exploiters. You
know perfectly well that we have taken the gold and the
metals and later the oil from the ‘new continents’ and

1 SW Calziers
1961.

6

Lilted

NOS. 27 and 28, Paris, FranFois Maspero’

histowis the highest work of art of the Architect of the
csaturies.”

the individual and the universe. The disorder in the Congo
and the devastation caused b< raids from Angola will
continue so long as the United Nations fails to attack the
root of the evil by terminating Portugal’s presence in
Africa- We are firmly convinced that only the total
eradication of colonialism will bring about lasting peace and
security in the heart of Africa,

%s is a statement by Dr. Malan, quoted by Mr. Brian
h his book The Rise of the 2b4th &?rican Reich.*

Bunting

65, fie doctrine of apartheid is resoundingly echoed in
*tier statements, such as one by the Calvinist theologian,
m,Strauss, that the white Christian was vested with
sffkisl authority over the native, who obey his orders. He
mustevenendure punishment by the Christian in the name
sfhe Lord because it delivered him from the slavery of sin.

71. 1 am reminded here of the excellent speech made by
the. Secretary-General barely a week ago, in which he said
that the United Nations wasnot only the hope of mankind,
but the last hope of mankind. Those werenot his precise
words, but I believe I have captured their substance.He also
said that the United Nations waswhat its Members made of
it. Thus, SO long as certain Members do not seek ways and
means of implementing the principles of the Charter and
imposing the measures called for on recalcitrants such as
Portugal, the Organization’s efforts will prove fruitless.

66, 1 have ventured to draw this parallel to illustrate the
over.sllplot directed against Africa. To demonstrate the
identity of South African apartheid with Portuguese
cole&,l domination, we shall merely cite the statement
madeby the representative of Lisbon at the National Press
Clubin Washington the day before yesterday, Wednesday, 8
November1967. The representative in question was the
ester for Foreign Affairs, and the following salient
pointsmay be drawn from his address:

72. The Security Council will recall that Portugal’s attitude towards the United Nations has always been recalcitrant and that it has always scorned the many resolutions
adopted by the various United Nations bodies, including
those adopted in October 1966 and July 1967 condemning
the mercenary activities instigated by Portugal. That same
country is still today an incorrigible backslider. If it did not
count on the approval and backing of the Powers it has won
over, the Lisbon Government would never have dared to be
so contemptuous of the Charter, which it has violated time
and time again by its raids and by its morbid opposition to
decolonization practices which lay bare its weaknessesin
many areas.

67. In his view, Africans are congenitally incapable of
governingthemselves. They therefore have no claim whateverto independence. He lauds the establishment of the
assimilados system, as if racial communion were a
substitute for independence. But he forgets that independenceis an inherent right, an inalienable right to
self-determination, and not a gift or a favour to be solicited.
It is clear from his speech that in his view, Africans have no
other mission than to bow their heads eternally to the
colonial yoke, a theory which thus coincides with that of
theproponents of apartheid in South Africa.

73. If the Lisbon Government is to be forced to ceaseits
provocations against neighbouring countries, the Security
Council must adopt a resolution condemning any direct or
indirect involvement with the mercenaries. Vigorous
coercive measures against the Portuguese arsenal in Angola
must be adopted to protect the targets in Portuguesedominated Africa against the growing arms menace. In the
face of Portugal’s colossal
guilt, both in colonial matters
and in its attacks on the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of independent States, the Security Council might
well exclaim, as did Cicero with regard to Catihne:
“‘Quousque tandem abutere Catilina patientia nostra? ”
men will Portugal stop defying the United Nations and
trying its patience?

68. I should like at this point to make a few brief
commentsregarding racial policy, for it is essential to dispel
anymisunderstanding that might give the impression that
the people enslaved by Portugal are ardently keen on
associationwith the Portuguese white community. It is
timeto enlighten all who harboured such illusions. In point
of fact, Africans are fully aware that they are complete
personalitiesin their own right, In other words, Africans
haveno desire to assume a borrowed personality or some
exotic
citizenship to round out their development. The
Afries%far from encouraging Portugal’s presumptuousness
bY begging for racial rapprochement with his equal, his
fellow-man, wishes for nothing more than to become
masterof his own fate, He is claiming his right to develop
hiscWnpersonality and to enjoy his own identity.

74. The members of the Security Council will readily
agree that we need an international organization Of a
stature commensurate with the individual and the universe,
one capable of reducing to modest proportions that
national egoism which is the major cause of the United
Nations ineffectiveness.

69, The black man therefore has no need to masquerade in
Portuguesecolours to fulfi himself; and hence it would be
s gravemistake for Portugal to believe that the assimilation
PelieYtill compensate for its refusal to grant independence
sad that the African will be satisfied with that gift. The
time hascome to call the absurd bluff of seeking at all costs
te turn the premises of absence of rights and inequality
Professed
by Portugal into administrative principles.

75. me PRESIDENT (translated from French): 1 am
overwhelmed by the .very flattering words which the
representative
of Burundi has just addressedto me. 1 should
like to thank him personally and on behalf of my
delegation.
76. I now c~ upon the representative Of Zambia.

70. Finally, we must recognize that the world needs an
iatemational organization of a stature commensurate with
Gworth,

77. Mr. MWEMBA (Zambia): Before addressing the Council, 1 should J&e to thank those delegations which have

Middlesex, Penguin Books, 1964.

7

ities. In view of the irrefutable evidence submitted by the
Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the congo
and of numerous aCtS of aggression committed by &
Portuguese armed forces against other independent African
States, my delegation iS left with no alternative but to
conclude that the latest act of aggression by a bandof
mercenaries came from Angola with the knowledgeand
support of the Portuguese authorities.

agreed to forego their places and allow my delegation to
address the Council at this hour.
78. Mr. President, thank you for allowing my delegation
to participate in this important debate on the question of
the mercenary invasion of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The people of Africa regard this development with
grave concern, not only because the territorial integrity of
the Congo has been violated, but because this is a threat to
the peace and security of Africa in particular and the world
in general.

85. Our conviction is further strengthened by a report
which appeared in The New York Times on 4 November
1967 which reads:

79. Once again the Security Council is seized with the
chronic problem of mercenaries in the Congo. My delegation feels that this matter should now be dealt with once
and for all.

“Portugal denies that the mercenary force camefrom
Angola, but the United States and other Westerncove,,.
ments have been accumulating evidence for weeksof its
presence there. Washington was right to emph&e
‘strongly’ to Portugal its ‘grave disquiet’ over this &v&p
ment .”

80. My delegation listened with deep regret to the
eloquent account given at the 1372nd meeting by the
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with regard to the new invasion by a band of
mercenaries from Angola, a Territory under Portuguese
domination.

The paper continues:
“The thrust from Angola into Katanga is evidently
linked to the presence in Bukavu of the forcesled bythe
Belgian, Col. Jean Schramme . . , The ramifications of this
latest development, if it is not checked quickly, couldbe
very dangerous. Many Africans are convinced that the
white minority regimes in South Africa, Rhodesia aadthe
Portuguese territories have been planning a powermove
against hostile African Governments to the north, They
believe the invasion of the Congo represents a first stepin
that strategy.”

81. I will not bore this Council with an account of foreign
interference in the internal affairs of the Congo since that
country attained independence seven years ago, nor shall I
bring back to memory the sufferings and misery of the
people of the Congo. These facts are well known to the
Security Council.
82. As everyone knows, the problem of mercenaries in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has been in existence
since the days of the secessionistregime of Moi’se Tshombe.
Since that time the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
never known peace. There has been untold loss of life and
property and unnecessary disruption of economic progress.

86. This condoning of mercenary activities by the Por
tuguese authorities is a violation of Security Council
resolution 226 (1966) which called upon the Government
of Portugal: “, . . not to allow foreign mercenaries to use
Angola as a base of operation for interfering in the
domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.”

83. The question must be asked: whose interests are these
mercenaries serving? Or are they, as some delegations here
would want us to believe, mere adventurers and seekers of
fortune? I will say, no. We would like to make it known
that these white mercenaries did not fight for TshombB
because they love him as an individual. They are fighting in
defense of colonialism. They are fighting to keep the Congo
under the control of the countries of their origin. They are
fighting to prevent African States from -thefree exercise of
their independence and to perpetuate colonialism on the
African continent. It is clear that these mercenaries have no
interest in the welfare of the Congolese people. They are a
gang of lunatics whose only objective is to destroy and kill
in the interest of neo-colonialism. My delegation strongly
condemns .the activities of mercenaries. Those who condone
the activities of these international gangsters are in fact
supporting colonialism.

87. My delegation, therefore, fully supports the demands
made by the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo which are as follows: firstly, that
the Security Council should condemn the Governmentof
Portugal for its continued violation of Security Ccufld
resolutions; secondly, that the Council should immediately
call upon the Government of Portugal to respect scruPb
lously resolution 239 (1967) of the Security Couacfi;and
thirdly, that the Security Council should call on all States
to ensure that no recruitment of mercenaries takesPlaceofl
their soil. These are the demands made by the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, aad my
delegation hopes that the Council will take immediate
action along these lines.
88. An attempt has been made here by a certain repr@
sentative to draw a comparison between the invasionbY
mercenaries of the independent Democratic Republic Oft”e
Congo and the racist rebellion regime in Southern
Rhodesia. The only sensible comparison here is that both
the rebels in Southern Rhodesia and the mercenariesin t”e
Democratic Republic of the Congo have only one crimina’
intent; and that is to kill black people. Smith ia Southern
Rhodesia uses violence to prevent the black Peoplefroln

84. I now turn to the recent acts of aggression perpetrated
on 1 November 1967 against the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by a band of mercenaries from Angola, a
Territory under Portuguese domination which, asusual, the
Government of Portugal has denied. It is hard for my
delegation to believe that these mercenaries could have
entered the Democratic Republic of the Congo from
Angola without the knowledge of the Portuguese author8

attaining independence. In the Congo mercenaries are using

similar means with a view to overthrowing
constituted Government of President Mobutu.

to prepare in Angola for a thrust into the Congo with the
aim of disrupting the established order there. In this
connexion, the statement we have heard today from the
representative of Portugal appears to raise more questions
than it answers. The successof the Congolese Government
in driving off that illegal attack and protecting the
sovereignty of its country does not diminish the repre.
hensible nature of the attack or the serious failure of the
Portuguese authorities to observe Security Council resolutions. The problem of mercenaries has plagued the Congo
many times since its emergence to independence and has
seriously hampered its attempts to develop in conditions of
peace and stability. All countries should comply with the
Security Council resolutions, and this Council has a clear
duty to take effective action to eliminate the threat of
mercenary incursions into the Congo.

the legally

89. It waswith a feeling of shock that we listened here to
a representative say that if the use of force in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was condemnable, by
the smle token it waswrong for ,the United Kingdom to use
force in Southern Rhodesia. What an insinuation! The use
of force in Southern Rhodesia would be against a racist
rebel gang. We have not and are not now asking the United
Kingdom to use force against an independent State or
country. The comparison drawn by the representative of
the United Kingdom, therefore, would indicate that the
United Kingdom now recognizes the Smith regime. If this is
the case,let the representative of the United Kingdom
declareit here and now without beating about the bush.

94. The Canadian delegation wilI be guided in its attitude
to any draft resolution brought before the Council by the
considerations which I have outlined.

90. Before I conclude, it should be stated emphatically
that the people of Africa have suffered far too long from
foreign domination and exploitation. All they want now is
to be left alone in peace so that they cm build their own
econolnies and political institutions. Besides, the people of
Africa are faced with the great task of eradicating disease,
illiteracy and poverty. III these endeavours they arc united.
It is the firm hope of my delegation that the international
community will do all it can to assistus in achieving these
noble aspirations.

95. Mr. TSURUOKA (Japan): It is a matter of serious
concern to my delegation that the Security Council should
find it necessary to meet once again scarcely four months
after it last considered the situation created by the
intervention of foreign mercenaries in the domestic affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. My delegation is
deeply disturbed by the recent grave situation which was
brought to our attention in the document [S/8218/ which
was presented to the CounciI by the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who explained his
Government’s charges that: “. . . mercenaries stationed in
Angola launched an aggressive attack on our country on
1 November, l967.“[1372nd
meeting, pura. 14.1

91. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): Canada has continually, in
word and deed, supported LJnitecl Nations efforts to sustain
the independence, territorial integrity and stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Canadian delegation supported, as did other members of the Security
Couacil, resolution 239 (1967), which reaffirmed, in particular, paragraph 2 of Security Council resolution
226 (1966), calling on all States “to refrain or desist from
intervening in the domestic affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.” In other words, we are against all
outside meddling with the internal affairs of the sovereign
Govennnent which has brought its complaint to the
Council.

96. The Council certainly cannot condone any action
taken by any Government, or any failure to act, that might
have the effect of an intervention in the domestic affairs of
another country. Such intervention, of course, would
clearly contravene the principle of non-interference in the
domestic affairs of sovereign States, which is firmly
enshrined in international law and in the Charter. We also
recall the Security Council resolution 239 (1967) of 10
July 1967, which:

92. In its resolution 239 (1967) the Security Council also
condemned any Government which persisted in providing
facilities to mercenaries whose object Was to overtllroW the
Government of a Member State. My delegation has listened
with great care to the statement of the Deputy Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo [I.VZnd
meeting/. From his statement, including his reference to
messagesintercepted from the mercenaries in Bukavu
asking for help from their associates in Angola, as well as
other statements in the Council, in addition to information
availablein the Press concerning events in the Congo in the
first daysof this month, it would, in my judgement, be very
difficult.to deny that additional mercenaries have appeared
in the Congo and that this band of mercenaries came from
Angola.

“Condemns any State which persists in permitting or
tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, . . .“;

and
“CaZZsupon Governments to ensure that their territory
and other territories under their control, as well as their
nationals, are not used for the planning of subversion, and
the recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries
designed to overthrow the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo .”
97. We have listened very carefully to the statements made
in the Council, including those of the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and of Portugal, whose
contentions are diametrically opposed to each other, as has
been the case in the past.’ It may indeed be very difficult to
provide conclusive evidence on the question now before us.

93. It is hard to imagine that this could have happened
without at least the knowledge of the Portuguese authoritiesand one must conclude therefore that, despite the very
clear language of previous Security Council resolutions, the
PortugueseGovernment has in fact permitted mercenaries
9

seem to be systematicahy devised to provoke treuhls far
certain States when they refuse to display
sufficienl
docility.

However, in the light of past history and experience
concerning the activities of foreign mercenaries, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has every reason to entertain
legitimate fears and suspicions. On the other hand,
Portugal, as the administering authority of the neighbouring
non-self-governing Territory of Angola, is under the obligation to take all measures necessary to remove the least
shadow of doubt that might give rise to legitimate
complaints. If, as seems to be the case, it is established that
the mercenaries of 1 November used Angola as a base for
armed incursion into the Congo, whether with the knowledge or acquiescence of the Government of Portugal or
not, that Government must be held responsible and such
action or negligence must be condemned as constituting a
gross violation of Security Council resolutions. Furthermore, in the opinion of my delegation, the Security Council
should request the Government of Portugal to give a firm
commitment that in the future it will not allow foreign
mercenaries to use its Territories as a base of operations for
interfering in the domestic affairs of the Democractic
Republic of the Congo.

103. The African nations are quite capable of retaliating
to the camouflaged aggression of these powers, whose
identity is known to all; and the fact that far these
undertakings they have used colonialist fanatics, a rabble,,i
failures and misanthropes of every kind, will ,-snaii,ly
condemn them in the eyes of history. Any favourssought
in this manner will only reflect
upon those who seekthem
and will emphasize what we are all aware of, namely, the
extent of the complicity which a number of States arenot
ashamed to show in their nostalgic yearning for a pastaat
is forever gone.
104. At the political level, in any event, the true respcn.
sibihties have been placed. Ever since 1960, when the first
mercenaries arrived in the Congo, there have been constant
comings and goings, and it is not without significanceaat
in 1963, at the time of the failure of the secession
ol
Katanga, the mercenaries largely sought refuge in Angelan
territory, while last July their leaders took refugeii,
Rhodesia.

98. We all know very well that the Congo has long been
subjected to foreign interference and that the activities of
foreign mercenaries for some years past have been a serious
obstacle standing in the way of national unity and progress.
The Council must act positively so that this young and
dynamic African country may be able to live in peace,
harmony and prosperity without external interference of
any kind.

105. Although Portugal has denied the Congolese version
of the events, it is nevertheless curious to note the form
that the denial has taken. Expressions like “There is no
truth in the Congolese allegations . . .“, no doubt imply
that the truth exists even if it is not exactly in agreement
with the Congolese representative’s statements. Or weare
told: “No group of mercenaries has crossed the frontier
between Angola and the Congo.” This could meanthat
such groups of mercenaries might have used other routes
with Portugal’s assistance, or it might mean that such
groups had in fact crossed the frontier, but that they were
not explicitly labelled as mercenaries.

39. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): On behalf of my delegation, may I first of all
thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council
for the privilege of participating in this debate.
100. My statement not only reflects a natural feeling of
solidarity but also stems from the fact that Algeria was
designated by the African delegations to join Burundi and
Zambia in putting forward the African point of view on the
question now before the Council.

106. The obvious result of such action is to causeconcern
for the development of international co-operation suchas
the Congo practises and is attempting to extend.

101. We meet here once again to discuss a problem which,
like many others, shows the level of degradation to which
international relations have sunk and reveals the barely
disguised contempt of certain well-known rowers for the
Third World and its ideals. We believe it is hardly necessary
to point out that the picture of these mercenaries as the last
adventurers of our time clumsily disguises a return to
gunboat diplomacy which, however short-lived it may be,
could one day spark off the dramatic chain reaction we all
dread.
102. The time has come to state the facts clearly, Either
the so-called mercenaries have no nationality and are not
the responsibility of any State, in which case it is
inadmissible that such common criminals should be the
object of a supposedly humanitarian concern when their
adventures have come to an end; or else they deserve
assistance through virtue of the protection which every
State owes to its nationals. In that caseit should, in future,
be clearly established that the responsibility of the Powers
concerned is involved in this kind of enterprise. In any case,
we must immediately put an end to such activities, which

107. A number of resolutions have already been adopted
by the Security Council. Most of these resolutions, which
have been constantly violated, prohibit the countriesis
which mercenaries are recruited from providing facilitiesby
which recruitment might be intensified.
108. In this connexion, we are bound to point cut that
the measures taken so far by certain Governments, ahhO@
positive in themselves, are bound to prove ineffectiveuntil
and unless they are applied universally through the con
certed action of all States, especially the European States
from which the mercenaries come, and until and unlessthe
reign of extremist colonialism is brought to an end Once
and for all and the reactionary strongholds of Rhodesiaand
the Portuguese colonies are destroyed.
109. The day before yesterday certain persons, WhomWe
should like to give the benefit of the doubt, sawfit to “Be
measures which would restrict the capacity of countries’
like the Congo, which find their security Perinsnently
threatened to defend themselves and to retaliate* We
should not’ be surprised at such proposals: they represent

10

tl,e]cgica]and necessary extension of the Atlantic Alliance
whosemilitary side spares 110 effort to providing effective
sidto portuguese colonialism +

long as the United Kingdom, which bears the responsibility
for the future of the Zimbabwe people, faas to take
energetic measures to put an end to the racist regime in
Rhodesia, the threat of invasion will hang over the Congo.

11o, We must
say and
g0 011 saying thlt
until the colonial
systelnsprevailing in Rhodesia, South -Africa and the
Portuguese
Territories are brought to .an end once and for
s]],we sha]]see a recurrence of SllCh w&S
:qd there will
be ,,c security, either for the Congo 01’ for any other
country*

116. Consequently, it is the duty of the international
community to demand that those Powers carry out their
responsibilities in accordance with the Charter and fulfil
their international obligations. It is the responsibility of the
Security Council to safeguard peace in the Congo and in
Africa. Today more than ever before, when Vet-Nam and
the Middle East are torn by aggression, the Council must
live up to its responsibilities and condemn the aggressor.

l]], in order to prevent SUC~I11recurrence, the Congo is
eatit]ed, with African assistance if need be, to take
hlnediate measures to deal with mercenary activities,
Throughthe pathological fixation created by the bogus
evacuation
problem, precious time has been gained, doubtlessb order to permit new infiltrations of mercenaries and
preventany government action to suppress them. It must
be statedplainly that the very presence of these pseudo
“defenders
of the West” in the Congo constitutes in itself
aaact of aggression. There is no attempt to conceal their
aims: they intend to challenge once again the independence,
sovereignty and integrity of the Congo. In order
to do so,they need to bring about a state of insecurity, or
at least to see to it that the situation in the Congo is
regarded
asinsecure.

117. In conclusion, Mr. President, I should like to say that
Algeria rejoices in the victories achieved by its Congolese
brothers in their legitimate struggle for political amI
economic liberation, The solution to ali the problems lies in.
steadfast resistance. Only by following a progressive policy
can the Congo be liberated from all foreign influence and
from the policies of blackmail exercised by certain Powers,
and play its allotted role in a united and independent
Africa.
118. It is against this background and in this spirit that
Algeria offers its total and unconditional support to the
Congolese people and their Government.

112, To keep to the main point only, it will be rememberedthat since the early days of its independence, the
Congohascontinuously been a pawn in imperialist rivalries
andthe victim of foreign intervention; from the very start,
tile aim of the imperialists has been to put a stop to the
liberationmovement in the Congo and to gain control over
itspolitical and economic future. This policy has created an
undesirablesituation from which the entire Congolese
peoplehavesuffered,

119. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): The Danish delegation
sharesthe deep regret and great concern expressed by other
members that the Security Council should have to deal
once again with the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, due to the intolerable activities of mercenaries
and to interference from outside in the affairs of that
country, It is not the first time that the territorial and
political integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been violated by outside forces. Fortunately, it seems as
if the latest incident has been contained, but to us the aims
and origin of such operations imply a dangerous trend. Any
country which tolerates that armed bands, intent upon
instrusion into another country, should be organized in and
operate from territories under its control violates the
purposes and principles of the United Nations as expressed
in Articles 1 and 2 of its Charter.

113. It is the wealth of the Congo which is at the root of
the covetousnessand interference of foreign Powers,
particularlyin the form of military invasions as in the case
of Stanleyville, and more recently of intervention in
politicaland economic affairs involving the sovereignty of
theCongo.Although imperialism has been wont to adapt
its methods to meet the needs of the moment, it neverthelessremains essentially true to itself. This means that
tllesesame imperialists have not given up all hope of
stampingout the liberation movements in places like
Africa.Today, their conflicting interests have turned the
Coagointo a hotbed of unrest, and it is the Congolese
Peoplewhoare the main victims. This striving to maintain
selfish
interestsis at the root of the recent events.

120, Such behaviour, furthermore, violates specific resolutions of this Council. I refer, of course, to resolution
226 (1966) and resolution 239 (1967). The former urged
the Government of Portugal not to dew foreign mercenaries to use Angola asa base of operation for interfering
in the domestic affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the latter called upon governments in general to
ensure that their territory and other territories under their
control were not used for the planning of subversion and
the recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries
designed to overthrow the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

114.‘There are two sides to this explanation: first of all,
thePresencein Africa of colonialism and of racist rigimes,
whichare a permanent source of danger, for the fact that
the mercenary bases are situated mainly in Portuguese
Terdtorieswhile their supplies, assistance and shelter are
providedby Southern Rhodesia and South Africa, reveals
c]ear]~
the relationship between the presence of colonialism
in Africa and the periodic outbreaks which threaten the
sovereignty
of the Congo, its territorial integrity and its
nationalunity.

121. So much for the legal aspects of the matter.
122. me political aspects,
however, are perhaps even less
auspicious, The border between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Angola is not only a national border; it is

115*Secondly, we must realize that as long as Portugal
Persists
in its policy in Angola and Mozambique, and as

a border between two worlds. North of it are the free
11

127. The COnStaIlt
attacks upon the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have led the Security Council to concern itself
with the Congolese question for the second time this year,
The Portuguese Government itself seems at last to have
realized that it is impossible to deny the facts put before
the Security Council, or substantially to reject the accusa.
tions levelled against the activities of the mercenaries
operating against the Democratic Republic of the congo
from Portuguese colonial territory. The recriminations of 1
its representative here have, in fact, been nothing
but verbal i
exercises which bear no relation to the facts or to the
crimes related and set out in the documents presented
to
/
us. These repeated requests for investigations are merely /
diversionary tactics which can, of course, deceive no one,
~
I
128. Even the leading newspapers, which as a rule tend to /
be favourable towards the activities of colonialist and
imperialist circles, are obliged to report the facts concerning
interventionist activities which are not only tolerated by
the Portuguese authorities, but in which they have seen&
to become willing accomplices. There is a report to that
effect this very day in The New York Times: “Portugal,
Rhodesia and Belgian big business prefer to stimulate
chaos-which requires minimal effort here.“3 “Here” refers
to the Congo, where apparently such activities may stir up
trouble. No doubt the recruitment, training and dispatching
of mercenaries to the Congo require only minimal efforts
on the part of the colonialists, but it permits them to
maintain a state of extreme tension in that vast country,
the favorite prey of all business and international financial
circles. To maintain unrest in the Congo, an immense
country in the heart of Africa, is to keep the whole of
Africa in a state of extreme tension. Such a situation
appears to be very advantageous to the great colonial
monopolies, which are accustomed to organizing their
despicable affairs under cover of such situations.

countries of Africa; south of it are many -territories which
have not yet attained their freedom, lands in which a white
minority rules. The implications of any invasion from the
territories controlled by white minority r&imes into a free
African country are far too obvious.
123. I listened with great interest to the statement made
on 8 November [1372nd meeting] by the Deputy Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I was
impressed by the case he presented, as well as by the
significant support it has received from other representatives in the course of our debate. Against that
background it would seem to be difficult to doubt that a
new incursion of armed groups into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has taken place. We must insist that
the repeated appeals of this Courtcil for non-intervention in
the inter&l affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo be scrupulously heeded by all Governments, and we
find that a very special obligation must rest upon the
neighbours of the Congo to ensure that the adjacent
territories are not abused, in contravention of the resolutions of this Council.
124. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has already
for far too long been exposed to disturbances from outside.
Those disturbances must be brought to an end. We support
the endeavours of the Congolese Government to restore full
authority in its country. It must now be allowed to pursue
unhampered the peaceful development of the Congo. The
responsibility of the Security Council in that connexion
seems very clear.
125. Mr,

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
Mr, President, on behalf of the delegation of the
People’s Republic of Bulgaria, I should like to offer you my
most sincere and hearty congratulations. In you we salute
the representative of an independent African State, a
country whose inavaluable and active contribution to the
work of this Organization is well known, a country with
which Bulgaria maintains close ties of friendship and
co-operation. Through you we also salute the freedom
fighters of the national liberation movement who are
struggling to free the African peoples from the colonial
yoke and to establish and stab&e the independence they
have regained. The Bulgarian delegation will give you its full
co-operation, both as President of this Council and as a dear
friend, in carrying out your duties and responsibilities.

French):

129. However, it apparently is difficult for Portugal ta
deny the smallest favour to the great international financial
monopolies operating in Africa. Did it not, in fact, receive
from the Angola Diamond Company, a company which
exploits the mineral wealth of its colony, about 125 million1
escudos in exchange for a concession of more than cat
million square kilometres in the African Territory underit!;
colonial domination? It need hardly be said that thosewho
provide the financial backing for the Angola Dimoa(l
Company, as well as the other monopolies set uP aad
operating in Angola, undoubtedly have a vested interestifl
seeing disorder reign in the Congo and are ready, if
necessary, to help to bring it about.

126. The facts related to us by the Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Umba Di Lutete, in the succinct statement he made at
the meeting on Wednesday, 8 November [1372nd meeting/, are most disturbing. They show that the forces of
colonialism and oppression have again seen fit to disturb
peace in Africa by intervening in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The concerted efforts of the African
countries to cope with the African situation and stabilize
the independent African States, one of the most notable of
which was the Conference of the Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity held at
Kinshasa in September 1967, do not seem to be to the
liking of some who are in the habit of fishing in troubled
waters.

130. Confronted with such overwhelming evidenceasthat
presented by the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Dem’
cratic Republic of the Congo concerning PQrtugal’s co’*
lusion and its responsibility for the attempts made by t’l”
mercenaries to disturb the peace and. the way of life Ofth”
Congo, even the closest friends of Portugal-at the Same
time the leaders of the Atlantic alliance, without wllose
military assistance Portugal would not even dream of
carrying out its enterprises or sharing in themycfm n”
longer hesitate to recognize the responsibility of their ‘ly’
though they seek to minimize it.
3 Quoted in English by the speaker.
12

131. 1n his statement of 8 November, the representative of
the United States said that:

capital is derived, namely the United States of America and
its closest allies.

“ . . . notwithstanding the denials made by the Government of Portugal and repeated to us today, that Angola
had indeed been used by mercenaries to prepare an armed
incursion into the Congo.“JI372nd
meeting, para. 86.1

136. In his statement of 8 November, the Congolese
representative requested the Security Council to take up
some of his requests and deal with them, His first request
was that, given the new situation, “there be an unequivocal
and unhesitating condemnation of Portugal’s attitude” by
the Security Council, because Portuguese territories were
being used as a base for organizing mercenary incursions
into the Congo. He added:

At the same meeting the United Kingdom representative
ssid that a new contingent of mercenaries had been sent
from Angola to the Congo, and went on:
“It is and was a clear duty of the Portuguese Govemmerit to take every possible measure to prevent any force
from assembling in Angolan territory or using Angola as a
base.“[Ibid., PUKL 64.1

“The second request I would make . . . is a reaffirmation of the Security Council’s previous resolutions
concerning this matter, particularly resolution 226 (1966)
of 14 October 1966, and resolution 239 (1967) of 10
July 1967.

132. There can therefore be no doubt of the Portuguese
Government’s responsibility in the case in point, especially
in view of the admissions by Portugal’s allies. Even allies as
close as the United Kingdom and the United States cannot
deny the facts, though they try to tone down the
presentation of them.
133. In his statement today, the Portuguese representative
did not refute any of the charges levelled against his
country, much as he tried to do so. He did, however, raise
certain points relating to foreign monopolies. It will be
interesting to see whether these points are raised by the
interested parties of whom he spoke. The Deputy Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo asked
some very pertinent questions which I should like to quote.
At the meeting of 8 November he asked:

“My third request to the Council is a condemnation of
the whole principle of mercenary armies,” /Ibid.,
paras. 39 and 40.1

137. Mercenary activities are one of Africa’s constant
scourges. Other speakershave merely spoken of the purpose
served by the mercenaries, how they are employed and how
international finance makes use of them, We believe that
the Security Council should take appropriate action and
that the action should be strictly enforced wherever the
mercenaries are found and regardlessof who is making use
of them.
138. The Congolese representative further asked “that
countries which have privileged relations with Portugal
should decline to support it in its undertakings” [Ibid.,
para. 411. We know which these countries are; they must
be able to effectively force Portugal to ceaseits present
activities. They will, of course, have to take really serious
measures, and th.ey can put an end to these activities if they
so wish. Finally, the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo asked that the countries of origin of
certain mercenaries “should take the necessarymeasuresto
prevent those mercenaries from using their regular channels
to make another foray”, once they had left Bukavu [Ibid.,

“In the relations between Portugal and some of the
great Western Powers are there not, unfortunately, some
disturbing elements, proof of which may be seen by what
is happening in SO-called Portuguese Africa? ” [Ibid.,
para. 3X]

Previously, he had asked another very pertinent question:
“How is it that such large bands of mercenaries can
leave their cou,ltry, pass through Lisbon, arrive in Angola
and continue their training there? In short, who pays
them? In the end, who reaps the benefit of these
crimes? ” [Ibid., para. 34.j

paw. 431.

139. Obviously, we approve and support these requests
which were presented to the members of the Security
Council by the Congolese representative. However, in my
delegation’s opinion, such decisions and measures are not
likely to eliminate the ills troubling Africa and the Congo
which is the heart of Africa. In osder to bring this
dangerous situation to an end, it is obviously necessaryto
force Portugal to respect the resolutions of the Security
Council and the decisions of the United Nations. But we
must also put an end to the malevolent activities of the
international monopolies that have organized the colonial
exploitation of the African peoples by such means and are
keeping it alive.

134. The sponsors of NATO, whose testimony regarding
Portugal’s guilt I quoted just now, have evaded the questions
which the distinguished representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo wished to clear up, and with good
reason, since to reply to them would mean seeking the
responsibility on their own doorstep.
135. In point of fact, the principal monopolies operating
in Africa enjoy for the most part a considerable measure of
Participation or the complete protection of American and
British capital. If we wished to go into all the ramifications
of responsibilities we would have to penetrate to the very
root of the matter and call for an end to the exploitation of
the African peoples by foreign monopolies, which, of
course, operate with the complicity of Portugal but which
also enjoy the protection of the countries whence their

140. However, these are only palliatives. In order that
such happenings and attempts no longer disturb the peace
in Africa or cause interference in the domestic affairs of
African States, and so that these activities do not recur, all
the organs of the United Nations, including particularly the
13

Security Council, must help the African peoples to rid
themselves forever of this scourge-the colonial y$ke. Only
then will the peoples of the African continent know true
peaceful development and be able to organize their lives as
they wish.
141. In conclusion, I wish to state that the delegation of
the People’s Republic of Bulgaria will support any effective
measures proposed to the Security Council within the scope
of the question now before us, to eliminate mercenaries and
mercenary activities from the political scene in the Congo
and the whole of Africa.
142. The PRESIDENT (translated porn French): In the
name of my country and on my own behalf I wish to thank
the representative of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria for
the very kind and encouraging words he has just addressed
to my country and to me.
143. Mr. LIU (China): Mr. President, I should like to
associate myself with the good wishes expressed to you as
President of the Council.
144. For the third time within the space of a year the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
complained that its independence and territorial integrity
are threatened by foreign mercenaries from a neighbouring
territory.
14.5. Foreign intervention is, of course, no new thing for
the Congo. In one form or another it has been with that
unhappy Republic ever since the day of its independence.
Only recently, foreign mercenaries have caused much ruin
and destruction in the province of Bukavu. No sooner had
the mercenaries in Bukavu been defeated than a new
contingent of them arrived in Katanga. That the Democratic Republic of the Congo, seven and a half years after
its independence, should continue to be subjected to
external interference is a matter that cannot be viewed with
unconcern by the Security Council, which has been seized
of the question of foreign intervention in the Congo since
the middle of 1960.
146. In the complaint of the Government of the Congo, it
has charged that the mercenaries who have invaded Katanga
have come from the Portuguese territory of Angola. If so,
clearly the Portuguese authorities have not acted in
accordance with the injunctions of this Council which, in
resolution 239 (1967) adopted on 10 July 1967, over four
months ago, condemned “any State which persists in
permitting or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and
the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of
overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the
United Nations”. That resolution also specifically called
upon “Governments to ensure that their territory and o&her
territories under their control, as well as their nationals, are
not used for the planning of subversion, and the recruitment, training and transit of mercenaries designed to
overthrow the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”.
147. The terms of that resolution are clear enough.
Obviously the Government of Portugal has the clear duty to
prevent any band of armed men from using the territory of

Angola for the planning of subversion or as a basefor
staging invasions. It is, admittedly, no easy matter to
establish beyond any shadow of doubt all the Pertinent
facts
involved iI the present case. But on the basiscftlle
statement of the Deputy Foreign Minister of the ~~~~~
cratic Republic of the Congo, as well as on reports from
other sources, there is a strong presumption that the
mercenaries did in fact come from Angola.

148. From the very start of its involvement in the affairs
of the Congo, the United Nations has always been guided
by the following principles: the unity, territorial integrity
and political independence of the Congo must be preserved
the Congo must not be a battleground for rival ideologies;
and the Congolese people must be given the opportunity to
develop their own institutions and resources in their ow,,
way free from external interference. Those principles
should continue to guide the deliberations of the Councilia
regard to the present complaint.
149. In the opinion of my delegation, the Council should
give careful consideration to the suggestions made by tile
Deputy Foreign Minister of the Congo in his statement ea8
November /1372nd meeting/ so that the danger posedby
the mercenaries to his country will be eliminated oncead
for all. It goes without saying that all countries, particularly
those bordering on the Congo, have a grave responsibilityto
carry out both the spirit and letter of the resolutions oftlie
Security Council in regard to the mercenary problem and
that failure to do so merits
the strongest censure of the
world community.

150. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I now
give the floor to the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the exercise of his right of reply.
15 1. Mr. UMBA DI LUTETE (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (translated front French): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for allowing me to speak at this late
hour. In my last statement to the members of the Council
[1372 meeting], I apologized for having to refer onceagain
to a speech where there was nothing of substanceto be
criticized or repeated in summary form. However, after
having heard the statements made by the various members
of the Council, I feel I ought to clear up a few points of
confusion which may have arisen as a result of the
statements by the Portuguese representative.

152. First of all, although this may sound paradoxical11
should like to express to the members of the CouncilmY
sincere admiration for Mr. de Miranda, the Portuguese
representative, Mr. de Miranda is an excellent speakeranda
man of parts. At the same time I sympathize with him in
the position in which he is placed. I have the feeling thathe
has been sent here with instructions to defend any cause)
even if he does not believe in it. What can he do in the face
of the confusion in which his Government finds itself, Orat
least appears to find itself at the present? Some time ago
we likewise heard the statements made in WashingtonOver
a television network by Mr. Nogueira, the Foreign Minister
of Portugal, and we are also familiar with the statements
made more recently by the Portuguese Ambassador to the
United States, Mr. Garin; I do not propose to make tiy
further comment on those statements. In my ownsPeeclll

tried, as far as possible, to set some limit on the complaint I
lodged with the Council. But since the Portuguese representative as usual has brought up all the old arguments, I do
not wish to leave the members of the Council with such a
disagreeable impression. Where shall I begin? As always, I
shall follow the well-worn track, which is the famous sac&g
of the Portuguese Embassy at Kinshasa in 1966. According
to the Portuguese representative, this deed was carried out
on the instructions of the Congolese Government as a
demonstration of anti-Portuguese feeling. The truth is that
it wasnothing of the sort, as I shall demonstrate.

impostor. This is the truth about the gangs we are supposed
to be harbouring.
156. There is a third point I should like to make. In the
verbatim record of the 1372nd meeting of the Security
Council, the Portuguese Government states that we have
contradicted ourselves in our various statements. Ap-’
parently we have said that the Portuguese Government has
supplied planes and troops. But nowhere in our statement
did we say such a thing. To talk in this way is an attempt to
create confusion, and this is a form of subversion against
which I must protest.

153. It was the work of undisciplined gangs, and the
highest authorities in the Republic intervened immediately
the news reached them. We at once apologized to the
Government at Lisbon. I do not know whether the
Portuguese representative was told about ,it, but we did in
fact present our apologies at the time. We did what we
could by ordering a thorough investigation, and the persons
responsible were imprisoned. In due course, when the
Portuguese Charge d’affaires returned to Kinshasa, we
received a note acknowledging that the Congolese Government had in fact done its best to nip the affair in the bud.
Lat,er on, when a group of young people tried to stage a
demonstration, the President of the Republic himself
appeared on the scene to calm down the demonstrators. I
very much doubt whether such solicitude would be found
in other countries. Unfortunately, in some countries such
scenes are daily occurrences. As a matter of fact, what
happened on the very day when the much-talked of
resolution 226 (1966) was adopted? In a country as well
organized as this one, in which the police forces and the
Government’s information channels are so efficient, what
happened? The tragic incident which I do not wish to
dwell on now. I mention these things in order to show that
the regrettable incident involving the Portuguese Embassy
should not be viewed as anything more than the actions of
undisciplined gangs such as are to be found, unfortunately,
in any country.

1.57. When in his statement on 8 November [1372nd
meeting] the Portuguese representative denied our accusation, he said that the letter of our Foreign Minister was
the only foundation upon which we cobld base our claim
that there were mercenaries in Angola; and to prove that
there were none, he merely quoted a statement of the
Portuguese Government. Fine proof indeed! The existence
of mercenary camps in Angola and the fact that the
mercenary contingent which has just attacked us came from
Angola are now an open secret. All who have spoken here,
even though they spoke in veiled terms so as to cover
themselves vis-&is a country which is after all their friend,
had to recognize that these bands of mercenaries came from
Angola. We are not the only ones to state this fact.
1%. When we submit photographs to the Council,
Portugal says they are faked and mean absolutely nothing.
When I submit this letter, to which I should once again like
to draw the Security Council’s attention, what does
Portugal say? That it is a forgery. What did the Portuguese
representative say when he took the floor just now? That I
should retract certain things I have said which, according to
him, showed ill-will towards his Government. By saying
that I submitted a forgery, the Portuguese representative is
accusing my delegation of fraud. I hope that, being a man
of honour, he will see fit to withdraw that allegation. In
any case, as far as I am concerned, here is the letter. If the
Portuguese representative still wishes to contend that it is a
forgery, all he need do is communicate with the Belgian
Foreign Ministry which was kind enough to provide our
Ambassador in Brussels with the document of which this is
a photocopy. But do we really need to dwell any longer on
what the Portuguese representative said? We know what to
believe and what not to believe.

154. Secondly, we are told that the actions of the
Congolese Government are prompted by anti-Portuguese
feelings. But does the Portuguese representative know how
many Portuguese are at present living peacefully in the
Congo, carrying on their businesses and earning their
living? How often have these people been disturbed? Yet
in his anxiety to provide firmer proof of the alleged
anti-Portuguese feelings of the Congolese Government, the
Portuguese representative accuses us of harbouring these
kwkw

159. I should like now to refer to what the Portuguese
representative said a few moments ago. According to him,
the various mercenaries whose names have been cited are
not of Portuguese nationality. But we are not particularly
concerned whether they are of Portuguese nationality or
not. That is unimportant. Whether the Lisbon Government
gave them planes or not is also unimportant. Again the
Portuguese representative has tried to confuse the issue by
mentioning a whole list of States which are involved.
Naturally, the States which have nationals among the
mercenaries are also involved. Our charge against Portugal is
that it has abjectly turned a blind eye to the mercenaries’
utilization of Angola as a training base from which they
could eventually launch their attack on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. These are the grounds for our
charge.

155. Here are the facts. Various United Nations bodies,
including the General Assembly, have adopted countless
resolutions to induce Portugal to decolonize. What has been
the result of all those resolutions? Absolutely nothing. On
the contrary, the Angolans have been subjected to barbaric
repression-that is the only word for it. What means have
the Angolans for defending themselves against the rockets,
the guns and the planes used by Lisbon? Their only
defence is flight. And where do they flee? To us. The
various commissions of the Organization of African Unity
that have visited the Congo ‘have been able to see for
themselves the wretched condition of all the people who
have fled and abandoned their country to an invader and an
15

160. The Portuguese representative next said he was bell
aware of the hardship caused in the Congo by a band of
soldiers of fortune. But are not these soldiers of fortune
precisely the mercenaries?
He then went on to his
interminably
long analysis of the article appearing in The
NCW
YcJrk
Times. He said that all the States of which the
mercenaries were nationals should refuse them passports,
since the Lisbon Government should be able to rely on the
identification
papers issued by those various States. I am
willing to agree, but he should have been completely honest
and should not have passed over in silence an incident
revealed by that same article in The New York Times to
which he referred.

167. This is what 1 wished to say to the members of tlis
Council. If I may add a few more words, I should like to
recall a suggestion made here by the representative of France
at the 1372nd meeting. He said in his statement that France
would support any proposal to co-ordinate at the international level the measures taken to wipe out the evil deeds
of the mercenaries.
168. Perhaps this may not come within the direct or
exclusive competence of this Council, but in this way the
Members of the United Nations would be informed’of the
suggestion I wish to make: would it not be possible for
these mercenaries who attack Governments to be declared
criminals against humanity and for international organ&lions swh as INTERPOL to pursue and arrest them
wherever they are found? Such a measure, if it could be
taken si1imltaneously with the others which I have requested, would be perhaps not a decisive step, but at least a
first step in the struggle I believe must be carried out
against these shameful events which everyone regards as
detestable.

16 1. The incident in question was that among the planes
transporting arms was one whose registration was irregular.
The United States Ambassador apparently drew the attention of the Lisbon Government to the fact. What did the
Lisbon Government do about it? The Portuguese representative should have told us. The plane was simply
repainted, and it rejoined the others with regular registrations. What must we conclude from that?

169. This is what I wished to say. I am sorry to have kept
the Council for so long, but I felt it my duty to speak asI
have done,

162. I shall say nothing more. But at least, Mr. President,
let me look at you and the members of this Council straight
in the face. In doing so, I should like particularly to draw
the Council’s attention to the responsibilities that it has
assumed. I was pleased to hear the United Kingdom
representative stressing the Council’s responsibility. Many
of the succeeding speakers expressed the same view.

170. The PRESIDENT (trunskatecl from French): I call on
the representative of Portugal to speak in exercise of his
right of reply.
171. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): Let me begin by
thanking the representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the amiable words he said about my personal
qualities; it wasvery kind of him, Since I am thanking him,
I must immediately proceed to thank him also for a
valuable piece of information that he has given us, namely,
that tlte Belgian document he mentioned in his speech last
Wednesday was actually supplied to him by the Belgian
Government.

163. The representative of Algeria just now emphasized
the low level to which international relations have fallen. It
is curious to note that some things we condemn, or which
we condemn in certain circumstances, have ceased to
trouble the consciences of certain people through frequent
repetition. Blood has flowed and continues to flow, and
some nre content to do no more than express their
concern!
164. Everyone recognizes that Angola has been used as an
operational base for the attack on my country, and yet
there is a refusal to admit that this is an aggression. We
refuse to condemn Portugal or to draw the logical conclusions from such a situation. This is a serious matter.

172. Havittg said that, I must make a few remarks about
the points he raised, and I must immediately reject what he
called “barbarous repression” that he alleged was going on
in Angola. There is no barbarous oppression in Angola
although that fable has often been trotted out. Probably,
and this is quite understandable, the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is referring to the
repression of the infiltrating murderers who crossinto Angola
from the Congo, If he means that, then of course I must tell
him that the Portuguese authorities have a duty to protect
the populations of Angola and cannot but take the
necessary security measures.

16.5. However, I would like to thank the Government of
the United States for having made representations to the
Portuguese Government as soon as it heard the news. The
Belgian Government did likewise for the sake of the safety
of its nationals.
166. I should fike to repeat what I said to the members of
this Council on 8 November. The resolution for which I am
asking is not an end in itself, but a means. We seek rlothing
but peace so that we can work and feed our children, so
that the foreigners among us may live and prosper, so that
our fields may yield their produce, so that our infrastructure can remain as it is, and so that we may bring up
our children in peace and tranquillity. We ask nothing else.
We are asking only that this Council should undertake the
energetic measures which the current situation logically
requires. It is pointless to haggle: either we recognize that a
situation exist& or we do not; if it exists, appropriate
measures must be taken to deal with it.

173. Next, he again mentioned the exhibits. In connexion
with the photos, he attributed to me an intention which I
did not have. I certainly did not mean to say that the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
was trying to deceive the Council. When I said that
photographs might be faked, I meant actually that. Photographs might be faked by anybody and they might be
palmed off. They might have been passed off on the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Co%%
who might have accepted them in good faith and produced
them for the Council. In fact, all that I said amounts to
16

this: that the representative of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo himself might have been taken in, might have
been deceived.

here-at least most of them-said that there was a presumption, a presumption probably due to the fact that
certain fighting has been going on in the region which is not
very far from the Angola border. But I must point out also
that this is no argument. In fact, I wonder if the proximity
of the fighting to the Angolan frontier, justifies any
presumption at all. But quite apart from this, 1 Ir,xst once
again deny, most categorically, that there are or the there
have ever been any mercenary bases in Angola for use
against the Congo. I must deny once again, most categorically, that there have been any infiltrations of armed or
unarmed groups from Angola into the Congo.

174. The representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo referred to The New York Times once again in order
to mention some plane, without markings, which might
have been found in Lisbon. If, in my statement earlier this
afternoon, I mentioned The New York Times at all, it was
because last Wednesday, 8 November, both the representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
some other members of the Council mentioned The New
York Times here. I merely read further in analysing the
articles of The New York Times.

178. I certainly did mention the statement issued by my
Government. In fact, I could do no better. As I pointed
out in my second statement last Wednesday /1372nd
meeting] I regard that statement, and I feel that the
Council must regard that statement, as made by a responsible Government, with a full sense of responsibility. I
repeat what I said last Wednesday.

175. But I did so with expres: reservations. I mentioned
most explicitly that we do not take our arguments from
The New York Times, or from any newspaper for that
matter. Therefore, we do not accept all that a newspaper
says, even if it be the very respectable New York Times. We
do not take everything as the truth. Therefore, the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can draw no argument frbm my remarks about The New

179. Now, if I am asked to prove what is contained in that
statement, I must say that I am unable to prove what does
not exist. If there are no bases,if there are no mercenaries,
I cannot prove what has never existed. One can only prove
what exists. Therefore, I reiterate here what I said last
Wednesday: that there are no bases, that there are no
mercenaries. If there should be any doubt about the truth
of this statement, I reiterate here what I said last
Wednesday. The Council is welcome to investigate.

York Times.

176. However, the most important point which he raised
is about the bases supposed to be existing in Angola for
illicit activities against the Congo. I must draw the attention
of the Council, first, to the fact that not a shred of evidence
has been produced here that there are bases in Angola. Not
a shred of evidence has been produced here that there have
been infiltrations from Angola into the Congo. Even the
famous Belgian letter does not say that there were
infiltrations from Angola into the Congo. All that the
Belgian letter says is that some sick and wounded refugees
were evacuated to Angola.

180. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have
no more speakers on my list. On the basis of consultations I
have held, it appears that the members of the Council are in
favour of setting the date for our next meeting on the
complaint of the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
Tuesday, 14 November, at 3.30 p.m. If there is no
objection, I shall take it that this suggestion is adopted.

177. There has not been, therefore, even a shadow of
evidence brought here about the supposed infiltrations of
any mercenaries from Angola into the Congo. If I understood aright, the members of the Council who spoke

The meeting rose at 7.lOp.m.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publicotionr,may
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
der Notions
Unies
rant en vente
dons
tes librairies
et ler q gences
dCporitairer
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
aupr&r
de votre librairie
ou adresser-vour
b:
Nations
Unier, Section
der venter,
New York ou Genbve.

KAK

IlOJY’iMTb

M3AAHMFl

OPTAHM3AUHM

1I:r~nlllrrr
Oprallll3ar~nn
06w&lrliclrlrr,Ix
~LrCllT(!TllilX
110 BCCX pnl”lOll~X
~1liplL
xaraxmc
II.III III~IIIIITC IIO a4pecp
~~pO@UiC
113j4~11Ill”f, ~thO-~OpN
A.lll

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

IIaqnir
~hBO&llTC

in U.N.

Price:

nIoEill0
CIlp2lWI

: Opramaqm
&m3XL

DE LAS NACIONES

Los publicacioner
de lar Nacioner
Unidar
ertirn
en todor
parles del mundo.
Consulte
o SIJ librero
Yentas,
Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Litho

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAULIn

KylIlITh
n I(IIII;EllI>IX
~1ara31111ax
06 1l3~allllfIX
II BaBICM lillIlilillOY
OiheArmmihlx
IIaqir~“~,
Cmiqw

1x0

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y cosas distribuidoras
o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidar,
Secci6n

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

n

in other

currencies)

de

356S3-December

1970-2,100
