General Assembly-Thirty-ninth Session

130

(a) The inclusion of reference to the lJnited Repu~lic
of Tanzania in the terms of reference of the United
Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in order to enable that
country to receive assistance in the implementation of programmes for combating desertification;
(b) The expansion of the scope of the work of the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office so as to enable 1t
to assist the States members of the Southern African
Development Co-ordination Conference in implementing
the recommendations of the United Nations Environment
Programme on combating desertification and drought, in
the same way as the Office is currently assisting the States
members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahe!;
10. Urges all Governments to increase their assistance,
inter a/ia, by financing regional and subregional programmes, through appropriate channels, including the
Special Account created under General Assembly resolution 32/172 of 19 December 1977. to countries suffering
from desertification;
11. Endorses the decision of the Governing Council in
paragraph 28 of its decision 12/ I 0 32 that a further overall
assessment of progress in the implementation of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification should be carried out
in 1992.
103rd plenary mecting
17 December 1984

B
IMPLEMENTATION IN THE SUDANO-SAHELIAN REGION
OF THE PLAN OF ACTION TO COMBAT DESERTIFICA-

TION

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 36/190 of 17 December I 981.
37/216 of20 December 1982 and 38/164 of 19 December
1983,
Taking note of decision I 2/10 of 28 May 1984 of the
Governing Council of the lJnited Nations Environment
Programme 32 on desertification,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolutions
1984/65 of 26 July 1984 on the implementation in the
Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of Action to Combat
Desertification and 1984/72 of 27 July I 984 on the environment and development in Africa,
Taking note also of the inclusion of Ghana and Togo in
the list of countries to be covered by the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office under the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification, 28
Having considered the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification, 33
Bearing in mind the special review undertaken by the
Governing Council of the progress made in implementing
the Plan of Action, based, inter alia, on the general assessment by the Executive Director of progress in the implementation of the Plan of Action during the period 19781984, 30 and on the document on the assessment of desertification in the Sudano-Sahelian region, 34
Aware that the prime responsibility in the struggle
against desertification and the effects of drought rests upon
33 A/39/433, annex II.
34 UNEP/GC.12/INF.3 and ( ·orr I

the countnes concerned. and noting the efforts of those
countries to combat desertification and drought,
l. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Environment Programme on the
implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan
of Action to Combat Desertification;
1
Notes with ,·,mcern:
(a) That the persistent drought in the Sahe! has intensified and spread into other parts of Africa, assuming the
catastrophic proportions of a generalized drought;
ih) That the inadequacy of financial resources contmues to place a serious constraint on the fight against
desertification;
(c) That struggle against desertification requires financial and human resources beyond the means of the affected
countries;
3. Expresses 11s appreciation of the progress made
towards overcoming these obstacles by the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office. on behalf of the United Nations
Environment Programme, as part of a joint action by the
United Nations Environment Programme and the United
Nations Development Programme to assist the Governments of the region in combating desertification;
4. Expresses Ifs appreciation also for the efficient and
co-ordinated manner in which the Executive Director of
the United Nations Environment Programme and the
Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme have continued to develop this joint action
through the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office;
5. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme and the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
to continue to provide and increase their support to the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in order to enable
it to respond fully to the urgent needs of the countries of
the Sudano-Sahehan region;
6. Expresses 1/s gratitude to the Governments, United
Nations bodies. intergovernmental organizations and
other organizations which have contributed to the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian region of the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification;
7. Emphasizes the need to redouble the efforts in order
to implement in the Sudano-Sahelian region the Plan of
Action to Combat Desertification and urges all Governments to respond favourably to the requests submitted by
the Governments of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian
region for assistance in combating desertification;
8. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to make the necessary
arrangements at each session for submitting a report to the
General Assembly. through the Economic and Social
Council, on the implementation in the Sudano-Sahelian
region of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/169.

Living conditions of the Palestinian people
in the occupied Palestinian territories

The General Assembly.
Recalling the Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements. 1976. 35 and the relevant recommendations for
15 Report o/ llahua,

L'nit,·d Natwns Conference on Human Settlements.

I ancou,w. 3 I Ha\'- I I June I 976 (United Nations publication. Sales No.

I 76.IV 7 and romge11dum). chap I

V.

131

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committtl·

national action 36 adopted by Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements.
Recalling also its resolution 38/166 of 19 December
1983,
Gravely alarmed by the continuation of the Israeli settlement policies, which have been declared null and void and
a major obstacle to peace,
Recognizing the need to investigate ways and means of
arresting the deterioration in the economy of the occupied
Palestinian territories.
I. Takes note with concern of the report of the Secretary-General on the living conditions of the Palestinian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories; 37
2. Takes note also of the statement made on 29
October 1984 by the Observer of the Palestine Liberation
Organization; 38
3. Rejects the Israeli plans and actions intended to
change the demographic composition of the occupied
Palestinian territories, particularly the increase and expansion of the Israeli settlements, and other plans and actions
creating conditions leading to the displacement and exodus of Palestinians from the occupied Palestinian territories;
4. Expresses its alarm at the deterioration, as a result
of the Israeli occupation, in the living conditions of the
Palestinian people in the Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967;
5. Affirms that the Israeli occupation is contradictory
to the basic requirements for the social and economic
development of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To organize, in 1985, a seminar on remedies for the
deterioration of the economic and social conditions of the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories;
(b) To make the necessary preparations for the seminar
providing for the participation of the Palestine Liberation
Organization;
(c) To invite experts to present papers to the seminar;
(d) To invite also relevant intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session, through the Economic and Social Council, on the
seminar.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/170. Human settlements
A
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION ON
HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-V I) and 3202 (S-VI) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 197 5
on development and international economic co-operation,
36 Ibid., chap. II.
37 N39/233-E/1984/79.
38 Official Records of the General Assemhlr. Thirr_r-mnth Sessum. Second
Committee, 26th meeting, paras. '\ 1-55

Recalling also its resolutions 32/ 162 of 19 December
1977 on institutional arrangements for international cooperation in the field of human settlements and 34/116 of
14 December 1979 on the strengthening of human settlements activities,
Seriously concerned at the continued low level of voluntary contributions being made available to the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) in support of the human settlements activities of the United
Nations.
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/57 A of 26 July 1984 on international co-operation
in the field of human settlements.
Having considered the report of the Commission on
Human Settlements on the work of its seventh session. 3Q
l. Takes note of thl' report of the Commission on
Human Settlements on the work of its seventh session and
the resolutions contained therein:
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments
and others which have made voluntary contributions to
the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements
Foundation in support· of the work of the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and commends in
particular those which have done so on a regular basis;
3. Renews its appeal to all Governments, particularly
those of the developed countries, to begin making regular
voluntary contributions to the United Nations Habitat
and Human Settlements Foundation of the Centre, if they
have not already done so, and. if they have. to consider
mcreasing the amount 01· their contributions.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December l 984

B
CO-ORDINATION OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS PROC,RAMMES WITHIN THE UNITED NATIONS SYSTEM

The <ieneral Assemb/_1,
Reaffirming its resolution 35/77 C of 5 December 1980,
in which it invited the Secretary-General to arrange, in
consultation with the members of the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination, for the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) to participate in
all aspects of the work of that Committee and its subsidiary machinery,
Recalling its resolution 3 7/223 C of 20 December 1982,
in which it requested the Secretary-General to accelerate
his efforts in arranging for such participation and to report
thereon to the General i\.ssembly at its thirty-eighth session.
Recalling also its resolution 38/16 7 B of 19 December
1983 in which it took note of the report of the SecretaryGenera! 40 summarizing decision 1983/ l 8 of 27 October
1983 of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination,
which decision it noted did not completely meet the
requirement of its earlier resolutions 35/77 C and 37/223
C. and requested the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of its resolutions on the question,
19 Jh,d .. f'hirt\'-lllnth Session fopp/cmcnt No Ii (A, 39 18).

4 o A 18 ,43_
