UNITED NATIONS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l839)

. , . , . , . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . , . . . .. . . . .

Expression of thanks to the retiring President and welcome to the representativeofItaly
.,.........................,,..........................
Statement by the President , , . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . , . .
Admission of the new Members:
Application of Papua New Guinea for admission to membership in the United
Nations: note by the Secretary-General (S/11823) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.1839

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the ?@&I Records oj’tlgr Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
cd
Decisions of tlze Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1839th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 22 September
President:

Mr, Moulaye EL HASSEN

(Mauritania).

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan,
Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United
Republic
of Cameroon,
United
Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jkom Frerzch):
Since this meeting of the Security Council is being
held on the day on which the General Assembly has
begun its general debate, I am sure that all members
of the Council realize more than ever, the importance
of the time factor in our work. I therefore appeal to
my colleagues on the Council to enable us to conduct
our deliberations
as effectively as possible so that
the Security Council may fulfil its obligations
and
settle fruitfully and speedily the items on its agenda.

agenda (S/Agenda/l839)

1.

Adoption

2.

Admission of new Members:
Application of Papua New Guinea for admission
to membership in the United Nations: note by the
Secretary-General (S/l 1823)
The meeting

1975, at 3 p.m,

of the agenda

WCIScalled to order at 3.35 p.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring
and welcome to the representative

President
of Italy

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretution
jiom French):
My first duty as President of the Security Council
for this month is to express to Ambassador Saito of
Japan, my friend and colleague, the gratitude which
1 am sure all the members of the Security Council
feel towards him for his services to the Council when
he presided over its work during the month of August.
During his term of office Ambassador Saito not only
conducted the official meetings of the Security Council in regard to requests for admission of new
Members to the United Nations, but also held long
on certain
and complex
informal
consultations
questions within the competence of the Security Council. Furthermore,
he took an initiative which, we
hope, will enable us to improve our working conditions
considerably.
2. I also avail myself of this opportunity
to
welcome, on behalf of all members of the Council,
the representative
of Italy, Mr. Piero Vinci, who
returns to a post he occupied three years ago when
Italy was last a member of the Security Council.
We are all extremely pleased to be working again
with our colleague from Italy, whose experience will
undoubtedly prove extremely valuable to us.
Statement by the President

4. Before proceeding to the adoption of the agenda
for this meeting I should like to say briefly how I
think our programme of work should be organized for
this afternoon.
5. At this first meeting the Security Council has
to consider the question of the admission of Papua
New Guinea to membership in the United Nations.
The Council will be guided by rule 59 of its provisional rules of procedure, which deals specifically
with the Committee on Admission of New Members.
6. At the end of our first meeting on this specific
item the Security Council will hold a closed meeting
to consider its draft report to the General Assembly.
The Security Council will meet again at 4.30 p.m.
to consider the report to be submitted by the Committee on Admission of New Members.
7. It seems to me that this work programme
is
in accord with the wishes of members of the Security
Council, and if no member of the Council has any
objection I shall take it that this programme of work
is adopted.
It was so decided.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Application
of Papua New Guinea for
Membership
in the United Nations:
Secretary-General
(S/11823)

Admission to
note by the

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Frewh):
In accordance with rule 59 of the provisional rules
of procedure, the Secretary-General,
on 16 September,
had the application of Papua New Guinea for admission to membership in the United Nations circulated

in document
S/l 1823. In accordance with rule 59,
applications
for membership must be handed, by the
President of the Security Council, to the Committee
on Admission
of New Members, unless the Council
decides otherwise.

10. The PRESIDENT
(irzterpretrrtion from French):
Therefore, in accordance with this decision, I shall
request the Committee
on Admission
of New
Members to meet immediately
after the end of the
closed meeting of the Security Council which is to be
held, immediately
after the present meeting, to
consider the report of the Security Council. I request
the Committee to prepare its report speedily, so that
the Security Council may be able to consider it at
the latest this afternoon.

9. Therefore,
and if there is no objection, I shall
request the Committee
to consider that application
and to report back to the Security Council. It is
understood that the deadline set in rule 59 for the
submission of the report of the Committee
is ipso
.lmcto excluded.
If there is no objection,
1 shall
immediately
transmit the application
to the Committee, which will then report back to the Security
Council as soon as possible.

2
Litho

in United

Nations.

New York

00150

82-6 1202-November

1~83-2J~~
