UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1910”

MEETING:

15 APRIL 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. ... .. ... ... ... ... ... .. ... .... .. ....

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/1910)

S/PV. 1910

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resdlutions and
Decisions of the Security Council, The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1910th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 15 April 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. HUANG

Hua (China).

3. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I invite the representatives of
Saudi Arabia and Guinea-Bissau to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited
to take a seat at the Council table when it is their turn
to address the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l910)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in .pursuance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/1201 1)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fernandes
(Guinea-Bissau)
and Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

of the agenda

4. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
The first speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

was called to order at 11.30 a.m.
Adoption

5. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): It is indeed a
privilege for me to speak on the issue the Council has
been discussing, if for no other reason than that the
President of the Council for this month hails from
China, one of the main fountains of ancient wisdom as
well as the innovator of a system of government that
has brought self-sufficiency to the Chinese people.
The modem Chinese political system is predicated -on
discipline and self-restraint-the
discipline and selfrestraint
of the individual-and,
ultimately;
the
Chinese people has developed a sense of responsibility
that has become exemplary. Therefore, it is a pleasure
for me to salute a fellow Asian, none other than
Ambassador Huang Hua, who is cool and collected
and who, while being younger than me in years, is
much older in wisdom. I am assured that the problem
before us will be dealt with with the probity which is
characteristic not only of the President of the Council
but also, I hope, of each of its members.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor:
Report of the Secretary-General
in pursnance of
Security Council resolution 384 (1975) (S/12011)
1. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1908th
meeting, I shall now invite the representatives
of
Australia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Portugal to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Anwar Sani
(Indonesia)
and Mr. Galva’o Teles (Portugal)
took
places at the Council table and Mr. Harry (Australia)
and Mr, Yango (Philtppines) took the places reserved
For them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Why should Saudi Arabia, or the representative of
Saudi Arabia, take an interest in the question of East
Timor? Well, Saudi Arabia, I believe, is not further
in distance from East Timor than Washington
or
Moscow. Furthermore,
we are an Asian nation, and
nowadays anything that affects a land which at one time
was considered distant, though it no longer is today,
affects the world, for the world, whether we like it
or not, it one through the development of communications and the awareness of young people everywhere.

2. The PRESIDENT
(translation
from Chinese):
In addition, I should like to inform the Council members that letters have been addressed to the President
of the Council by the representatives of ,Saudi Arabia
and Guinea-Bissau which contain requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure. Accordingly, pursuant
to the usual practice, I propose, if1 hear no objection,
to invite these representatives
to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

7. I participated in the debate on this question during
the last session of the General Assembly, and I was
1

assured by my Indonesian colleague that his country
had no ambition in that part of Timor. All they wanted
was that there would not be a brush fire-and
by
“brush fire” here I mean any political events that
might create a commotion in Indonesia. In that regard
I must draw the Council’s attention to the fact that
Indonesia consists of 130 million people, so it has a
prime responsibility
to see that there should be no
trouble in the’land on account of the many fingers
sometimes pulling strings, not in that unhappy land
of East Timor but, I must say, in many other parts of
the world. I need not name the regions where surreptitiously many Powers, big and small, are interfering
in the domestic affairs of others, whereas the Charter
is clear as to our responsibility
not to engage in such
intervention or interference.

we wish them well-rather
than taking sides with one
party or the other.. This is my humble advice to a
peopie’whom I always defended in the United Nations
when they had colonies and I was negotiating with them
on how they should disengage themselves. Why did
I have a special liking for the Portuguese? It is because
I know that they were once in Brazil and did not have
any racial discrimination
as did those people from the
north who are snow-white and thought that they were
made’ in a separate mould. The Portuguese mixed
with lthe people of Africa and of Latin America. They
are h’uman. Not that the others are inhuman, but they
were-:iecluded. As.1 have said, ‘those Europeans in the
north,. not long ago were barbarians. The Industrial
Revolution brought them to the fore, but before that it
waS.‘the Renaissance which started in Italy which
really humanized the ‘whole of Europe. Before that
they were barbarians.. We were barbarians also, but
that was two’or three thousand years ago, not recently.

8. There was something most unusual at yesterday’s
meeting [1909rh meeting]. I listened carefully to our
colleagues from Indonesia and the Philippines as well
as to the representatives of certain political parties.
Of course, the representative
of Portugal tried to
rationalize the hasty withdrawal of Portugal. We all
saluted Portugal for the decolonization
of its erstwhile
colonies, and we still marvel that it was done with
dispatch rather than step by step or in a protracted
manner, as was done by some erstwhile imperial
Powers. It took two world wars for them to get rid
of their colonies. But I think that Portugal was too
hasty; not that it had elected to be too hasty in
disengaging itself, but it had its internal problems. It
was suffering, labouring to produce a new ideology or
regime, by whatever name you want to call it. Therefore the representative of Portugal should not have
rationalized
the hasty withdrawal
of Portugal,
although, of course, he had to rationalize it. Of course
Portugal is still in the throes of deciding on its political
ideology. We know that. Let us be frank. There are
many people pulling strings in Portugal too. Some are
called rightists, some are called leftists, some are called
socialists and some are called communists; and we wish
Portugal well in the long~run. I wish they would leave
Portugal alone and then, I think, peace would prevail
in the Mediterranean
as well as in Portugal.

10.’ Therefore, I should humbly like to submit a few
points to the Council, as an old-timer who has worked
on self-determination,
having with .some of my colleagues elaborated that principle into a full-fledged
right in the international
covenants on human rights.
Self-determination
means. not only throwing off the
foreign yoke; it also means preparing a people for a
new system or allowing them to maintain their system
and to evolve a new one in conformity with what is
nowadays expected in every country.
11. Again, I must stress for perhaps the tenth time
what a good job Australia did in New Guinea, but
they did not do it overnight. So if the Indonesians
moved at one time it was not in order to lord it over
the East Timorese.. It was in order to see what could
be done so that public order could be maintained
when the so-called vacuum was created by the withdrawal of Portugal. Therefore, there is no reason to
molest or criticize Indonesia.
12. Of course I listened very carefully to that young
gentleman,
Mr.
Horta,
the representative
of
FRETILIN
[Frente’ Revoluciona’ria
Timor Leste Zndependente]
[190&h meeting].
Did FRETILIN
start
in East Timor, or is it an import into East Timor
from Mozambique or somewhere else? I do not know
where it started. Now;,it is his privilege to espouse
any sort of ideology that he thinks is most suitable,
but he shouId not impose it. He may be young but
he is a leader. So why not be reasonable as a young
leader and, instead, of saying FRETILIN
and Mozambique and this and that, go there and work without
so much.partisanship
and co-operate with the others
I was young’once.
We learn with the years. You
cannot impose FRETILIN
or any other sort of
ideological mixture on a people to ‘whom it means
nothing.

9. I listened to our Australian colleague, Ambassador
Harry, and I think his statement was the most balanced
of all the statements I heard on this question. He
counselled patience and stressed the human aspect of
the problem. Innocent people are suffering in East
Timor, and for what purpose? Because there is a
tug of war-and I am using the words “tug of war”
in its figurative sense-between
the various ideologies
and systems that some may want to impose on those
people who are still tribal. They have their chiefs.
I can talk with more understanding
because we in
Saudi Arabia belong to a tribal system. The loyalty
is to the chief of the community or communities.
They
had been living in peace until, as I said, Portugal
had to pack up hastily. I hope that Portugal will not
export any new ideological system. First let the Portuguese settle their problems in their own country-and

13. Then.a thing that also surprised me was that for
the first time we had advocates of one party ‘or the
other, and, ironically, the advocates were Australians.
2

I hope we will pay, all of us, so that there may be
peace. We are paying, and some do so but not from
good motives. They call it aid. Let anything which
should be done be done through the United Nations,
and then we are sure there are no ulterior motives for
the aid, whether it is covert or overt. Let the United
Nations,
through. the Secretary-General
and the
gentlemen of the Council, be the wise advisers of East
Timor, and let there be no funny business on the part
of the major Powers. You know what ,happened in
Viet-Nam and you know about the deadlock in Korea.
For Heaven’s sake give us a respite from all those
ulterior motives that many Powers have and which,
they will find, in the long run will backfire. They tax
their people and march them to shed their blood in
foreign lands. I am glad the major Powers are getting
wiser, because their young generations will no longer
be a party to aggression by being made to march to
the slaughterhouse, whether by means of indoctrinated
ideologies or, as it used to be, by drum beating,
bugle blowing and flag waving.

One was supporting FRET&IN,
I believe, t& is, an
import into the area, and the other was just trying to
show that Indonesia and, indirectly, the Philippines
were right-especially
Indonesia-in
assuming responsibility in East Timor at a time when the situation was
very worrying to the Indonesian Government.
:
14. I could talk about the ‘orderly manner in which
Indonesia gained its independence. I was approached
in this very United Nations by none other than Ali
Sastroamidjojo,
who was a nationalist, and he assured
me that they had no designs on others and all,they
wanted was to be decolonized and join the Unrted
Nations. It was my privilege also to know many
Indonesian leaders’. I could never sense in themany
aggressiveness in the sense of wanting ,to incorporate
people into their population
because of economic
ambition. In fact I have learnt that both East Timor and
the Timor under Indonesian rule‘would
constitute a
financial burden on anyone because they are not
economically
viable, but still Indonesia feels a deep
responsibility
to maintain peace in the area, to see to
it that no new ideologies are imported that may create
trouble.

18. Sir, I am confident that under your Presidency
members of the Council will work out a draft resolution
which will be unanimously
approved, so that peace
may prevail.

15. Classic warfare may perhaps be relegated to the
past, but sometimes one wonders whether what we
call warfare by proxy is better or worse. All war is
bad. Now many nations, not only the big Powers but
smaller Powers, are resorting to covert intervention in
the affairs of others. Beware because there might
be miscalculation,
and a spark may start a whole
conflagration. It may start in some place, and then we
may have a war of extinction of the human species;
That is why I felt my responsibility
to address the
Council.

19. Beware, you mischievous
people, of political
parties that you want to import into the area. If you
want to be good Timorese, go there and evolve a
Timorese system, rather than some foreign system that
may bring suffering to the people not only of Timor
but also of the whole region.
20. I ‘wish to thank you, Mr, President, and the
members of the Council for having given me this
opportunity to speak.

16. What shall we do? Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi was
delegated by the Secretary-General
to see what could
be done. I read his report [sli2011, annex]., It is not
conclusive, because perhaps he was prevented from
seeing everything that he would have liked to see. We
can come to that conclusion by reading his report.
Therefore,
since there are efforts on the part of
members of the Council to pursue the matter in a
peaceful manner, I hope that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
will be given another
chance to find out for himself what can be done to
make sure that things do not deteriorate.

21. Mr. KANAZAWA
(Japan): My delegation has
closely observed developments in East Timor since the
adoption of resolution 384 (1975) nearly four months
ago. Although it appears to us that peace and order in
the Territory have not yet been fully restored, we
consider it encouraging that armed strife now seems
to be confined to isolated areas in the Territory, and
that life is gradually returning to normal.
22. Since last August East Timor had been plunged
into bloodshed which cost the lives of many innocent
people of the Territory and caused enormous suffering.
In fact the world can no longer tolerate such a tragedy
as the events in East Timor. We sincerely hope that
peace and order will be restored as soon as possible,
bringing conditions which will enable the people of
East Timor to exercise freely their right to selfdetermination.

17. Although it is not for me to give advice to the
so-called opposition, those who are trying to malign
Indonesia, I would ask Indonesia to talk to them and
perhaps, if they do not bring any new ideology, to let
them be their neighbours, but without trying to be the
focus of trouble. I think I have the responsibility
and
the right to give such advice. The ancient Arabs used
to say advice was worth a camel but that nobody
took it free. Now, it seems, if one wants to give
advice, not for the sake of generosity but for the sake
of maintaining
peace, he has to pay the people to
whom the advice is given so that they will take it.

23. My delegation has considered the report of the
Secretary-General,
which gives a comprehensive
account of the activities of his Special Representative, Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi.
The delegation of
Japan wishes to pay tribute to the Special Representa3
/

tive for his conscientious efforts to implement resolution 384 (1975) despite the difficulties he encountered
in fulfilling the responsibilities entrusted to him by the
Secretary-General. Although he could not visit all of
East Timor and establish contact with FRETILIN
there, he has brought back to us useful first-hand
information. His report will help the Council assessthe
situation and find a solution for the situation in the
Territory.
L
24. My delegation supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General that his Special Representative
continue to hold consultations with all the parties
concerned. We therefore consider it desirable that the
Council extend the mandate of the Special Representative to allow him to continue such consultations,
including the possibility of making further visits to
East Timor. As the Council has heard the contradictory statements from the representative of the
“Provisional Government”, Mr. Goncalves, and from
Mr. Horta of FRETILIN, another visit by the Special
Representative assuredly would be most useful. In
this connexion, my delegation has noted that the
“Provisional Government” has invited the Special
Representative to make another visit to East Timor to
discuss further the implementation of resolution 384
(1975).

27. Wdrge. all States to co-operate fully with efforts
of the United Nations, in particular of the Security
Council, to bring about a prompt and peaceful solution,
assuring the people of East Timor of the free exercise
of their right to self-determination, in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
)*d
28: ‘My delegation believes that the Council, in order
to attain these objectives, should do the following:
first~ieaffirm the right of East Timor to self-determination ‘in accordance with General Assembly resolution’ 1314 (XV); secondly continue efforts to restore
peace and order, enabling the people of East Timor to
exercise their right to self-determination; thirdly,
call upon the Government of Indonesia to complete
without delay the withdrawal of all its remaining forces
from the Territory; fourthly, take note of the report of
the -‘Secretary-General and renew his mandate to
enable him to continue his efforts to help bring about
a peaceful solution-as a corollary, we will support a
proposal to renew the mandate of the Special
Representative-fifthly,
accelerate the achievement
of a peaceful solution by talks among all the parties
concerned.
29. In order to attain these-objectives, the Council
should urge all the parties concerned to provide
assistance to. the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative in the discharge of the responsibilities
entrusted or to be entrusted to them under the relevantCouncil resolutions. Also, the Council should urge
all States to refrain from any action which might
delay a solution or which might cause the situation
to deteriorate.

25. My delegation continues to believe that peace and
order in the Territory must be restored as soon as
possible and that the Indonesian forces there must
withdraw without delay in accordance with resolution 384 (1975). In this connexion, my delegation has
noted with particular attention the statement of
Mr. Goncalves [1908th meeting] that the Indonesian
forces began their withdrawal in February and continued it in March. My delegation welcomes also the
statement made by the representative of Indonesia
yesterday [1909rh meeting] that the armed volunteers
started to leave the Territory in February and that
the process of withdrawal is expected to be completed
within a short time. Indonesia is widely acknowledged
as a country which has firmly supported the right
of self-determination of the peoples in colonial Territories. It gives my delegation satisfaction, therefore,
to note the repeated assurances of the Government
of Indonesia that Indonesia has no claims on East
Timor and that it respects the right of the people of
East Timor to self-determination. We are confident that
the Government of Indonesia wiIl take further
measures to complete without delay the withdrawal
of all its remaining forces from the Territory. My
delegation is convinced that the complete withdrawal
of Indonesian forces from East Timor will help create
conditions which assure the people of East Timor of
the free. exercise of their right to self-determination.
26. My delegation considers that the future of East
Timor should be decided by the freely expressed will
of its entire population, according to due procedures
widely accepted by the international community. It
is the people of East Timor themselves who must
decide their political future.

30. I wish to remind the Council of the importance
that the Government and people of Japan, as an Asian
nation, attach to a speedy and peaceful solution of
this question. We have heard statements of the
opposing sides on the future of East Timor, and it is,
therefore, for the Council to take the first steps which
will help that people to exercise their right to determine
their political future. I sincerely hope that the proposal
I have outlined will provide the assistance that the
people of East Timor need to decide their future,
free from outside interference or intimidation.
31. My delegation hopes that the Council will take
a unanimous decision, as it did last year, on the
situation in East Timor which will safeguard the inalienable right of the people of East Timor to selfdetermination. We pledge our full co-operation with
other delegations to achieve this objective.
32. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese):
Mr. Hot-ta, to whom the Council extended an invitation
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure,
wishes to make a further statement. Therefore, I invite
him to take a place at the Council table to make an
additional statement.
4

33. Mr. HGRTA: We heard and read with interest
the statements made before the Council by the delegations of Portugal, Indonesia, Australia and the Philippines. We also heard statements by certain individuals
brought to the Council by the Indonesian Government.
While the people of East Timor are at this very moment
subjucted to a criminal war of aggression by the Indonesian army, the Indonesian Government and these
individuals are here making a mockery of this
honourable Council. This body, which constitutes the
rule of law in a world in the throes of change,
cannot ,fully meet its obligations if its integrity is
violated by the actions of a country whose Government
has pledged allegiance to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.
&‘<
34. We would say that such actions can only spring
from a distorted view of international relations. No
Government with dignity and with respect for other
countries and Governments would present such
individuals as petitioners to this world Organization.
We heard here words of insult uttered against the
people of East Timor. Indeed, the great majority of
the people of East Timor cannot read and write. But
certainly they feel in their flesh the exploitative and
oppressive political and economic system which
serves only minorities such as the Indonesian lackeys
who have been brought here.
35. It is very unfortunate that the Indonesia
Government has brought here a certain coffeee planter
or chicken farmer who has lived in East Timor, like
many other colonialists, exploiting our people. The
language used by this friend of the Indonesian military
junta is typical of an old and sick racist colonialist
mentality. The Indonesian Government, by bringing
this racist white man, only reminds us of the racist
South Africans and Rhodesians, who justify apartheid
because “the Africans are ignorant”. It is rather
shocking that the Indonesian Government has brought
here a racist-a colonist-to insult the people of East
Timor, an insult which is extended to the people of
Africa.
36. My delegation, faithful to my Government’s
policies and to the people of East Timor, cannot
tolerate that a racist, colonialist and sick mentality
should have used this noble forum to vomit his hatred
for people of darker skin. My delegation wonders if
it is such a person himself who should.be held responsible, or the delegation that sponsors him here. I do not
wish to make further comment on the presence and the
statements of such individuals before the Council at this
point. We believe Council members will form their own
impressions.
37. While certain individuals betray their people and
others come to this very place to insult the freedom
fighters of East Timor and the freedom fighters of
Africa, it is a great consolation for us to learn that many
tens of thousands of other people throughout the world
have expressed their sympathies’and support for the

just struggle of the people of East Timor for national
independence. Over 100members of the British Parliament have expressed their condemnation of Indonesian
aggression, and the World Council of Churches and a
great number of other religious groups and intemational organizations have sent us messagesof sympathy
and support. The Afro-Asian Peoples’ Solidarity
Organization, which comprises over 80 organizations
around the world, has stated its recognition of the
struggle of the people of East Timor under the leadership of FRETILIN. Various organizations in Canada,
the Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, New Zealand,
Fiji, Papua New Guinea and the United States have
protested. against Indonesian criminal aggression
against the people of East Timor. The people of Australia, particularly, have shown over the past months a
tremendous solidarity with the patriotic forces of East
Timor. Members of the Australian Parliament,
including cabinet ministers, the Australian Council of
Churches, the Australian Union of Students and the
Australian Council of Trade Unions, which involve
over 4 million people, have voiced their sympathy and
support for the people of East Timor and FRETILIN
and a strong condemnation of Indonesian expansionism.
38. Sections of the United States Congress have also
expressed their concern about Indonesia’s military
adventure in East Timor. Moves have been made to cut
military aid to Indonesia by several American
Congressmen. This indicates that prominent American
politicians are aware that American military aid to
Indonesia has been misused. We believe, though, that
the Government of the United States does not approve
of Indonesian use of American military aid against
East Timor. Moves have also been made in Canada,
the United Kingdom and Australia to cut economic
and military aid to Indonesia. In spite of the efforts of
the Indonesian delegation to ‘the United Nations to
distort the real situation in East Timor and avoid world
condemnation, the criminal record of the military junta
of Djakarta is too well known, and one can hardly
doubt the Indonesian act of genocide in East Timor.
39. The Council must consider Indonesian aggression
against East Timor as the main issue of the discussion.
The General Assembly in its resolution 3485 (XXX)
and the Council in its resolution 384 (1975) have called
on the Government of Indonesia to withdraw without
delay all its forces from the Territory. Indonesia’s
invasion of East Timor contravened the Charter of the
United Nations and international law and was a breach
of international peace and order.
40. The Council has the responsibility to find ways
to put an end to armed aggression. At this moment,
there are over 30,000 Indonesian paratroopers and
marines in East Timor. This information has been
independently confirmed by Australian intelligence
officials. It is totally untrue. that Indonesian forces
have been withdrawn from the territory of the Democratic Republic of East Timor; on the contrary, new

I

-rim
reinforcements have been sent continuously. For the
sake of peace and security in that part of the world,
we expect the Council to consider the continued
Indonesian military aggression against East Timor as
a matter of priority, and we hope it will not be misled
by the contradictory statements of the Indonesian
Government. Otherwise the Council might become
compliant towards continued Indonesian military
aggression against.* the people of East Timor.
41. It has already been four months since the international community condemned Indonesian military
intervention in East Timor and called for the withdrawal of Indonesian forces. In spite of this, the war
in East Timor continues on a large scale between the
nationalist forces and the Indonesian army. I wish to
read out a telegram dated 12 April 1976, sent from
East Timor by the Prime Minister of the Democratic
Republic of East Timor, Nicolau Lobato:

is ju&%j victory is certain. Independence or death.
The people of East Timor will win.”
42. There is no so-called Provisional Government in
East Timor, but only one legitimate Government, the
Government that was formed following the establishment of the Democratic Republic of East Timor. After
the invasion of Dili on 7 December, a puppet so-called
Provisianal Government was set up while Indonesian
air andJnava1 forces were bombarding the city. If the
need arises, my delegation might feel compelled to
supply the Council with concrete evidence concerning
the . real nature of this so-called Provisional
Government.
43. ’ My Government has well in mind the way the
present Indonesian regime conducted campaigns of
pacification against nationalist forces and the way it
conducted the so-called act of free choice..Although
we do so reluctantly, there is need to remind the
Council about the i so-called act of free choice in
West.Irian. Djakarta claimed the right to control the
former Dutch colony of West Irian. The United
Nations conceded the Territory of West New Guinea
to Java. The former Dutch colony was handed over to
the Javanese on 1 May 1963. There was one proviso
in the so-called New York Agreement: the people of
West Irian must be given an opportunity to express
their attitude towards incorporation into Indonesia by
1969. Between 1963 and 1966 it seemed that the
Government at that time was .prepared to conduct
the process of self-determination in a very progressive
way. But beginning in 1966 the new military regime
in West Irian conducted an intensive campaign of
repression and intimidation, often resulting in outright
armed conflict, to persuade the people of West New
Guinea to accept incorporation into Indonesia. In
1969 the act of self-determination required by the
United Nations was allowed to take place at the last
possible moment by the Javanese leaders. The United
Nations representative appointed to observe the West
New Guinea plebiscite, Mr. Ortiz Sanz, reporting to
the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session,
expressed severe reservations about the way in which
Indonesia had conducted the plebiscite. He said:

“The harvest of rice and corn in East Timor
ended last month. The main target of the Indonesian
forces is to sack all the agricultural products from
the people. Such food items are driven to Dili and
shipped to Indonesia. Over the Indonesian controlled
areas popular unsatisfaction is increasing day to day,
and the people are starving.
“Within the fake so-called Provisional Govemment there are two factions. One is headed by
ex-UDT and the other one by ex-APODETI. It was
the ‘Governor’ himself who, through the microphones of Radio Dili,
>.( released the truth.
“A revolt attempt was brought down’ with the
cost of many lives. Adam Malik said again that the
war in East Timor was over, but he forgot he said
days before the Indonesian forces could not leave
East Timor because they were still needed. The
Indonesian Government is continuing to send new
units.
“How can Indonesia justify the refusal of East
Timorese refugees in Indonesian territory in getting
back to East Timor? Indonesia’s claim that its
forces control all the territory is false. All members
of the Central Committee and Government of the
Democratic Republic of East Timor are moving
freely, telecommunications are still operating and
the National Radio goes on the air three days a week.
The refusal of the Djakarta Government to grant
entry permits to journalists and International Red
Cross representatives is an unquestionable proof
that Indonesia does not control all the territory.
In the first week of April FRETILIN forces inflicted
heavy losses on the enemy and captured a lot of
weapons, ammunition, and other war material. We
are waiting for the next visit of. the UN Special
Envoy. We are not afraid of the truth. The people
of East Timor are prepared to manifest their determination to freedom and independence even under
the threat of Indonesian soldiers’ guns. Our fighting

“The petitions opposing annexation to Indonesia,
the cases of unrest in Manokwari, Enarotaii and
Waghete, the flight of a number of people to the
part of the island that is administered by Australia,
and the existence of political detainees, more than
300 of whom were released at my request, show that
without doubt certain elements of the population of
West Irian held firm convictions in favour of independence. . ..
“I regret to have to express my reservation
regarding the implementation of article XXII of the
Agreement, relating to ‘the rights, including the
rights of free speech, freedom of movement and
of assembly, of the inhabitants of the area’. In spite
of my constant efforts, this important provision
6.

was not fully implemented and the Administration
exercised at all times a tight political c~trol
over
.
the population.“’
44. I wish to stress again before the Council that my
Government and the people of East Timor fully respect
Indonesian territorial integrity and greatly admire the
Indonesian nation. But we cannot tolerate the fact that
the same people who 30, years after achieving their
independence from the, colonial .Power -are now
behaving in the same way the colonial Powerbehaved
in the past towards them.
“I,.
?
45. East Timor is not what was West Nuigini, It never
was part of the Dutch East Indies. We expectand are
sure that the affair of West Nuigini will not be
repeated in .East Timor.
*I’
:r
46. In accordance with international law.and with the
Charter of the United Nations and in order not to
contradict itself, this’ Council must call upon the
Government of Indonesia to withdraw immediately and
unconditionally all its forces from the Territory and

to cease the air and naval blockade of East Timor.
My Government urges the visit to East Timor of
another fact-finding mission composed of members of
the .Security Coun$il to ensure the implementation of
the previous resolutions of the United Nations.
Further, the Council must call on the Government of
Indonesia and the. Governments of other States to
facilitate the entry into the Territory of the intemational press, observers and aid and* relief personnel
immediately. Only after such a situation has, been
achieved will there be a real possibility for the people
of East Timor to determine their own political and
economic systems. My Government will co-operate
fully with the United Nations and will be willing to
start bilateral or multilateral dialogue once the Indonesian armed forces have withdrawn totally from the
Territory.
The meeting

rose at 12.30 p.m.
Note

’ offirial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda ,item 98, document A/7723, annex I,
paras. 250 and 251.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, gales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans lea librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
ICAIC

IlOJIYVIlTh

Haaau~a

EI3AAHIIR

Oprannsaunw

OPl-AHH3AIlHlf

O~-MAHX~HH~IX
BO acex
pafiOHaX

amax

H aremcTrsax

sameaa

KHHW(HOM

rdararwne

Haqnfi,

C!~K~HR

no npogaxcte

COMO

CONSEGUIR

mn

nmmme

KQatniR,

PUBLICACIONES

OKbEAHHEHHhIX
Haqdi

NIOXKHO

~ynnrb

HAUHH
B KHHXHLIX

Mwpa. HaBOAHTe
CnpaaKH
no aapecy:
OpraHnJaunR
Hbm-EIopK

Mara-

06 HSAaHnRX
06CbeAWHeHHblX

n

HUH XeHeBa.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esmn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

I

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

8360801-August

1984-2.200
