TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 8 AUGUST 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1495) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , , . . . . , . . , , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of Chile, Colombia, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey,
Yugoslavia and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9359)
,...........,..,...,........,...............I

1

S/PV. 1495

FOURTEEN IWNDRED AND NINETY-FIFTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 0 August 1969, at 10.30 a.m.
President: Mr. J. DE PINIES (Spain).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socials
ist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l495)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia
Letter dated 24 July 1969 from the representatives of
Chile, Colombia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the United Arab Republic, Turkey, Yugoslavia and
Zambia addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9359)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Spanish): In accordance with the earlier decision of the Council, I now invite
the representatives of Chile and India to take places at the
Council table,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. PiEera (Chile) and
Mr. Sen (India) took places at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Counwill now continue its consideration of the question Of
Na.mibia.
cil

3. The first speaker on my list is the representativeof
Hungary, on whom I now call.
4. Mr. TARDOS (Hungary): Mr. President, first of all I
should like to extend to you my delegation’scongratulations on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I assureyou that the
Hungarian delegationwill fully co-operatewith you.

5. At the same time, I should like to pay a tribute to
AmbassadorBoye of Senegalfor the excellent manner in
which he presidedover our deliberationshere, aswell asour
informal consultations,last month.
6. Once againthe Security Council hasto discussa serious
matter: the situation in Namibia.Only four monthsagothis
body examined this question and adopted a resolution
[264 (1969)] callingupon the Government of South Africa
to withdraw its administration from Namibia and to desist
from the creation and the establishmentof Bantustans.
7. In answerto the resolution of the Security Council the
Government of South Africa hastaken fresh measures
with
a view to establishingthe so-called“homeland” systemand
has put another eight Namibians on trial under South
Africa’s Terrorism and Suppressionof CommunismActs.
8. As we all know, more than two years agothe General
Assembly terminated the Mandate of South Africa over the
Territory of South WestAfrica, asit wascalledat that time.
Since the adoption of General Assembly resolution
2145 (XXI), the General Assembly and the Security Council have severaltimes beencompelledto face the deteriorating situation in Namibia. Ignoring the clear-cut decision of
the world Organization, and disregardingworld public
opinion, the Government of South Africa hasbeen intensifying its suppressiveacts and its full-fledged policy of
colonial arbitrariness,apartheid and racial discrimination
againstthe peopleof Namibia. The Pretoria authorities have
been going on with the forced implementation of their
inhuman plans aimedat dividing that country, contrary to
the interest and the will of the Namibianpeople,
9. The latest events in Namibia-the open violation of
Security Council resolution 264 (1969)-show how far the
South African colonizers dare go. Not only has the
Government of South Africa failed to meet its international
obligation under the Charter of the United Nations, but by
its tenacious attitude and its stubborn refusal to abide by
the resolutions of the world Organization, the Pretoria
r&me hasdeclaredpolitical war on the United Nations.
10. Alone, South Africa could not be successfulin
pursuing a colonial war against the people of Africa and
defying all the resolutionsof the United Nations. The facts
and experiences of the recent debates on Namibia,
Southern Rhodesia,and the Portugueseaggression
against
Zambia have proved that in the southern part of Africa a
military and POliticdl
triangle has been set up by South
Africa, Southern Rhodesiaand Portugal. The membersof
that alliance carry out co-ordinated punitive operations

6 August. We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for having
eloquently expressed our own feelings about U Thant.

against the African peoples, The substantial financial and
military assistance provided to South Africa by some major
Powers against the clearly expressed wish of the United
Nations shows convincingly the tragic line-up of forces
against the people of Africa.

18. I shall now turn to the item on our agenda. The series
of meetings being held by the Security Council to consider
the situation in Namibia was to be expected ever since the
Council adopted resolution 264 (1969) on 20 March 1969.
In operative paragraph 8 of that resolution, the Council
decided that, in the event of failure on the part of the
Government of South Africa to comply with their provisions of that resolution, the Council would meet again
immediately to determine upon necessary steps or measures
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations. Familiar with the tradition established
by the Government of South Africa in its reaction to the
decisions adopted by both the General Assembly and the
Security Council, we knew that it would once more
disregard the request addressed to it by the Council and
that sooner or later-and more likely sooner than later-we
should therefore have to meet again to consider what new
steps should be taken to ensure that South Africa withdraws its administration from Namibia, an administration
which has become illegal since the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI).

Il. The Government of South Africa must bear full
responsibility for the grave situation in Namibia, but all
those countries which have provided direct or indirect
support to Pretoria, helping its policy in contravention of
international law and the United Nations Charter, have to
share the grave responsibility for the deteriorating situation
in that Territory.
12. It is the clear policy of my Government to use every
available means to promote the total and definitive elimination of the colonial system, The representatives of Hungary
in all international organizations of which my country is a
member are always mindful of the letter and the spirit of
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and strive for its
implementation. My delegation here is ready to vote for a
resolution which would force-I emphasize the word
“force’‘-the
Pretoria Government to implement the United
Nations resolution on Namibia.
13. At the same time, my delegation is aware of the fact
that South Africa can defy United Nations resolutions
because of the assistance given to it by its Western allies.
Therefore my delegation urges all members of the Security
Council to harmonize their deeds outside the United
Nations with their statements made within it concerning
their attitude toward South Africa.

19. Undoubtedly, the main significance of Security Council resolution 264 (1969) is the express recognition of the
fact that the General Assembly considered the Mandate
exercised by South Africa over Namibia as terminated and
that the Assembly had assumed direct responsibility for the
Territory until its independence. All the other provisions of
resolution 264 (1969) have their legal basis in that recognition.

14. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
express special thanks to the representative of Hungary for
the kind words he has addressed to me.

20. Our position in this matter is well known, since it has
been set forth on many occasions. I think it will be
sufficient to say now that resolution 264 (1969) and the
two previous resolutions adopted in 1968 had our firm
support and vote. The purpose of this debate is to consider
what measures the Security Council can take to bring about
compliance with resolution 264 (1969). We must add, with
deep and sincere concern, that in the time which has
elapsed since the adoption of that resolution the Govemment of South Africa has not only disregarded the request
addressed to it but has aggravated an already serious
situation by endorsing and applying other measures designed to consolidate its illegal occupation of the territory
of Namibia and to create new and greater obstacles to
prevent the people of Namibia from exercising their
legitimate right to self-determination.

15. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish]: Mr. President, first of all I should like to welcome
you
with great pleasure as President of the Security
Council. We are quite sure that, in view of the country
which you represent and your outstanding personal qualities, particularly your talent, tact and diplomatic, experience, we have the best guarantee that you will guide our
deliberations with the greatest success and impartiality. In
expressing these feelings, I wish to reiterate that, in the
discharge of your difficult duties, you will receive the
fullest co-operation from my delegation,
16. I should also like, through you, to ask the representative of Senegal to transmit to Ambassador Boye, our
President during the month of July-a month marked by
intense activity on the part of the Council-our gratitude
for the work which he performed with outstanding efficiency and which was, of course, crowned by well-deserved
success.

‘!

17. With regard to the resumption of duties of our
respected Secretary-General, I note that since the day
before yesterday he has again occupied his seat in this
Council, having completely recovered from the illness
which kept him away for the last few weeks. I am pleased
to endorse the words which you, Mr, President, addressed
to him on behalf of us all at the 1494th meeting on
2

21. The real task facing the Council is to decide on the
nature and scope of the new measures to be adopted, in
conformity with the spirit and letter of resolution 264
(1969), to ensure that this resolution is fully implemented.
We are not unaware of political realities; nor could we
disregard them even if we wished. Those political realities
mean that, for the time being, the courses of action open to
US are necessarily limited. We may recall, in passing, that
the opinions and the influence not only of a considerable
number of members of the Council but of the large
majority of the States Members of the United Nations have
on the whole IittIe effect on the conduct of the Government of South Africa. On the other hand, the influence of a

smal1 number of Powers would, if exerted fully and in
accordance with the decisions of the United Nations, be
really effective in the exact sense of the word.

30. The Security Councilhason three previousoccasions
dealt with the questionof Namibia.Twice in 1968it was
called upon to intervenein the caseof Namibianscharged
with acts of terrorism. It was not until March this year,
however, that the Security Council took it upon itself to
pronounceupon the basicissueinvolvedin this question.In
resolution264 (1969) it decIaredthat:

22. Moreover, we should not forget that each new
resolution adopted must add new positive elements to the
previous ones and must necessarily be more forceful than
those which preceded it, while preserving as far as possible
the general agreement concerning Namibia which has so far
existed in this Council. On this last point, however, we
must admit that one cannot wait indefinitely and that the
people of Namibia have been waiting a very long time to
exercise their undeniable right to determine their own
national destiny, free from any kind of oppression and any
kind of trammels such as those imposed on them forcibly
by the Government of South Africa.

“

. . . the continuedpresenceof SouthAfrica in Namibia
is illegaland contrary to the principlesof the Charterand
the previous decisionsof the United Nations and is
detrimental to the interests of the population of the
Territory andthoseof the internationalcommunity;“.
Therefore it called upon South Africa to withdraw immediatelyfrom Namibia.

23. When I express these ideas I am hopeful and my hope
is that expressed by the representative of Zambia at the
1492nd meeting, to the effect that during this debate we
shall be offered: “, , . a more attractive alternative which
should inescapably and effectively be aimed at compelling
South Africa to comply with the General Assembly and
Security Council decisions relative to Namibia”.

31. If, as has beensaid, it wastoo much to expect the
Government of South Africa to withdraw immediately
from the Territory, it wascertainly not too much to hope
that the Government of South Africa would show some
deferenceto world opinion and at least meet the United
Nations half way. But that has not been the case.The
Government of South Africa not only has refused to
comply with the provisonsof resolution264 (1969) but has
actually challengedthe right of the Security Council to
concernitself with the Namibiaquestionat all.

24. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish
especially to thank the representative of Paraguay for the
kind words he addressed to me at the beginning of his
statement.

32. It was in the light of South Africa’s defianceand
nonco-operation that the elevenmembersof the Council
for Namibia requestedan urgent meetingof the Security
Council. Over fifty Afro-Asian Membersof the United
Nations have sinceassociatedthemselves
with the request
for urgent action by the Security Councilto deal with the
dangerous
situationin Namibia.

25. Mr. C. M. CHANG (China): Mr, President, permit me
on behalf of my delegation to extend to you our warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the Presidency of
the Security Council for the current month.
‘26. I wish also to express my delegation’s appreciation for
the effectiveness and skill with which Ambassador Boye of
Senegal guided the Council’s deliberations during the
eventful month of July,

u’33. That the continuedillegal occupationof Namibiaby
South Africa must be brought to an end is a matter on
which there has been virtual unanimity of opinion. But
there has been wide disagreement
on the questionof how
27. A little less than three years ago the General Assembly
the United Nations can best dischargeits responsibilities
took it upon itself to make a historic decision on the future
toward Namibia. On the one hand there are those who
of South West Africa, which has since come to be known as believethat only by resoluteaction by the Security Council
Namibia.
under the provisionsof ChapterVII of the Chartercanthe
Government of South Africa be forced to bow to the
authority of the United Nations.On the other hand there
28. In a resolution [2145 (XXI)/ supported by an overare those who counselcaution, believing,asthey do, that
whelming majority
of Member States of the United
the United Nations should never be saddledwith tasks
Nations, the GeneralAssembly terminated South Africa’s
beyond its capability or beyond what the realities will
Mandate over Namibiaand brought the Territory under the
direct responsibility of this Organization. My delegation allow.
voted for the resolution and expressedthe hope that the
34. The Security Council is thus faced with a most
Government of South Africa would find it in its own
difficult problem. Should economicsanctionsbe applied
interest to co-operate with the United Nations so as to
againstSouth Africa in order to convincethat Government
enable Namibia, the only remaining Territory of the
that unlessit comesto termswith the United Nationsit will
formerly Mandated Territories of Africa, to achieveindependentstatehoodin a peacefuland orderly way.
have no economic future? Or should this Council be
content with other procedureswhich are lessdrastic but
29. The Government of South Africa, however, has which commandthe greatestsupport?
refused to recognize the validity of General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI). The United Nations Council for Q’35. The Council is, of course, aware that mandatory
economicsanctionscannotbe effective without the full and
Namibia, established to administer the Territory until
independence, has not been able to dischargethe tasks whole-heartedsupport of thoseWesternPowersthat are in
a special position
to make significant contributions to
entrusted to it by GeneralAssembly resolution 2248 (S-V)
enforcementaction. Without their co-operationno enforceof 19 May 1967.
3

ment action can be effective. In the present case it is all too
obvious that such co-operation is not forthcoming. In such
circumstances the Council, should it decide to apply
mandatory economic sanctions, runs the risk of raising
hopes it cannot fulfil. That is a point that, I believe, we
may do well to ponder.

43. We have, however, been obliged to expressdoubts
about certain initiatives of the GeneralAssembly.However
generousthe feelingswhich motivated the Assembly,my
delegationcould not, in particular, concealits reservations
about resolution 2145(XXI), which in our view is legally
unsoundand could clearly not be implemented.In March
1969,when the Council wasaskedto deal with a problem
whose solution still seemedas far away as ever, my
delegationexpressedthe hope that this body, havinglearnt
from experienceand being well aware of the limits of its
possibleaction, would refrain from embarkingin its turn
upon a coursewhich would obviously leadnowhere.

36. My delegation, however, has consistently upheld the
inalienable right of the people of Namibia to freedom and
independence. We are ready to lend our support to any
constructive and effective proposal best calculated to bring
that about.
37, The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I wish to
thank the representative of China for the very kind words
he addressed to me.

44. In thesecircumstances,France had to abstainin the
vote on resolution264 (1969) of 20 March 1969.It may be
worth mentioningin this connexionthat this resolutionwas
not adoptedunanimously.Perhapsit may alsobe in order
to stressthat, although a majority supportedthis resolution, even at the time of the vote it appearedthat
somewhatdiffering views had been expressedabout the
practical measures
which could betaken for its implementation in the likely event that the Pretoria Government
refusedto comply.

38. Mr. CHAYET (France) (translated from F’rench):
Mr. President, may I be allowed, first of all, to tell you how
pleased my delegation is to see you, the representative of a
neighbouring country, presiding over our work. You may
rest assured of our fullest co-operation, especially as, for a
very long time now, the Pyrenees have no longer existed
between our countries.
39. I should also like to ask my colleague, the representative of Senegal, to be so good as to transmit to
Ambassador Boye our warm and friendly thanks for the
perfect way in which he discharged his onerous duties last
month.

45. Since then, the situation hashardly developedas the
international community could wish. While renewingtheir
offer to receive a representative of the SecretaryGeneral-on their own terms, it is true-the South African
authorities have, in their letter of 30 April 1969, maitrtained the position which they had already stated on 27
March 1968.

40. Finally, like my colleagues, I was glad to see the
Secretary-General, now completely restored to health,
resume his duties.

46. Moreover, the present trial at Windhoek of eight
inhabitants of the Territory, charged under the highly
questionableTerrorism Act, is a sad echo of the Pretoria
trial which, a year ago, led the Council to adopt unaaimouslyresolutions245 and 246 (1968).

41. I now turn to the item on our agenda. The situation to
which the members of the United Nations Council for
Namibia have drawn the attention of the President of the
Security Council is well known to all of us. It has been
raised at every session of the General Assembly for over
twenty years. Moreover, this Council examined it in detail
barely four months ago. On that occasion (1464th meeting/, the French delegationstatedits position at length.

47. Furthermore, there are consistent reports that the
initiatives of our Organizationare arousinggrowingscepticismin Africa amongthe mostpolitically involved elements
of the population.

42. My delegationhasalwaysconsideredthat it is the duty
of South Africa to ensurethe materialand moral welfare of
the peopleentrustedto it by the Leagueof Nations and to
promote the evolution which will lead them towards the
exerciseof their right to self-determination.Consequently,
we have on many occasionsexpressedour disapproval of
the extension to a territory with international status of a
discriminatory and repressivepolicy which is contrary to
the spirit of the Mandate and towards which France has
always been ill-disposed.My delegationhas been equally
clear in expressingits oppositionto any initiative by the
Pretoria Government aimed at dividing the Territory,
againstthe will of its inhabitants,or incorporating it in the
Republic of South Africa. Aware of the responsibility
which rests with the United Nations in this matter, my
delegation has, as stated in’ the General Assembly on
7 October 1968 by the FrenchMinister for Foreign Affairs,
always been: “, . . ready to take part in the searchfor any
solution likely to restore the rights and dignity of the
peopleswho havefor too long beendeniedthem.“1

48. My delegation does not think such scepticismis
justified. Weconsiderthat the United Nationscanandmust
contribute effectively to the solution of the problemwhich
is once againbefore us. It would be advisable,however,for
the United Nations to take a realisticview of the situation
and suit its actions to its possibilities,Our presentdebate
would be fruitful if it could guide our stepstowardsthis
modestbut reasonable
course.
49. These considerationswill determinemy delegation’s
positionon anytexts to be submittedto the Council.
50. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):I thank
the representativeof France for the kind words he has
spokenabout mein his statement.
51. Following consultations with the membersof the
Council and if no other representativewishesto speak,1
shalladjourn the meeting.The next meetingof the Council
will beheld on Monday, 11August, at 3 p.m.

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third

Session,
PlenaryMeetiilgs,1683rdmeeting,

The meetingroseat 12.40 p.m.
4
