United Nations

S/PV.5980

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5980th meeting
Wednesday, 24 September 2008, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yoda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. De Gucht
Mr. Du Xiacong
Mr. Ballestero
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Kouchner
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-51755 (E)

*0851755*

S/PV.5980

The meeting was called to order at 2.45 p.m.
Expression of welcome to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Belgium and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of France
The President (spoke in French): At the outset of
the meeting, I should like to acknowledge the presence
at the Council table of His Excellency Mr. Karel de
Gucht, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, and of
His Excellency Mr. Bernard Kouchner, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France. On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend a warm welcome to them.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (S/2008/601 and Add.1)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Chad, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Javier Solana,
High Representative of the European Union.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative of the European Union, and invite him
to take a seat at the Council table.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
documents S/2008/601 and Addendum 1, which
contain the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad.
I now give the floor to Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative of the European Union.
Mr. Solana (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to be here this afternoon, and I thank
you, Mr. President, for the invitation. My greetings go
to all members of the Security Council and, in
particular, to Mr. Bernard Kouchner, whose country
currently holds the presidency of the Council of the
European Union.
Under the mandate issued by the Security
Council, the European Union-led military force in
Chad and the Central African Republic (EUFOR) has
been deployed for six months. Today there are more
than 3,300 troops on the ground. During this period,
EUFOR has deployed a powerful and mobile force in a
theatre far from Europe and difficult to reach. EUFOR
has been patrolling a particularly extensive area; it has
put in place protective measures for humanitarian
organizations,
which
have
clearly
improved
humanitarian access. EUFOR has lend its support to
the ongoing deployment of United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT),
and I can say that cooperation between EUFOR and
MINURCAT is exemplary, and we welcome that.
All of this has taken place with the full
cooperation of the authorities of Chad and the Central
African Republic, and with full transparency vis-à-vis
all countries of the region. The presence of EUFOR has
undoubtedly contributed to stabilizing eastern Chad
and the northern Central African Republic.
Humanitarian personnel attest to that, as do refugees
and internally displaced persons. Returns are under
way as well; that is certainly encouraging.
The presence of EUFOR has helped to ease
regional tensions; that is key, because what happens in
Chad and the Central African Republic is linked to
what happens in Darfur, and vice versa. Ongoing
political efforts between Chad and the Sudan are on the

08-51755

S/PV.5980

right track. Those efforts must be pursued and
consolidated.
For now, the situation is calm, but it remains
fragile. EUFOR will depart, as announced, on
15 March 2009. Our concern is to avoid a security
vacuum on that date.
For those reasons, at the time of the midterm
review which brings us together today, I believe it is of
fundamental importance to stress three points: first, the
vital need for an appropriate handover for EUFOR by
the United Nations on 15 March 2009; secondly, it is
necessary for this handover to encompass both Chad
and the Central African Republic, because the two
situations are geopolitically linked; and thirdly, a
prompt Security Council decision is needed, making
possible timely planning by the United Nations. We
will do all we can to assist the United Nations in all
areas to ensure that the transition is successful.
The handover will not mark the end of the
European Union commitment in the region. The
European Union will continue to be an active player
with respect to Darfur, which I hope will ultimately
enable refugees to return to their homes. The European
Union will contribute to the financing of the Chadian
Détachement intégré de sécurité, whose members have
been and will continue to be trained by MINURCAT.
The Union will also contribute to the economic and
social reconstruction programme in eastern Chad,
which, along with a secure environment, will facilitate
the return of displaced persons to their homes.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Solana for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to Council members
wishing to make comments or ask questions in
response to the briefing we have just heard.
Mr. Kouchner (France) (spoke in French): I
greet all my colleagues seated here around the table. I
would like in particular to welcome my former foreign
ministerial colleague, the Permanent Representative of
Chad to the United Nations, since, as the High
Representative of the European Union has just told us,
nothing would be accomplished without the
participation of the Africans. Nothing would be done or
would have been done without the participation and the
agreement of Chad, of course, but also of the entire
African Union.

08-51755

It has not been easy to make it clear that the
people of eastern Chad demand security. So I thank
Javier Solana and I am very pleased that the action of
the European Union-led military force in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR) has been described
here, as this is the largest autonomous military
operation ever deployed by Europe. EUFOR in Chad
and in the Central African Republic symbolizes, to my
mind, the European Union contribution to United
Nations action, first and foremost.
But I know that this is not the first time that
Europeans have committed themselves alongside the
United Nations in Africa. I recall that, in 2003 and
2006, the European Union was also deployed in the
context of its Common Foreign and Security Policy
and its Common Security and Defence Policy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; let us recall that
fact. And the outcome was positive.
By taking the initiative last year of adopting
resolution 1778 (2007), we wanted to provide a
response to the regional dimension of the Darfur crisis
as a complement, of course, to the actions undertaken
by the United Nations and the African Union in Darfur
itself, and in fact on the other side of the border. This
EUFOR operation is working smoothly, and I thank
Mr. Solana for pointing that out. But it is not going as
smoothly as we had expected, since we had thought
that on the other side of the border, in the Sudan, a
hybrid force would be deployed: in an African UnionUnited Nations force that would have been a
counterpart to EUFOR, which would have provided
complete security to the population — to more than a
million persons — refugees, displaced persons and
Chadian populations within Chad.
Eastern Chad and the north-western Central
African Republic need both protection and
humanitarian assistance. But they will never have that
in full if, on the other side of the border, a similar force
is not deployed to contain the rebellion that is spilling
over to both sides of the border.
Thanks to the commitment of the numerous
countries that have contributed to this operation,
EUFOR is fulfilling its role effectively, and the
European mission has been able to provide security to
this zone. And there is no need for me to recall the
recent incidents that resulted in deaths.
The non-governmental organizations and the
United Nations agencies also welcome the presence of

3

S/PV.5980

the European forces, as they can attest. We have always
played our role by deploying rapidly more than 3,000
troops. Moreover, the operation has also been
appreciated
by
the
great
non-governmental
organization Oxfam, which recently reported that
EUFOR has made numerous refugees and displaced
peoples feel safer and has been able to act in an
impartial manner, which was far from easy to do.

voluntary basis, of course. I understand that a first
timid movement has taken place: a few thousand
individuals have started to return to the areas they were
forced to flee because of the violence. EUFOR only
makes sense if there is an effort at development and if
the non-governmental organizations are sufficiently
safe to allow for the rebuilding of villages. That is
what is essential.

However, despite EUFOR’s small successes,
there is a persistent lack of security, which is fed by the
lack of a sustainable political solution and by the
difficulties encountered in the deployment of an
operational police force. I apologize for emphasizing
this point, but there has to be an operational police
component, in particular in order to provide security
for the refugee camps and the areas surrounding them.
I referred earlier to displaced persons in Chad, but
there are also refugees. They benefit, of course, from
the support provided by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, but these
people still lack security.

Once these steps are undertaken, and once the
rainy season is over, the efforts at rebuilding and
assistance to the civilian population must be expedited,
thanks in particular to financing from the European
Commission, which is something that we and
Mr. Solana have underscored. We must maintain a
sufficient level of security in the areas of return.

The activities on the ground of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) and the Chadian Détachement
intégré de sécurité provided for in resolution 1778
(2007) are indispensable in order to improve security
for the civilian population.
I am adamant: without that, we will never be
truly satisfied, and the local populations will continue
to live through a time of insecurity. Anyone who has
visited the camps would know that women are unable
to leave the camps without being attacked just
100 metres away. To search for water is a huge trial
that they risk their lives to undertake. The danger has
abated in some places, but it is not enough.
As Mr. da Silva Angelo indicated to the Council
last week (see S/PV.5976), acceleration of the
deployment of MINURCAT and the Détachement
intégré de sécurité is crucial and urgent. I know that I
am pressing hard on this point, but I assure the Council
that it is necessary. The adoption later today of the
draft resolution renewing MINURCAT’s mandate is of
course important and necessary, and my country fully
supports it.
The international community must remain
engaged, in particular to lend its support, as
emphasized by Javier Solana, to the return of displaced
persons under the best possible conditions, and on a

4

In accordance with the guidance of resolution
1778 (2007), the Europeans are in favour of the
replacement of EUFOR by a United Nations force in
March 2009. We thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2008/601), which closely examines the
possible options for this takeover. As Mr. Solana
indicated, we must do everything we can to prevent a
security vacuum in the area.
The transfer of authority from EUFOR to a
United Nations force must take place in good
conditions. Otherwise, we will have to start again from
scratch. So the transfer must take place in the best
possible circumstances and at the time of the expiry of
the European Union force. Any option that would
postpone this transition would endanger the people
whom we have sought to protect and whom we have
succeeded in protecting. Therefore, we welcome
agreement that has been reached among Security
Council members to express, in a resolution renewing
MINURCAT’s mandate, their intention to deploy a
United Nations force to take over from EUFOR, the
mandate of which will be decided upon by
15 December.
To conclude, the Secretary-General should now
start planning for this force, which we believe should
be deployed both in Chad and in the Central African
Republic, whose modalities and the size of whose
components will have to be carefully studied. It must
be capable of meeting the challenges that are faced
every day as a result of crime. That is what we will
implement in Chad and in the Central African
Republic. It is in the spirit of fulfilling our
responsibility to protect, an old notion that has been

08-51755

S/PV.5980

somewhat forgotten with which the Council is well
acquainted. In the spirit of this responsibility to
protect, in situations where the civilian population is
threatened and exposed to violence, we are committed
to providing support on the ground at the request of
States, who of course still bear the primary
responsibility for protecting their populations.
Mr. de Gucht (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium’s commitment to the European Union-led
military force in Chad and the Central African
Republic (EUFOR) has been constant and demonstrates
our concern for security and the humanitarian situation
in this area. We have been contributing about
100 personnel to the European mission since the
beginning of its deployment to Chad and the Central
African Republic. While the presence of EUFOR and
the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) is slowly beginning
to bear fruit, the security situation has not yet changed
fundamentally, and a multidimensional presence will
remain necessary beyond 15 March 2009. EUFOR,
whose mandate expires on that date, was always
intended to be transitional mission, and we are
preparing for its replacement by a United Nations
military force as part of a strengthening of
MINURCAT. I welcome the fact that that the Chadian
authorities agree with that reasoning and with the
deployment of a United Nations force. It is important
that the planning for such a United Nations force begin
immediately to permit an effective transfer of authority
on 15 March 2009. In our view, the force will have to
replace EUFOR both in Chad and in the north-eastern
part of the Central African Republic, where EUFOR
has deployed 200 personnel.
The future component of MINURCAT in the
Central African Republic will not necessarily be very
much larger, but it could prevent a security vacuum as
long as Central African armed forces are unable to
undertake security tasks on their own. It will thus be
essential to permit efforts to support the security
sector — particularly those carried out by the
Peacebuilding Commission — to succeed.
More basically, no military force will be able to
ensure long-term security if the political context
causing the lack of security does not change. For that
reason, the international community must also think
about the root causes of the lack of security. We must
further strengthen our efforts to normalize the relations
between the Sudan and Chad, resolve the Darfur crisis,

08-51755

support national dialogues in Chad and the Central
African Republic and facilitate a dialogue between the
Chadian authorities and armed groups in Chad, which
must lay down their weapons and express their
grievances in ways other than violence.
My delegation believes it would be useful to
consider the possibility of giving the United Nations a
clearer mandate to help find solutions at the political
level so that our efforts in the region will have lasting
effects. Such a commitment could take a variety of
forms, but it must be an element of our debates in the
coming months.
Ms. DiCarlo (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I would like to thank High
Representative Solana for his briefing.
We greatly appreciate the efforts of the European
Union to provide a safe and secure environment in
which the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) can operate.
The European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
has provided invaluable security protection to refugees,
internally displaced persons (IDPs) and assistance
workers. EUFOR personnel have performed their jobs
admirably under very difficult circumstances. We
recognize their contributions and ask Mr. Solana to
convey to them our deepest gratitude for their efforts.
EUFOR member States have some of the finest
and most experienced troops in the world, who have
gained unique experience over the past six months
while deployed to the region. The proposed follow-on
United Nations force would, of course, profit
immensely from the continued participation of veterans
of the EUFOR deployment. We are very happy to note
that some EUFOR member States have expressed
interest in participating in the proposed follow-on
United Nations force.
We remain very concerned about the continuing
political, military and security volatility in the region,
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report of
12 September (S/2008/601). In particular, we are
deeply troubled that internally displaced persons and
refugees in Chad and the Central African Republic
continue to suffer owing to political instability and
general lawlessness and that Sudanese rebel
movements continue to recruit from refugee camps in
eastern Chad. A follow-on United Nations force must
build upon the EUFOR effort and develop the capacity
to protect those vulnerable populations.

5

S/PV.5980

The United States continues to support the
presence of MINURCAT in the Central African
Republic. In the Central African Republic, nearly
25,000 IDPs, refugees and humanitarian aid workers
are subject to criminal attacks and increasing banditry.
We believe that a United Nations military presence is
needed in that country to prevent insecurity that could
potentially harm those populations.
We note that a well-trained and well-equipped
security force must be in place prior to EUFOR’s
withdrawal next March. There must be a transition
period of sufficient duration and with sufficient
interaction between the departing and arriving forces.
We hope that EUFOR facilities will be transferred to
the United Nations, as that would help with
deployment in a timely manner.
The armed struggle within Chad continues. We
strongly encourage all parties to work diligently
towards full implementation of the Dakar Agreement
and of all existing peace agreements. We commend the
efforts by the Contact Group, and particularly the
Government of Libya, for their work to support a
comprehensive peace between Chad and the Sudan. We
emphasize, as stated in the draft resolution before the
Council today, that a proper settlement of the Darfur
issue and an improvement in the relations between the
Sudan, Chad and the Central African Republic would
contribute to long-term peace and stability in the
region.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Solana, High
Representative of the European Union, for his biannual
briefing on the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) and the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Chad for being with us this afternoon.
(spoke in English)
Italy welcomes the full deployment of the
European Union operation and the results that have
already been achieved in terms of increased security
and better protection of the local population and the
humanitarian community. Italy is proud to be part of
EUFOR in Chad and the Central African Republic,
with a field hospital located in Abéché, which serves
the whole mission as well as the people of the
neighbouring villages. On the occasion of the Security
Council’s visit last June, I personally had the privilege
of visiting the hospital and its technological structures,
which meet the highest standards. I personally

6

witnessed the presence there of one EUFOR patient
and seven Chadian patients from the surrounding
villages.
Coming back to the main subject: we have noted
that, despite the efforts of the international community,
the security situation remains volatile, and only a
limited number of returns have taken place. I welcome
the establishment by the European Commission of
programmes to encourage the voluntary return of
internally displaced persons.
I also welcome the reported progress in the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and
its activities in support of the local gendarmerie. Once
again, I wish to note the very good cooperation that the
United Nations and the European Union have
established, which reflects the strong added value of
the increasing coordination between the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of peace
and security. We see Chad and the Central African
Republic as an important test case of our collective
ability to maximize the impact of, and ensure
coherence among, various actors and instruments.
We will shortly adopt the draft resolution
prepared by France — which I wish to thank — to
renew the mandate of MINURCAT. We look forward to
an update by the Secretary-General on his planning for
a smooth and timely takeover from EUFOR, including
the size, mandate and structure of the new force.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Burkina Faso.
I should like to thank Mr. Javier Solana for
having briefed the Security Council on the activities of
the European Union military operation in Chad and the
Central African Republic. The information that he
provided is all the more important and useful because
the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) is coming to an end on 15 March 2009.
In that regard, the Council must be proactive and find
the means to capitalize on EUFOR’s accomplishments
at a time when the political and security situation
remains worrisome in Chad, the Central African
Republic and the entire subregion.
We should like to commend the partnership that
EUFOR has established with the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad

08-51755

S/PV.5980

(MINURCAT) under the mandate entrusted to it in
resolution 1778 (2007). For this partnership to bear
fruit, it is necessary and urgent to ensure the effective
deployment of MINURCAT in order to adequately
respond to the increasingly precarious security and
humanitarian situation in eastern Chad and the northeastern Central African Republic.
We look forward with interest to the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment of the possible options for the
size, structure and mandate of the United Nations
military presence aimed at strengthening EUFOR.

To conclude, we thank once again all the
countries contributing contingents to EUFOR and we
urge them to continue their support to Chad and the
Central African Republic in order to restore lasting
peace and stability there.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 3.10 p.m.

08-51755

7
