S/PRST/2005/35

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 July 2005
English
Original: French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5232nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 22 July 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Central African Republic”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council heard a briefing by the Representative of the
Secretary-General, General Lamine Cissé, on the situation in the Central
African Republic and the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA). It reiterated its
full support for the action of the Representative of the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council is deeply gratified by the successful holding of the
presidential and legislative elections and welcomes the establishment of the
newly elected institutions whose stability is necessary to ensure lasting peace
in the Central African Republic.
“The Security Council acknowledges the efforts by the Central African
defence and security forces to guarantee satisfactory security conditions during
the electoral process, and commends the Multinational Force of the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community (FOMUC), France, the European
Union, China and Germany for providing decisive support to them.
“The Security Council appreciates the vital role played in the process by
FOMUC to date, and expresses its support for continuing efforts by FOMUC
to back the consolidation of the constitutional order, which has thus been reestablished, and the rebuilding of the rule of law. In this regard, it welcomes
the decision of the States of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community to extend the mandate of FOMUC.
“The Security Council invites the Government of the Central African
Republic, and all the political and social forces, to consolidate the national
dialogue and to ensure national reconciliation with a view to achieving
sustainable development in their country.
“The Security Council calls upon international donors and the
international financial institutions to continue to assist the Central African
Republic generously. It emphasizes that their support will be indispensable for
the country’s economic and social recovery and encourages them to formulate
in close consultation with the United Nations system and the Government of
the Central African Republic a concerted development strategy.
05-43573 (E) 220705

*0543573*

S/PRST/2005/35

“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to explore in close
consultation with the authorities of the Central African Republic and the
country’s development partners the possibility of setting up a follow-up
committee or enlarging the Committee of Foreign Partners to Follow Up on
the Electoral Process in order to support the reconstruction efforts initiated by
the Central Africans. It invites the Secretary-General to report to it on his
consultations through his Representative in the Central African Republic, no
later than 31 October 2005.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the insecurity reigning in
the north and the west of the country owing to the presence of armed groups in
these regions and invites relevant States to consult with subregional and
regional organizations and with the United Nations Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA) on the action required to respond
collectively to the threat posed by these armed groups to the stability of the
Central African Republic and certain countries of the subregion.
“The Security Council expresses also its deep concern at the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic, in
particular in the north of the country. It calls upon the international community
to contribute generously to the humanitarian needs of the Central African
Republic.”

2
