S/2020/372

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a paper on the working methods of the
Security Council for the month of May 2020, during the presidency of Estonia (see
annex). The paper has been agreed upon by the members of the Council in the light
of the continued challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
to the Council’s usual procedures.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-06469 (E)

140520

*2006469*

S/2020/372

Annex
Working methods of the Security Council during the presidency of
Estonia, May 2020
1.
On 1 May 2020, Estonia assumed the presidency of a Security Council that
continues its work despite extraordinary circumstances.
2.
The restrictions currently imposed by the Governor of New York State in
relation to coronavirus disease (COVID-19) will be in place in New York until at least
15 May, and the Secretary-General has issued measures aimed at limiting the presence
of United Nations staff within the United Nations premises until 31 May 2020. The
limitations on holding large in-person meetings owing to the COVID-19 pandemic
are expected to be continued until the end of June 2020.
3.
After consultations with the Secretariat and all Council members, Estonia plans
to utilize the following guidelines, aimed at continuing the work of the Council to the
greatest extent possible, during the month of May.
4.
The present guidelines build upon and enhance the guidelines provided in the
letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Council addressed to the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Council (S/2020/253) and the letter
dated 2 April 2020 from the President of the Council addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council ( S/2020/273).
5.
The Council members have assessed the measures outlined in the letter dated
27 March 2020 (S/2020/253), and have agreed that the procedure for the adoption of
resolutions outlined in that letter will remain in place for the duration of the
restrictions on movement in New York owing to the COVID -19 pandemic, so as to
enable the Council to discharge its mandate. The implementation of the procedure
will be assessed at the end of May and may be reviewed, adjusted or discontinued,
subject to agreement among all members.
6.
The present guidelines are a response to the current exceptional and
unprecedented circumstances and will be revised, should circumstances change
during the course of the presidency of Estonia in May, in close consultation with all
Council members and in the light of updates to and developments in the COVID -19
pandemic.
Informal programme of work of the Council
7.
In the spirit of transparency, the presidency intends to issue an informal
programme of work after consultations with Council members during the first
working day of its presidency. The programme will include all the activities of the
Council, to be conducted mostly through video teleconference meetings or through a
written procedure for adoptions.
8.
The informal programme of work will be circulated by the Permanent Mission
of Estonia to the United Nations to the wider membership of the Organization and
published on the Council’s website, as well as on the website of the Permanent
Mission of Estonia.
Discussions
9.
The virtual discussions held during the presidency of Estonia will be designated
as “open video teleconference meeting on [item on the agenda to be discussed]” and
“closed video teleconference meeting on [item on the agenda to be discussed]”.

2/4

20-06469

S/2020/372

10. With the assistance of the Security Council Affairs Division, the presidency
plans to work in the spirit of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, ensuring
that all Council members participating in a virtual discussion are represented by
appropriately credentialled delegates, pursuant to rule 13; that the agenda is adopted
at the outset of the video teleconference meeting, pursuant to rule 9; and that any
other rules are observed, as appropriate, under chapter VI, entitled “Conduct of
business”.
11. The President of the Council may invite Member States, members of the
Secretariat or individuals who are not members of the Council to participate in an
open video teleconference, pursuant to rules 37 and 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
12. Until technical constraints are resolved, the video teleconference meetings will
be conducted in English.
Announcement of video teleconference meetings
13. The day before an event, the presidency of the Council will share with the wider
membership of the United Nations and the media, through email, a message from the
President of the Council announcing the video teleconference meeting. The
presidency will inform the public of the day’s programme through social media on
the day of the event, prior to the meeting(s).
14. Information on the daily agenda of the Council will also be available to the
wider membership and the general public in the programme of work on the Council’s
website.
Records of video teleconference meetings
15. Until the situation changes, verbatim records of the events will not be published.
Records and other information relating to the video teleconference meetings are
published on the Council’s website in the section entitled “VTCs of the Security
Council members and outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic (March-May
2020)”.
16. The presidency will encourage briefers, where appropriate and according to
their practice, to share their presentations with the presidency of the Council. Special
representatives of the Secretary-General, special envoys of the Secretary-General and
department heads may wish to publish their statements to the Council on the web page
of their mission or department on the United Nations web site.
17. The President of the Council will circulate as a document of the Council a
compilation document within 48 hours of the end of the meeting containing the
interventions of the briefers and those of the members and non -members of the
Council participating in the video teleconference meeting who ask for the inclusion
of their statement in the document. To that end, members and non -members of the
Council are invited to send their statements to the presidency as soon as possible, and
no later than the day of the meeting. Circulation of a compilation document will not
apply to the closed video teleconferences of Council members.
Live feed through United Nations webcast; participation of non-members
18. Open video teleconference meetings will be stream ed by United Nations
webcast in full. Closed video teleconference meetings will not be webcast.
19. United Nations Member States that are not members of the Council will be
invited by the presidency to submit written statements to be included as part of th e
compilation document for the following select open video teleconference meetings of
20-06469

3/4

S/2020/372

the Council on: working methods (15 May) and protection of civilians in armed
conflict (27 May). Non-members of the Council may be asked to deliver statements
orally during the above-mentioned meetings if it becomes technically feasible.
Recordings of open video teleconference meetings
20. In coordination with the Secretariat, the President requests that the webcasts of
the statements delivered during the open video teleconference meetings of the Council
continue to be made publicly available and archived as United Nations webcasts.
Outcomes of video teleconference briefings followed by video
teleconference consultations
21. To the extent possible, and in agreement with Council members, the presidency
will facilitate the negotiation of elements for the press for every Council discussion.
The President will orally deliver any agreed elements for the press through United
Nations webcast.
Adoption of resolutions
22. The presidency will apply the agreement reached by Council members under the
leadership of China as President of the Council for the month of March 2020 and
outlined in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Council addre ssed
to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Council with regard to the
written procedure for the adoption of resolutions, if necessary.
Presidential statements
23. In the absence of objections, the adoption of presidential statements th at have
been electronically agreed upon by consensus following a non-objection procedure of
no less than 24 hours will be announced by the President during an open video
teleconference meeting. The statements will have the same status as those adopted in
the Security Council Chamber. They will also be published as an official document
of the Council.
Conduct of video teleconference meetings by the members of the Council
24. In order to make the discussions as efficient as possible, the presidency reques ts
all participants to see to it that both principal and alternate delegates are logged in at
the same time, thereby ensuring that, if a principal’s connection is dropped, an
alternate can take his or her place immediately. The procedure will minimize the need
to suspend the event if participants lose their connection.
25. It is highly recommended that all principals, alternates and briefers test their
microphones and video equipment 30 minutes before the beginning of a video
teleconference, including by connecting through the links provided, and follow the
technical guidance provided by United Nations technicians.
26. Following general practice, the order of speakers for the video teleconference
meetings of Council members will be established by a draw.
Subsidiary organs of the Council
27. The presidency expresses its support for the continuation of the work of the
subsidiary organs of the Council, to the greatest possible extent.

4/4

20-06469
