S/PV.8908

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8908th meeting

Wednesday, 17 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez/Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu. . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Phan

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-34302 (E)
*2134302*

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Afghanistan,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan and Tajikistan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Deborah
Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, and Ms. Freshta Karim, Director
of Charmaghz.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Lyons.
Ms. Lyons: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity. I also thank Council members for the
opportunity to speak about Afghanistan at this very
critical time.
For the past 20 years, the needs of Afghanistan
have been discussed and acted on in the Chamber with
particular sympathy and generosity. But with the Taliban
takeover, the Afghan people now feel abandoned,
forgotten and indeed punished by circumstances that
are not their fault. To abandon the Afghan people now
would be a historic mistake — a mistake that has been
made before with tragic consequences.
I would like to begin by providing first a general
assessment of the de facto Taliban Administration,
based on our engagement with them in Kabul and the
provinces over the past three months. Let me highlight
that our formal interactions have been generally useful
and constructive. The de facto authorities have assured
us that they want a United Nations presence and value
our assistance. They continue to seek international
recognition, as well as ways to overcome the major
trust deficit that they recognize exists between them
and the international community.
In terms of governance, they have begun to raise
revenues from customs and have used some of those
2/24

17/11/2021

revenues to begin addressing pressing issues, such as
partially paying civil servant salaries. As well, the
Taliban continue to provide security to the United
Nations presence throughout the country and allow
broad humanitarian access, including for female
humanitarian workers. That changed security situation
has allowed us to visit parts of the country that we had
not visited in 15 years, providing vital assistance.
Be assured that we have not shied away from
raising difficult issues with the Taliban, particularly
on ethnic rights, women’s rights, girls’ education,
inclusivity and on reports we have heard of harassment
and extrajudicial killings. In general, they have
taken cognizance of those concerns and have often
acknowledged that they have made mistakes and are
trying to address them. However, they also make clear
that, for now, there are limits to concessions they are
willing to make on certain issues.
On girls’ education, the de facto authorities have
indicated that they are working on a nationwide policy so
that the right to girls’ education can be exercised across
the country, but they say that they need more time to
clarify the policy and its implementation. While the de
facto authorities had initially assured the protection of
women’s rights within Islamic law, including education,
there has been a general curtailment of Afghan women’s
and girls’ fundamental rights and freedoms. Those
range from limiting their right to work to the absence of
women from major decision-making forums and from
senior echelons of the civil service. It should be noted
that those policies are applied disparately around the
country, with some provinces becoming significantly
less restrictive than others.
We continue to call for a far more inclusive
administration in which Government institutions
reflect Afghanistan’s broad diversity. We have
seen limited progress on that issue, however. The
composition of the caretaker Cabinet — so called
by the Taliban themselves — remains entirely male,
essentially Pashtun and almost all Taliban. At both
the capital and provincial levels, recent appointments
continue to appear designed more to reward fighters
than to promote governance and inclusion.
Be assured also that we maintain close contacts as
well with other sectors of Afghan society around the
country, including media, former Government officials,
civil society, professionals and, most certainly, women’s
groups. Afghans in general remain apprehensive about
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

the future intentions of the Taliban de facto authority.
Those apprehensions mitigate some of the relief that has
come from the notable decline in conflict. The Afghan
population is of course hugely concerned about their
paralysed economy, the inability to withdraw money
and fears of not being able to feed themselves and their
children during the winter in the coming months.
There are also limitations on demonstrations and
other attempts at freedom of expression. Media outlets
continue to close, sometimes due to financial reasons
and sometimes due to ongoing restrictions by the de
facto authorities on the content of their publications
and broadcasts. Continued inter-ethnic tension and
violence give rise as well to concern for minority
rights, with reports of forced evictions targeting
minority communities.
Let me say that, while the overall security
situation has indeed improved as the conflict has
largely ended, we regularly receive credible reports
of incidents impacting the right to life and physical
integrity of Afghans. Those include house searches
and extrajudicial killings of former Government
security personnel and officials. The judicial system
itself is unevenly applied. The availability of judges,
civil servants, police personnel and legal and financial
resources vary across the country. There are no women
working in the justice sector. And it remains unclear
how the de facto authorities intend to assure and ensure
women’s access to justice.
Another major negative development has been the
Taliban’s inability to curb the expansion of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISILKP). Once limited to a few provinces and Kabul, ISILKP now seems to be present in nearly all provinces
and is increasingly active. The number of attacks has
increased significantly from last year to this year.
While there were 60 such attacks in 2020, so far this
year there have been 334 attacks attributed to ISIL-KP
or, in fact, claimed by ISIL-KP. The group continues to
target Shia communities. The Taliban insist that they
are waging a concerted campaign against ISIL-KP,
but that campaign is worrisome in that it appears to
rely heavily on extrajudicial detentions and killings of
suspected ISIL-KP members. That is an area deserving
of more attention from the international community.
However, our general impression is that the Taliban
are making genuine efforts to present themselves as a
Government. Those efforts are partly constrained by

S/PV. 8908

the lack of resources and capacity, as well as a political
ideology that in many ways clashes with contemporary
international norms of governance so present in this
Chamber. The Taliban have not yet established full
trust with much of the Afghan population or convinced
them of their capacity to govern. The movement is also
struggling to manage some serious internal divisions.
Ultimately, however, the Taliban must decide on
whether to govern according to the needs and the rights
of the diverse Afghan population, or whether to rule on
the basis of a narrow ideology and an even narrower
ethnic base.
Since the Taliban took power, members of the
international community, understandably, have
focused on helping those Afghans who want to leave.
Widespread fears of life under Taliban rule prompted
the horrific scenes that everyone witnessed in the
immediate aftermath of the Taliban takeover in August
as thousands of Afghans chose to flee the country.
But our attention now must turn to the vastly greater
number of Afghans who remain in the country but face
in the short term a most dire future.
We are on the brink of a humanitarian catastrophe;
however, we are on the brink of a humanitarian
catastrophe that is preventable. The financial sanctions
applied to Afghanistan have paralysed the banking
system, affecting every aspect of the economy. Gross
domestic product has contracted by an estimated 40 per
cent. Cash is severely limited. Traders cannot obtain
letters of credit. People who have worked and saved
for years cannot access their savings. Civil servants’
salaries cannot be paid in full, if at all. Hospitals are
running out of medicine and turning away patients.
Prices have gone up as goods have become scarcer,
instituting a punishing tax on the poorest and most
vulnerable Afghans. Fuel and food prices have risen
as winter approaches. An entire complex social and
economic system is shutting down in part due to the
assets freeze, the suspension of non-humanitarian aid
flows and sanctions.
According to a recent United Nations report, almost
one in two Afghans face crisis or emergency levels of
food insecurity — one in two of a population of some
38 million. As we move into winter and households
consume their very limited food stocks, we fear and
predict that up to 23 million Afghans will be in crisis
or at emergency levels of food insecurity — among
the worst in the world. That will likely indeed worsen
over the winter, making Afghanistan the country with

21-343023/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

the largest population in the world facing the greatest
risk of food insecurity — 23 million of a population of
38 million facing the greatest risk of food insecurity.
I repeat: the largest population of any country in the
world. Furthermore, while the risk of famine was once
mostly in rural areas, 10 out of 11 of Afghanistan’s most
densely populated urban areas are now anticipated to be
equally at emergency levels of food insecurity.
Against tremendous constraints — but backed by
the incredible generosity of the many donors — we
are delivering significant amounts of humanitarian
aid. We — the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the many United Nations
agencies functioning in Afghanistan — are grateful
to the donors, who have now almost fully funded the
September flash appeal. By the third quarter of this
year, the United Nations humanitarian organizations
and
their
accompanying
non-governmental
organizations have reached close to 10.5 million people
with assistance across the country. That includes
food assistance, agriculture and livelihood assistance,
treatment for acute malnutrition of children, medical
consultations and water trucking to reach thousands
of drought-affected people. As I am sure the Council
knows, Afghanistan has faced this year the second
drought in four years, while we again anticipate another
drought year in the years to come.
The support cannot stop there. My key message,
however, is that humanitarian assistance is not enough.
The international community needs urgently to find a
way to provide financial support to health care workers
in state hospitals, staff in food security programmes
and eventually to teachers — provided that the right of
girls to education is emphatically met. That can be done
only through the institutions and delivery mechanisms
that have been built at great cost over the past two
decades with the contribution of many of the countries
present here. I want to assure the Council that every
effort will be made by the United Nations to ensure that
funds provided through those delivery mechanisms will
not be diverted to, or by, the Taliban. We have created
an independent facility for the payment of salaries in
the health sector, but that needs to be expanded and
replicated to many other essential service areas. We will
need intense dialogue with the donors on those issues.
For the next three or four months, we must focus on
helping the most vulnerable Afghans endure the winter.
And we must do so without undermining the institutions
4/24

17/11/2021

and coping mechanisms that are keeping the rest of the
population from sliding into greater vulnerability.
On another disturbing note, I must report that the
reality of the current situation threatens to heighten
the risk of extremism. The continued deterioration
of the formal economy will provide impetus to the
informal economy, including illicit drugs, arms flows
and human trafficking. The ongoing paralysis in the
banking sector will push more of the financial system
into unaccountable and unregulated informal money
exchanges, which can only help facilitate terrorism,
trafficking and further drug smuggling. Those
pathologies will first affect Afghanistan, but then they
will infect the region.
Countries of the region have created or continued
various important formats of support. Both the
Moscow format meetings and the so-called troika
plus — involving China, Pakistan, Russia and the
United States — have continued to meet. I am also
happy to report that two meetings have been held, in
Islamabad and in Tehran — and I believe the next one
will be held in Beijing — in the new format of meetings
of Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan’s neighbours. India
also recently hosted a conference of some countries of
the region at the national security adviser level. Those
are all indications of how strongly the countries of the
region are stepping up at this critical time.
All of those formats rightly stress the need
for stability in Afghanistan as well as the urgent
requirement to combat illegal drug-trafficking and
transnational terrorism. Countries of the region, like
the rest of the international community, have called for
a more inclusive Government in Afghanistan as well
as the need for girls’ education, the return of women
to work and respect for human rights and the rights of
minorities. On those issues there is a strong regional
and international consensus. The world is speaking
with one voice to the Taliban on those issues.
The problems of Afghanistan are not limited
to the region. The best way to promote stability and
future international support is for the Taliban to
avoid the isolation that characterized their previous
experience in power. That will require a sustained and
structured policy dialogue among the Taliban de facto
authorities, other Afghan stakeholders and the wider
region and the international community. UNAMA is
well positioned to play a vital role in this important
dialogue, depending on our future mandate. The goal
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

should be to establish a gradual but concerted pathway
spelling out concrete steps for establishing constructive
relations between Afghanistan and the world at large,
with of course the well-being and rights of the Afghan
people being the central goal of all these efforts. That
is, to be frank, the only way to avoid losing much of the
progress of the past 20 years. Such a road map — such a
pathway — and continued engagement would pave the
way for more constructive exchanges on a wide variety
of international priorities, including on the de facto
authority’s responsibilities to the people of Afghanistan
to implement the obligations of the many treaty bodies
supported by the Council and to which the Afghan
State is a party.
I know that no one can guarantee that all those
measures in and of themselves will ensure a better
future for the Afghan people, but we can guarantee
that, without making this concerted effort, their lives
will most certainly worsen. This is not the time to turn
our backs on the Afghan people. If we do, our collective
failure will resonate for decades, as will the pain of
millions of Afghans.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Lyons for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Karim.
Ms. Karim: I thank the Security Council for
inviting me. It is an honour to be here, but I must admit
that it took a lot of courage for me to join this meeting.
That is because I am exhausted by this war and on
the verge of an emotional breakdown, just like every
other Afghan. The sense of loss is huge. Every Afghan
family, including my own, has lost at least one of its
members to the decades of never-ending war. Our
graveyards are a proof of that, and our land is witness to
the amount of human blood spilled on it. In the silence
of the graveyards, looking at the graves of soldiers from
the previous Government, soldiers from the Taliban,
young women and children, I have come to a stark and
clear realization: that no one is an enemy, and no human
must be killed anymore for this war or any other war.
After years of suffering, every one of us — from
me as an Afghan, to my peers, to the Taliban and the
international community — must stop seeing each
other as enemies. We need to make the effort to see the
humanity in others and hear their suffering and their
stories. We also need to be brave, to apologize for our

S/PV. 8908

wrongs and for the lives that were lost. It is not easy,
and I understand, but we need to do that.
Today I start this journey by declaring that no one
is my enemy. Each of us has our own demands and our
own vision of truth and future. We do not agree on
many things, but we must coexist. I call on the United
Nations to work with all stakeholders in the creation
of a political structure that allows for co-existence and
an end to the cycle of war that Afghanistan has been
trapped in for decades.
Since the Taliban takeover, the global approach
has been to focus on evacuations, the Afghan migrant
crisis, humanitarian aid and lobbying for girls’
education. All of those are very important, but the wellbeing of Afghan citizens can be sustainably realized
only if we have political stability. However, I do not see
enough global efforts for that. That frightens me. That
absolutely frightens me because without it, we have just
a pause to the war — just a pause. This is not the end
of it. There will be more human lives lost, poverty and
global isolation. Let me explain why I say that this is a
pause to the war rather than an ending.
It is because the current arrangements of political
power by the Taliban are exclusionary. They exclude
other Pashtuns beyond themselves. They exclude all
ethnic groups. They exclude women and all previous
political actors. Exclusion and lack of power-sharing
does not work in Afghanistan, in the same way that it
does not work in any other part of the world. People
dissent, and our recent history is proof of this. Just
looking at history, we had a civil war among different
ethnic groups just 30 years ago, in the 1990s, after the
withdrawal of the Soviet Union. Furthermore, post2001 when the Taliban were excluded from the Bonn
Conference and negotiations, they came back. We
witnessed that.
Another problem of Afghanistan is that it has an
overly centralized political structure and system, which
the Taliban inherited from the previous Government.
It disempowers people in provinces and rural areas.
That is why so many of our rural, excluded and poor
citizens joined the fight to take over Kabul. Without
a political structure that allows all groups to make
themselves heard through non-violent means, they are
likely to use violence. Violence is still pervasive in
the country even after the takeover by the Taliban. We
already see Da’esh doing exactly what the Taliban were
doing: committing suicide attacks. It is sobering to see

21-343025/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

soldiers from the previous Government joining them.
Also, I wish to mention that just a couple of hours ago
there was a suicide attack in Kabul, killing two children
and several other people.
That is why I say we are seeing a pause to the war.
Unless we act to break the cycle, it will continue to
repeat itself. We have seen the violent takeover of power
in Afghanistan by different groups over the years. At
best, they only paused the cycle of war for a few years.
However, it is only through non-violent means and
negotiations involving all groups that we can create a
new political system in which we can all coexist. Only
in that way can we end war and sustain peace. We need
a genuine global effort to turn the current moment into
a window of opportunity for long-lasting peace. To that
end, I have three recommendations.
First, I urge the United Nations and friendly neutral
Governments to play a leading role in bringing all
stakeholders back under a Bonn Conference model. The
aim should be to ensure transitional justice through that
model so as to create a political system acceptable to
all and inclusive of all — one that will ensure social
justice, the distribution of wealth and opportunities and
the decentralization of power — as well as ensuring the
fundamental rights of all citizens.
Secondly, I urge all rival regional Powers, including
India and Pakistan, but not limited to them, to bring the
best versions of themselves, setting aside their regional
rivalries, to genuinely work for peace. Moves to gain
power in the region cannot gain them respect when it
comes at the cost of misery of children, of people living
in war and of graveyards full of young men who could
have had a life.
Thirdly, I urge the global community to support
local actors, non-governmental organizations and
associations working in Afghanistan. They must be
given financial and social support to continue their
grass-roots work for peace. In that way we can have
a local-level peace effort working in parallel with
international efforts.
I will end with a call to all of us to make brave
decisions, because it is the darkest of our times that
require our bravest decisions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Karim for her briefing and her participation in
this meeting.
6/24

17/11/2021

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Allow me to first thank
Ms. Lyons, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Afghanistan and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
for her briefing. We are delighted to have the Special
Representative with us here in the Security Council
Chamber and commend the entire UNAMA team
for its crucial and relentless work to support the
Afghan people.
Indeed, the people of Afghanistan are entering a
particularly difficult winter. As Special Representative
Lyons has just said, more than half of the population
faces acute food insecurity, and the World Food
Programme has issued multiple warnings about the
risk of large-scale death from hunger throughout
Afghanistan in the coming months. Afghanistan is
highly vulnerable to drought and other effects of
climate change, which exacerbates food insecurity and
compounds the humanitarian crisis. It may also lead
to further instability and displacement and increase
the vulnerability of marginalized groups, including
women. Against that backdrop, humanitarian aid is
of urgent importance, and we expect the Taliban,
as well as all parties in Afghanistan, to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is provided, in line with
humanitarian principles.
Norway has increased its humanitarian support to
Afghanistan to a total of $37 million this year, but we
know that humanitarian assistance alone is not enough.
The political challenges of dealing with the Taliban
taking power by force must not prevent us from doing
all we can to save Afghan lives. The re-establishment of
basic services, in particular health care and education,
is vital. We underline the importance of ensuring safe
access to the right to education and safeguarding that
right, including through the full implementation of
resolution 2601 (2021). In order to secure the provision
of basic services, Norway has decided to contribute
approximately $23 million to the newly created
Special Trust Fund for Afghanistan. The international
community must explore all avenues for Afghanistan to
recover a normally functioning economy, with people
engaging in trade and gainful employment, as well as a
re-established, functioning financial sector. Preventing
a total economic collapse is essential.
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

I would also like to thank Ms. Freshta Karim for her
briefing to the Security Council and for her important
messages on inclusive governance. I commend her
long-standing advocacy on the right to education for all
children in Afghanistan. Her statement is yet another
reminder to the Council and the international community
about the importance of continuing to consult with
Afghan women in all our efforts affecting the future
of Afghanistan. Norway is therefore increasing its
support to organizations promoting women’s rights
and participation in Afghan society, especially those
working at the grass-roots level to prevent conflict and
protect human rights.
Allow me also to express my condolences to all
those who knew the human rights defenders Frozan Safi
and Hijratullah Khogyani. We firmly echo the calls
for a prompt, independent and impartial investigation
into their deaths and for the perpetrators to be
held accountable.
The security situation in Afghanistan is still a cause
of great concern. Recent acts of terrorism targeting
places of worship and hospitals deserve our strongest
condemnation. Those attacks add to the suffering of
the Afghan people. We expect the Taliban to do its
utmost in countering terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province, mindful of the importance of respecting
human rights as an integral part of any successful
counter-terrorism strategies.
I would like to conclude by re-emphasizing the
severity of the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
The responsibility lies with those who rule. Nevertheless,
the international community must also do its utmost to
assist the Afghan population in this critical time. If we
are to avert a disaster of enormous proportions, there is
no time to lose.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I want to thank Ms. Karim
for her message and her courage today. I also wish to
thank Special Representative Lyons for her briefing.
It is evident that the situation in Afghanistan
has become more dire, and the role of the United
Nations and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in that regard are now more
necessary than ever. The importance of UNAMA in
coordinating humanitarian aid delivery and relations
with authorities, monitoring and reporting on the
security and human rights situations and assisting in
governance and rule of law cannot be understated.

S/PV. 8908

There have been a number of different meetings
concerning Afghanistan recently, in different locations
and formats, including the extended troika that took
place this past week, but the main messages that
all of these events have all been similar and could
be summed up as a call on the Taliban to fulfil its
promises and live up to its public statements. First
and foremost, this means the formation of an inclusive
and representative Government. The make-up of the
current Administration is being viewed with great
disappointment. Ignoring the diversity of the people of
Afghanistan and excluding women are clear decisions
that go against the expectations of the international
community and fuel concerns over the continued future
instability of the country, as Ms. Karim highlighted
very eloquently in her statement today.
Estonia again emphasizes that sustainable peace
in Afghanistan can be ensured only by respecting
and upholding international norms and standards and
constitutional protections for the rights of all the people
of Afghanistan, particularly women, girls and persons
belonging to minorities. By excluding women from
employment and public life, restricting their mobility,
and by undermining the right of women to full, equal
and meaningful participation in decision-making and all
other aspects of Afghan society, as well as their access
to justice, Afghanistan will not enjoy development or
prosperity. Without the participation and support of
women, Afghanistan will not be able to provide all its
children with an education or ensure the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to everyone in need.
Humanitarian aid is greatly needed right now in
Afghanistan. Estonia and all other European Union
members together pledged almost $800 million for
humanitarian assistance as part of the flash appeal
in September. It is positive to see that aid has started
moving into Afghanistan through a number of different
channels, but to reach those in need, all parties have
to allow immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access for United Nations humanitarian agencies
and other actors to provide assistance, including for
women aid workers to deliver aid, for women healthcare workers to provide medical care and for women
teachers to educate students. We welcome the rapid
establishment of the United Nations Development
Programme Special Trust Fund for Afghanistan and
encourage further measures that would assist in
strengthening its economy and liquidity.

21-343027/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

Estonia remains committed to helping the people
of Afghanistan. However, our cooperation with
any Afghanistan leadership will be based upon its
willingness to uphold the positive achievements of
recent decades and act by the norms and standards of
international law, including international human rights
law. We condemn the use of violence against peaceful
protestors and journalists, for whom Afghanistan
continues to be one of the top-most dangerous places
in the world to work in, despite a general improvement
in the security situation in the country. We further
condemn the recent terrorist attacks, which have
multiplied across the country, and recall the expectation
that the territory of Afghanistan would not be used as
for terrorist activity against any country.
I would like to conclude by giving special thanks to
the staff of UNAMA and to the broader United Nations
personnel in Afghanistan, whose efforts in delivering
aid and stability for the benefit of the people of
Afghanistan have been vital during this time of crisis.
Mr. Phan (Viet Nam): I thank Special Representative
Lyons for her comprehensive and substantive briefing. I
highly commend the efforts — especially those that have
been made over the past three months — of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and other United Nations personnel on the ground. I
also thank Ms. Freshta Karim for sharing her thoughts
and stories.
Viet Nam continues to closely follow the
developments in Afghanistan. We strongly condemn
the continued terrorist attacks in Afghanistan in
recent weeks and express our deepest condolences to
the families of the victims. It is our sincere hope that
the situation in the country will soon stabilize, for the
benefit of the Afghan people and for peace and stability
in the region, particularly in the neighbouring countries.
Today I wish to highlight the following points.
First, it is imperative to promote an inclusive
political settlement with the full, strong and meaningful
participation of women to ensure the stability, unity
and development of the country. We urge all relevant
parties in Afghanistan to continue to engage in
dialogue, resolve their differences and promote national
reconciliation and harmony. We also call for the active
participation of women and young people in all aspects
of society, particularly in education and employment.
8/24

17/11/2021

Secondly, it is critical to ensure order and security
in the country, as well as the safety, security and
well-being of all people in Afghanistan. All relevant
parties must continue to respect their obligations under
international law, including humanitarian law. The
normal operations of indispensable infrastructure and
essential services for the civilian population, particularly
vulnerable groups such as women, children and persons
with disabilities, must be ensured. The safety, security
and working conditions of United Nations personnel,
humanitarian workers, foreign nationals, international
organizations and diplomatic missions must continue to
be guaranteed.
Thirdly, further efforts are needed to tackle the
increasing challenges related to the humanitarian and
economic situation, food insecurity, migrants and
refugees and the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
current economic situation in Afghanistan is facing
tremendous challenges. It is extremely alarming that
more than 20 million people, over half of the country’s
population, are facing crisis levels of food insecurity,
as Special Representative Lyons has just described.
Immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access
must be ensured to reach the Afghan people in need.
Furthermore, we call on the United Nations regional
and international partners to redouble their efforts in
supporting peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan
in order to save the country’s economy from the brink
of collapse. It is also heartening to note the continued
efforts of various partners to provide humanitarian
assistance over the past few months.
Fourthly, we commend the efforts of UNAMA at
this critical time. We once again stress the importance
of ensuring the security and safety of the Mission and
all of its personnel, international and national. We
look forward to the upcoming report of the SecretaryGeneral on strategic and operational recommendations
for the mandate of UNAMA. We reiterate our call on
all relevant parties in Afghanistan to fully cooperate
and create favourable conditions for the United Nations
and UNAMA to carry out their mandate for the benefit
of the people of Afghanistan and development of
the country.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I have the honour
to make this statement on behalf of the Niger,
Tunisia and Kenya, as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1).
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

We would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her
briefing on the latest developments in Afghanistan.
We also thank Ms. Freshta Karim, Director of
the non-governmental educational organization
Charmaghz, for her insightful briefing.
The A3+1 is extremely concerned about the
increasing number of terrorist attacks carried out by the
Islamic State-Khorasan Province, which have mainly
targeted religious minorities. We strongly condemn the
recent spate of heinous attacks that have targeted holy
sites in Kandahar and Kunduz, whose aim is to instil
fear and fuel divisions among the Afghan people. The
reprehensible targeting of civilians, including medical
personnel and civilian infrastructure, is also a violation
of international humanitarian law. All those responsible
must be held to account.
The worrying turn of events in Afghanistan calls
for immediate steps to revitalize the global counterterrorism architecture to ensure structured and
coordinated action to address these attacks, which
clearly constitute a threat to international peace and
Security. The Security Council should endeavour to
ensure that any interventions are informed by the peace,
safety and security interests of the Afghan people and
not motivated by geostrategic interests, which would
only further complicate the situation.
The A3+1 welcomes the third meeting of the
participants of the Moscow format consultations on
Afghanistan on 20 October, noting its recommendations,
which, if pursued, could contribute significantly
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. We call in
particular on the Taliban to immediately take steps
to improve governance and to form a truly inclusive
Government that adequately reflects the interests of all
ethno-political diversity groups as a prerequisite for a
national reconciliation process in Afghanistan.
The A3+1 remains disappointed that sufficient
efforts have not been undertaken by the Taliban to deliver
on its promises to the Afghan people. We reiterate our
call on the Taliban to make sustained tangible efforts
to embrace peace, cut its links with terrorist groups
and affiliates and engage in a meaningful dialogue
with all components of society, with a view to restoring
security, putting in place a sound governance structure
and upholding human rights for all people, without
discrimination on account of religion, ethnicity, gender
or any other considerations.

S/PV. 8908

We also call upon the Taliban to take immediate
steps to apprehend Al-Qaida and Islamic State leaders
and operatives, hold them to account and demonstrate
that Afghanistan will not be a haven for terrorist
networks. The raft of measures laid out under resolution
1267 (1999) and subsequent resolutions should in that
regard be brought to bear as necessary.
With over 23 million facing acute hunger and
nearly 9 million in near-famine conditions, the A3+1
remains deeply concerned about the dire humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. The situation is compounded
by the collapsing economy, which has pushed many
Afghans into abject poverty. We are particularly
concerned by the children’s situation; an estimated
3.2 million children under the age of 5 are on the edge of
acute malnutrition.
To address the immediate needs, the humanitarian
agencies and the international community should
prioritize vital public services, including health and
education for all. In that regard, the A3+1 commends
the support from the international community,
especially its pledges of more than $1.1 billion in
humanitarian aid and development, made during the
pledging conference on 13 September. We caution the
Taliban against capitalizing on the goodwill of the
international community to hold the Afghan population
hostage for the purpose of extracting financial or
political concessions.
The A3+1 is gravely concerned by the plight of
the women and girls of Afghanistan, who are being
denied their fundamental human rights, including the
right to work and the right to education. Education is
not only a fundamental right, but also an important
religious obligation that should not be distorted as an
excuse to discriminate against women and girls. We
therefore stand in solidarity with the Afghan women
and their inalienable right to contribute positively to
the development of their country. In that regard, we
underscore the imperative for their full and meaningful
participation in all aspects of Afghan life, including
at the grass-roots and leadership levels. For that to
be achieved, there must be an equal commitment to
eliminating all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence and other gendered harms against Afghan
women, girls and children, as well as any actions
intended to restrict women’s freedom of movement.
Finally, Kenya, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Tunisia reaffirm our unwavering

21-343029/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

solidarity with the people of Afghanistan and stand
ready to support all endeavours aimed at securing their
safety and well-being.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special
Representative Deborah Lyons for her briefing. I would
like to express in particular my delegation’s appreciation
for the work that is being done by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in these
challenging times. I also thank Ms. Freshta Karim for
her insights.
Afghanistan has already seen much bloodshed and
violence in recent years. We have also heard from the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General today
about the dire situation in Afghanistan. Furthermore,
according to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, more than half of Afghanistan’s
population is facing crisis or emergency levels of acute
food insecurity, and urgent humanitarian assistance is
required to meet the basic food needs of the people.
Over the past two decades, India has contributed
significantly to the development of Afghanistan. Indian
development projects have been undertaken in every
critical area of socioeconomic development, including
power, water supply, road connectivity, health care,
education, agriculture and capacity-building. Even
as we speak, India continues to grant educational
scholarships to thousands of Afghan men and women to
continue their education in India. India has undertaken
more than 500 development projects covering all 34
provinces of Afghanistan. We have also extended
humanitarian assistance through the delivery of 75,000
metric tons of wheat, as well as essential medical
supplies and coronavirus disease pandemic vaccines
to Afghanistan last year. India is once again ready
to deliver urgent humanitarian aid consisting of food
grains and medicines to the people of Afghanistan.
India remains steadfast in its commitment to
providing humanitarian assistance to the people of
Afghanistan. In that context, India has supported
the call of the international community that access
to humanitarian assistance for Afghanistan should
be direct and without any hindrance. Humanitarian
assistance should be based on the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and independence, and disbursement of
the aid should be non-discriminatory and accessible
to all, irrespective of ethnicity, religion or political
belief. In particular, the assistance should reach the
most vulnerable first, including women, children and
10/24

17/11/2021

minorities. We call on the international community and
countries of the region to come together, rising above
partisan interests. As Afghanistan’s largest regional
development partner, India is willing to coordinate
with other stakeholders to work towards enabling the
expeditious provision of much-needed assistance to the
people of Afghanistan.
Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat to
Afghanistan and to the region. In fact, the Security
Council itself has come together, on several occasions
since August, to pronounce itself in one voice with
respect to the places of religious worship, including
those used by religious and ethnic minorities, and other
public places such as hospitals, that have been targeted
by terrorists. Resolution 2593 (2021) clearly sets out
boundaries outlining the international community’s
expectations on a range of critical and immediate
issues. The resolution lays down the requirements in
terms of the fight against terrorism, where it has noted
the commitment of the Taliban to not allow the use of
Afghan territory for terrorism, including on the part
of terrorists and terrorist groups designated under
resolution 1267 (1999).
Resolution 2593 (2021) also lays down the
expectations of the international community in terms
of an inclusive, negotiated political settlement with the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women and
minorities and diverse political-ethnic groups in the
country; the importance of upholding human rights
including those of women, children and minorities; and
the requirement to provide humanitarian assistance
to the people of Afghanistan. One of our immediate
priorities is to evacuate stranded people, as well as to
ensure their free movement so that they are allowed to
travel in and out of Afghanistan.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to be a cause
of pressing concern. As its immediate neighbour and a
long-standing friend of its people, the current situation
has direct implications for India. In that context, India
recently held on 10 November the third Regional Security
Dialogue of national security advisors on Afghanistan,
together with the participation of regional partners.
The Delhi Declaration on Afghanistan, adopted at the
meeting, reflects the much-needed regional consensus
on Afghanistan. The international community and
key stakeholders, including from Afghanistan, have
welcomed the Delhi Declaration on Afghanistan.
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

India calls for an inclusive dispensation in
Afghanistan that will represent all sections of Afghan
society. A broad-based, inclusive and representative
formation would gain greater international acceptability
and legitimacy. Today it is more necessary than ever
that the international community speak with one voice
on Afghanistan. Resolution 2596 (2021) requires the
Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
on strategic and operational recommendations for the
mandate of UNAMA, in the light of recent political,
security and social developments. We believe that this
report should contain holistic recommendations from
a strategic perspective. When the Council decides on
the future of the UNAMA mandate in March 2022, its
focus needs to be centred on the welfare, well-being
and expectations of the Afghan people.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for sharing her thoughts and views on
the situation in Afghanistan. We are also grateful to
Ms. Freshta Karim for her clear, emotional and brave
statement. We also welcome the participation of
representatives of regional States to today’s meeting.
The new realities in Afghanistan since 15 August
have brought neither the Afghans nor the international
community any closer to stabilizing the country or
to establishing a peaceful, indivisible and drug- and
crime-free State on its territory. Due primarily to a lack
of international recognition, long-standing, decades-old
problems remain, and new challenges have emerged.
We remain in favour of the formation in Afghanistan
of a genuinely inclusive Government that adequately
reflects the interests of all the political-ethnic forces in
the country, a moderate domestic and friendly foreign
policy and respect for basic human rights, including
those of women and children. Eliminating the threat
posed by terrorism and narcotics remains a key task.
We trust that the new authorities will be more farsighted than the previous leadership of Afghanistan,
which, to satisfy its own ambitions, sacrificed national
interests and left its people to fend for themselves. We
note that the Taliban are ready for practical cooperation
with the international community and regional partners
to address the main challenge facing the country:
restoring order and rebuilding the country after years
of conflict. We can indeed see the first positive signs

S/PV. 8908

with regard to the return of women to work in the social
sector as well as girls’ education.
We also note the efforts of the new authorities
to combat the Islamic State in the context of the
increasingly frequent bloody terrorist attacks through
which the Islamic State-Khorasan Province is seeking
to destabilize the situation in the country and beyond.
Drugs are also linked to terrorism, because they are
terrorists’ main financial lifeline. Today there is a
real threat of a spillover of terrorist and drug activity,
including those masquerading as migration flows,
into the territory of neighbouring countries. We trust
that the Taliban will continue to fulfil its promises to
eradicate those problems. Such problems, however,
go hand-in-hand with poverty, food shortages and
corruption, and they are not new to Afghanistan. To a
large extent, they were inherited by the Taliban given
that they had not been systematically addressed in the
past 20 years.
However, unlike the situation a few months ago,
the new authorities in Afghanistan are deprived of any
sources of income. The banking system is paralyzed
and there is no cash flow in Afghanistan. Physicians,
doctors, teachers and police officers are not being
paid. All of that is leading inexorably towards a
humanitarian catastrophe that could affect millions
of ordinary Afghans. The priority at the moment is to
provide urgent humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. We
welcome the swift action taken by the United Nations
in that area, as well as the timely cooperation with the
local authorities. We support the coordinating role of the
United Nations in consolidating international efforts in
the area of humanitarian assistance. For our part, we
are also prepared to make our own contribution to that
common endeavour. We will soon be sending food,
medicine and other essential goods to Afghanistan.
We trust that the key donors will also demonstrate the
generosity that is needed in this critical situation.
At the same time, we must note that despite
the scaling-up of aid through the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, different funds
and programmes, it will not be possible to resolve the
social and economic problems of Afghanistan without
unfreezing its financial assets from international
financial institutions. We hear that from staff of
the United Nations itself, who have predicted that
Afghanistan is headed for an inevitable economic
collapse because its assets remain frozen. In that
context, we support the efforts of United Nations funds

21-3430211/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

and programmes to work with relevant ministries in
Afghanistan to distribute unfrozen funds to enable
the uninterrupted work of various categories of
civil servants charged with providing services to
the population.
It is encouraging that the positions of regional and
extraregional players with regard to the prevention
of an economic catastrophe in Afghanistan are quite
similar. In that regard, we believe that it would be
useful to convene, as soon as possible, a representative
international donor conference under the auspices of
the United Nations, based on the understanding that the
main burden of post-conflict economic and financial
reconstruction and development in Afghanistan should
be borne by the forces whose military contingents have
been present in that country for the past 20 years.
The Russian Federation continues to provide
direct assistance to the Afghan settlement process.
The extended troika plays a key role in that regard.
The most recent meetings of the extended troika were
held in Moscow on 19 October and in Islamabad on
11 November. The Moscow format remains a unique
platform for broad regional cooperation, with the
participation of Afghans themselves, and its special
role was reiterated during the most recent round of
talks held in Moscow on 20 October.
We are in regular contact with all five Central
Asian countries. In that regard, we believe that it is
more important than ever to ensure cooperation within
the regional organizations, namely, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, (CSTO) including
CSTO the Working Group on Afghanistan and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), including
the revitalized mechanism of the SCO-Afghanistan
Contact Group.
In conclusion, we reiterate our unwavering
commitment to preserving the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan. Its security
and stability are in the interest of the Afghans, their
neighbours and the entire international community.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Deborah Lyons and Ms. Karim for their briefings.
China thanks Special Representative Lyons for leading
the diligent work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), despite the
difficult conditions.
12/24

17/11/2021

At present, Afghanistan finds itself on the precipice
between chaos and order and faces challenges on the
humanitarian, economic, counter-terrorism and political
fronts. Peace and reconstruction remain an uphill task.
The international community should strengthen unity
through cooperation, lend a helping hand and work
together to support the country as it embarks on the
road of peace, stability and development.
First, it is important to support Afghanistan in
alleviating its humanitarian difficulties and in gradually
rebuilding its economy and society. The United
Nations should further play its coordinating role and
mobilize all parties to step up humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan and deliver it as soon as possible. In
the long run, that is necessary to help the country
rebuild its domestic market, participate in regional and
international economic cooperation and find a sound
development path. We call on the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, among others, to consider
resuming financing support to Afghanistan.
Secondly, we should actively work with Afghanistan
and support the realization of independent, stable and
effective State governance in that country. The future
of Afghanistan is in the hands of the Afghan people.
The international community should provide positive
guidance to Afghan political parties and ethnic
communities and encourage Afghanistan to maintain a
broad-based and inclusive political orientation, pursue
moderate and stable domestic and foreign policies,
protect the fundamental rights and interests of ethnic
minorities, women, and children and develop goodneighbourly relations and cooperation.
Thirdly, in a context of increasing terrorism,
including combat terrorism, it is imperative to be
comprehensively and resolutely vigilant. The recent
spate of large-scale terrorist attacks in Afghanistan
has once again demonstrated that terrorist forces are
taking advantage of the situation to gain strength.
China is deeply concerned about that. The international
community should urge all parties in Afghanistan to
make a clean break from terrorist forces. It should also
support its independent, resolved and effective actions
to combat all terrorist forces, including the Islamic
State and the East Turkestan Islamic Movement.
Fourthly, there should be more coordination
and therefore greater synergy between all the
mechanisms on Afghanistan. We support the United
Nations key coordinating role in the maintenance of
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

stability and the delivery of emergency assistance.
Afghanistan’s neighbours have officially launched a
coordination and cooperation mechanism, and China
will host its third Foreign Ministers meeting next
year to promote cooperation among neighbouring
countries and contribute to the long-term stability of
Afghanistan. We look forward to the international
community’s respect and support for the efforts of the
neighbouring countries.
Afghanistan’s humanitarian crisis is its most severe
and pressing challenge, as we heard in the briefing
presented by Special Representative Lyons. Recent
reports of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the World Food Programme show
that more than half of the Afghan population faces
unprecedented levels of acute hunger, and 95 per cent
of families do not have sufficient food. According to
UNICEF statistics, by the end of this year, 3.2 million
Afghan children under the age of five will be severely
malnourished. If no immediate action is taken, 1 million
children might perish because of that.
As winter approaches, the Afghan people urgently
need food, medicine and warm clothes; otherwise,
they stand to face a very harsh winter. In that
context, unilateral sanctions, especially with regard
to Afghanistan’s frozen overseas assets, have become
a bottleneck issue that cannot be ignored. Teachers,
doctors and nurses in Afghanistan have not received
their salaries for more than half a year. When teachers
are not paid and schools do not function, how can we
even begin to talk about girl’s schooling? If doctors and
nurses are not paid, how will they help people fight the
coronavirus disease pandemic? The freezing of assets
is a collective punishment of the Afghan people. It
is unacceptable morally, and in reality it exacerbates
humanitarian disasters. The frozen Afghan assets
should be returned to their true owners as soon as
possible. They cannot be used as a bargaining chip for
the purpose of threat or coercion.
China supports the United Nations in its ongoing
role of helping Afghanistan achieve a smooth
transition. The future mandate of UNAMA should fully
reflect evolving situations, meet the expectations of
Afghanistan and fit within the work and the priorities
of the relevant international regional mechanisms
in a mutually reinforcing manner. With regard to
UNAMA’s future mandate, we hope that the SecretaryGeneral will listen extensively to Afghan parties and

S/PV. 8908

international partners in order to put forth practical and
viable recommendations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Ms. Lyons and Ms. Karim for their briefings.
I commend the courage of the United Nations teams
working in difficult conditions, as well as that of Afghan
civil society actors, who never give up. When they took
power by force on 15 August, the Taliban created a
crisis situation that has serious consequences for the
Afghan people and carries the risk of destabilizing the
entire region. Faced with this situation, the Security
Council must show unity and firmness in defending the
fundamental rights of the Afghan people. So far, there
has been no sign of change on the part of the Taliban;
they have done nothing to respect the commitments
they have made to the international community.
On the security front, resolution 2593 (2021),
adopted on 30 August, set clear conditions for a
complete and clear break with terrorist groups and
Al-Qaida. However, it is clear that the links between
the Al-Qaida command and the Taliban continue, the
Taliban are not mobilizing against the Islamic State
in Khorasan, and several recent attacks have plunged
Afghanistan into mourning. Our thoughts are with
the victims.
The fight against terrorism remains a priority for
France, and we cannot accept Afghanistan becoming
a sanctuary for terrorist organizations. Our action in
the Council, as elsewhere, is aimed at drying up the
resources of terrorist groups and countering their
propaganda, but also guaranteeing respect for human
rights and ensuring that there is no impunity for
terrorists. We expect the Taliban to demonstrate that
terrorist groups receive no direct or indirect financial,
ideological, political or logistical support in Kabul or in
the Afghan provinces.
France is seriously concerned about the humanitarian
situation. Half of the Afghan population is in need
of emergency aid, and this number is increasing as
winter approaches. We cannot stand by and do nothing.
That is why France committed itself at the Geneva
conference on 13 September to provide €100 million in
humanitarian aid for the civilian population. We must
now ensure that this aid is delivered to the population,
while ensuring full compliance with the requirements
of resolution 2593 (2021) and the sanctions regimes
established under resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1267
(1999). In that regard, it is important that the Taliban

21-3430213/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

comply with international humanitarian law and not
pose any obstacles to the delivery of aid. They must
also, as they have pledged to do, ensure the protection
of humanitarian personnel, including women and
infrastructure.
We expect the Taliban not to set Afghanistan back
20 years. Respect for human rights, especially for
women, and for the freedom of the media, as well as
the formation of a government representative of the
various components of Afghan society, are sine qua
non conditions to which they must subscribe. Despite
assurances, there have been many cases of arbitrary
executions, repression of peaceful demonstrations and
violence against journalists. These actions must stop.
We condemn any infringement of the right to
education for girls and adolescents, and to higher
education for female students. Women must be able to
work without fearing for their lives. It is also essential
to ensure women’s access to medical care. Afghan
women have fought for their rights — they continue to
do so — and we must support them in their struggle.
The Taliban must ensure that threatened Afghan
men and women who wish to leave the country have
freedom of movement and that they do not face
administrative obstacles to their departure.
In conclusion, France will continue to give its
full support to the Afghan people and will be vigilant
to ensure that the commitments made by the Taliban
are respected and translated into concrete actions on
the ground. We will not tolerate impunity for those
who violate international humanitarian law and
human rights.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lyons and Ms. Karim for their powerful briefings.
The situation in Afghanistan the briefers describe
today is of deep concern. The risks of a humanitarian
catastrophe are real and are exacerbated by the
onset of winter and an economy in sharp recession.
Some 19 million people are already facing crisis and
emergency levels of food insecurity. Allowing Afghans
to starve to death serves no one’s interests. Urgent
action is needed.
Special Representative Lyons said that this
humanitarian crisis is preventable. The work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations leadership will be crucial. We
14/24

17/11/2021

need to ensure an adequately resourced, prioritized
and coordinated international response led by the
United Nations.
The United Kingdom will continue to be one of
the foremost supporters of the humanitarian response.
Total United Kingdom aid to Afghanistan this year is
now £286 million, of which £50 million will provide
life-saving humanitarian support for over 2.5 million
vulnerable Afghans.
But the international community needs to do more
and act quickly to find creative solutions to address the
liquidity crisis and establish principles and mechanisms
for providing assistance beyond basic humanitarian aid.
We hope the World Bank and donors will find a way to
quickly repurpose the $1.5 billion in the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund in support of health and
other basic services. For its part, the Taliban should
address the concerns of the international community
with regard to terrorism, humanitarian access, safe
passage, inclusive government and human rights,
particularly those of women and girls.
On terrorism, we urge the Taliban to make clear in
public that foreign terrorist fighters are not welcome,
and not to allow Al-Qaida, the Islamic State or other
terrorist groups to organize, raise funds or plan attacks
from Afghan territory.
We welcome Special Representative Lyons’ report
that the Taliban are taking positive steps to provide
unimpeded and safe humanitarian access for male and
female aid workers. We are also encouraged by the
reopening of secondary schools to girls in at least eight
provinces. However, all children, including girls of all
ages, should be able to go to school, and all women
should be able to work, have access to services and
participate in public life. Educated healthy women and
girls will contribute to peace, stability and development.
We hope that the leaders from across the Islamic
world will continue to reinforce this message. While
the number of conflict-related deaths may be falling,
the human rights situation in Afghanistan remains of
deep concern, with credible reports of serious human
rights abuses and violations, including extrajudicial
killings, restrictions on civil society and attacks on
minority groups.
Our approach to the Taliban will continue to be
calibrated according to their actions, not their words.
The Security Council clearly set out its minimum
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

expectations in resolution 2593 (2021). The best way
for these expectations to be met and to avoid the
worst humanitarian outcome is for the international
community to be united, including in its engagement
with the Taliban.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons for her
briefing; we deeply appreciate it. I am really grateful to
Ms. Karim for her briefing, especially when we know
that her sharing her testimony at this time is not without
risk. She has left her mark in this Chamber; I want to
assure her of that.
Since we last met on 9 September (see S/PV.8853),
little of what we hoped for has come to pass, while much
of what we feared has come to be. The much-promised
inclusive Government is nowhere in evidence. There
is no credible dialogue, representative of all Afghans,
towards future governance. There is no stability.
Instead, what we are seeing and what the Afghan
people are living with is violence, fear and repression
at the hands of the Taliban.
Women and girls in Afghanistan remain under
attack. They are being targeted by the Taliban for
their education, for their work, for their activism,
for demanding their fundamental rights. Put simply,
they are being targeted for their gender. This is
deliberate and driven by a desire to repress and
control — to take away women’s autonomy, their choice and
their freedom.
Many Afghan women have come to the difficult
conclusion that their lives and futures are only possible
outside of Afghanistan. Despite assurances regarding
safe passage that the Council stipulated in resolution
2593 (2021), the Taliban has not respected that
choice either.
Reports regarding the killing earlier this month of
women human rights defender and economist Frozan
Safi demonstrate all too clearly the dangers that women
face. Ms. Safi and three colleagues intended to leave
Afghanistan. A call received was thought to be about
an evacuation flight. Instead of safe passage, those
women found only hatred and, in the end, horrific and
fatal violence.
I have said it before, and I will say it again today:
we cannot look the other way while the women of
Afghanistan are being targeted and attacked. The
courage and fortitude of countless Afghan women

S/PV. 8908

such as our briefer today, Ms. Karim, Ms. Safi and her
colleagues, should be recognized, but the international
community also needs to be clear with the Taliban that
their actions are not without consequences.
Today marks 61 days of the Taliban’s restrictions
on girls attending secondary school, each day marking
an unconscionable loss to Afghanistan’s own future. A
generation of girls are being deprived of an education
because of the fear and suspicion of some men. Every
child has an equal right to education regardless
of gender.
It is also reported that the rights of children in
Afghanistan have significantly deteriorated since
August, with increased child labour, recruitment
and use, trafficking and marriage. The erosion of
rights for women and children in Afghanistan under
Taliban control has been both stark and swift. Their
protection and the upholding of their rights must be
central as a focus of all our deliberations on the future
of Afghanistan.
We also strongly condemn recent terrorist attacks,
violence, intimidation and forced displacement
targeting minorities. We condemn the repression of
Afghan civil society and Afghan journalists.
Words almost fail to capture the magnitude of the
humanitarian crisis now under way in Afghanistan,
as winter approaches and millions face starvation.
We have been warned, including today by Special
Representative Lyons, of the gravity of this situation.
The international community and the Council must
listen. The international community and the Council
must act.
The Taliban now bear primary responsibility for
the conditions facing the people of Afghanistan, but the
international community also needs to move beyond
pledges and rhetoric and take action in order to prevent
widespread suffering and death. Humanitarians must
be allowed to deliver in all parts of the country. At
this critical time, the United Nations and partner
non-governmental organizations on the ground
cannot and should not be impeded in their life-saving
operations. The Security Council has a role to play
in facilitating the humanitarian response. We need to
deliver on this; it is our duty and our obligation.
Since August, the Council has been clear about
what we expect from engagement with the Taliban.
We said that we would judge them by their actions,

21-3430215/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

not their words. The Council and the international
community must reaffirm publicly, without ambiguity,
that the rights of all Afghans, especially women and
girls, children and minorities, must be protected. That
message surely stands alone in its own right.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Lyons and Ms. Karim
for their briefings. We appreciate their efforts to draw
attention to the plight of the people of Afghanistan
as the Security Council considers the action it should
take to better support the country’s peace, security
and stability.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation
for the tireless work and commitment that the national
and international staff of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) have shown during
the past few months. It is clear that the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan is more critical than ever.
We are deeply grateful for the support that UNAMA
continues to provide to the Afghan people and the
international community through its work.
We meet today as Afghanistan faces immense
challenges, among them a humanitarian crisis of
daunting proportions. A variety of factors lie at the root
of this crisis — endemic aid dependency exacerbated
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, severe drought
and the seasonal impact of winter conditions and
decades of prolonged conflict that culminated in a
seizure of power through military means instead of a
negotiated settlement.
Over the years, the international community,
including the Security Council, made it clear to the
Taliban time and time again that it was in the Taliban’s
own interest to peacefully pursue a political settlement
to the conflict in Afghanistan, instead of a battlefield
victory. The Taliban chose the latter path, and we are
now seeing the horrible consequences of that choice
unfold before our eyes. But the Afghan people should
not have to pay twice for the Taliban’s decision. That
is why we must all do our part to address the emerging
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan.
Just last month, the United States announced more
than $144 million in additional assistance to Afghans
affected by the ongoing humanitarian crisis. That
brings our total humanitarian assistance contribution
to Afghanistan to $474 million in 2021 alone. We are
proud to remain the largest contributor in support of
Afghanistan’s humanitarian assistance needs. That
16/24

17/11/2021

assistance will flow through independent humanitarian
organizations, including UNICEF, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the World Health
Organization, and it will directly support some of the
estimated 24 million vulnerable people likely to need
assistance in Afghanistan by next year.
We welcome the efforts of agencies like the World
Food Programme, which is undertaking an immense
operation to combat escalating food insecurity in
Afghanistan. We are encouraged by its effort to rapidly
scale up its programming month by month to reach
millions of people in need. For international assistance
to continue to be effective as needs grow, however, all
aid workers, including women staff members, must
be permitted to operated independently and safely.
Without women staff members, safe and principled
humanitarian programming is simply not possible.
Humanitarian implementers must be able to reach
all populations in need, including women and girls,
without impediments.
Through resolution 2593 (2021), the Council
has stressed the need for full, safe and unhindered
access for the United Nations, its specialized agencies
and implementing partners and all humanitarian
actors engaged in humanitarian relief activity to all
those in need. The United States and our partners
will continue to call on the Taliban to live up to the
international community’s expectations in that regard.
Of course, United States aid is not sufficient to address
Afghanistan’s looming needs. We therefore urge
other Member States to increase their assistance to
humanitarian efforts in Afghanistan as well and thank
those who already have.
We are also deeply concerned about the ongoing
liquidity shortage, inflation and other economic factors
hampering the delivery of humanitarian assistance
in Afghanistan. We welcome creative solutions from
the international community to help mitigate those
challenges in a way that limits undue benefit to the
Taliban and sanctioned individuals. And although we
and many others are rightly seized with Afghanistan’s
humanitarian needs, we continue to pay close attention
to whether the Taliban are demonstrating compliance
with its commitments on counter-terrorism, respect
for human rights and inclusivity. Women and girls
must be able to participate fully in political, economic
and social life in Afghanistan. That is not a demand
unique to the West, the United States or even the
Biden Administration. We are simply demanding that
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan’s women and girls be afforded the ability
to enjoy the universal human rights to which all of us
are entitled.
There is no excuse for the disruption of women’s
and girls’ access to education. All girls, including those
in secondary and post-secondary schools, must be
allowed, and publicly encouraged, to return to school
immediately. Women must also be allowed to return
to their workplaces. Allowing half of the country’s
workforce to participate in economic life would be a
good place to start helping Afghanistan’s economy
move in a positive direction.
In the light of all the challenges that we have
discussed today, the United States looks forward
to receiving the Secretary-General’s strategic and
operational recommendations for the future of
UNAMA’s mandate. The role of the United Nations
in coordinating humanitarian operations, reporting
impartially on developments on the ground and
providing crucial good offices is more vital now
than ever.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
I thank Special Representative Lyons and Ms. Karim
for their valuable contributions at this meeting. I would
like to focus on four points.
First, as has already been said, the onset of
winter represents a huge challenge for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance, on which 18.5 million civilians
depend. In line with resolution 2596 (2021), we highlight
the importance of redoubling efforts to provide that
assistance. Unrestricted, safe and unimpeded access
to all humanitarian actors must be guaranteed, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. To
that end, we emphasize that the full participation of
women is essential. The gender approach in developing
such programmes and in their implementation is
crucial. Likewise, it is necessary to ensure that the
humanitarian response plan be adequately funded.
We note with concern the reports of human rights
violations, including threats to women human rights
defenders, arrests, forced disappearances and murders.
Respect for the human rights of all Afghans must be
without distinction. Likewise, the right to education for
girls and to paid work for women must be safeguarded.

S/PV. 8908

We unequivocally condemn the targeted attacks
against civilians, in particular the terrorist attacks that
have taken place in recent weeks. Terrorism continues
to be one of the main threats to peace and security
in Afghanistan and the region. The Council must be
vigilant regarding patterns and trends throughout the
area in order to more effectively deal with that scourge.
Afghanistan must not again become fertile ground
for terrorism.
We echo the point made by Ms. Karim about the
focus on inclusion. A stable and peaceful Afghanistan
will be built insofar as the plurality and diversity of
Afghan voices have a space and representation in the
political, economic and social fields. We cannot go back
to an Afghanistan that does not have the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women, young people
and ethnic, linguistic and religious minorities. In that
regard, resolution 2596 (2021) is unequivocal, as it
highlights the importance of establishing an inclusive
and representative Government, with the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women. We stress the
importance of that.
In conclusion, I express Mexico’s support for the
work carried out by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan and Special Representative
Lyons in this complex situation. Their efforts are vital
to promoting stability in Afghanistan for the benefit of
the Afghan people and the region as a whole.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Isaczai (Afghanistan): Allow me at the outset
to join others in congratulating Mexico on its presidency
of the Security Council. I would also like to welcome
the physical presence of Special Representative Lyons at
this meeting, and I commend her efforts and leadership
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) under very difficult circumstances. I also
thank my countrywoman Ms. Freshta Karim for her
emotional and powerful briefing.
On behalf of the Afghan people, I take this
opportunity to express my profound gratitude and
appreciation to the staff of the United Nations
system, other international organizations and local
non-governmental
organizations
for
providing
life-saving assistance to the people of Afghanistan
during these very difficult and challenging times.

21-3430217/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

Since the previous Council meeting (see S/PV.8853)
on 9 September, the situation in my country has
worsened. Afghanistan is currently facing a crisis of
historic proportions. The lives and dignity of millions
of Afghans are threatened by a failing economy, severe
food insecurity and an absence of security, basic rights
and freedom.
We have heard different figures regarding the
number of Afghan people needing humanitarian
assistance. I will not quote them, because those figures
change as we speak, and the numbers are rising. Let
me be blunt: I would say that the entire population of
35 million people will, sooner or later, need some form
of assistance. Time and our efforts are therefore of
the essence.

17/11/2021

While the responsibility for that catastrophic
situation rests squarely with the Taliban for having
chosen to take power by force and impose itself on the
Afghan people, the international community has no
choice but to remain engaged and hold the Taliban to its
promises and commitments.
Let me outline five areas where the international
community can exercise some leverage and
remain engaged.

Poverty remains widespread. The United Nations
Development Programme estimates that, if the current
trends continue, Afghanistan will experience nearuniversal poverty — a 97 per cent poverty rate by
mid-2022.

First, and without question, as we have heard from
other speakers, humanitarian assistance and the delivery
of health services must be scaled up significantly to
save lives and prevent the country’s total collapse. With
a major drought taking hold, winter approaching, the
pandemic spreading, the economy in a state of collapse
and a regime that cannot pay salaries or provide people
with the most basic services, a perfect storm is brewing.
The impact of the crisis on the most vulnerable will
be devasting and difficult to reverse, especially for
women, children and people with disabilities.

Unfortunately, amid that grim situation, the Taliban
have failed to deliver on its promises and commitments
to Afghans and the international community to mitigate
the impact of the crisis and suffering on the Afghan
population. The Taliban continue to defy international
calls to ensure respect for the human rights of Afghans,
form an inclusive Government and cut its ties with
international terrorist groups. Furthermore, they
continue to commit gender apartheid by preventing
women from working and girls from attending
secondary schools. Today is the sixty-second day of
the Taliban’s nationwide ban on girls’ schooling at the
secondary level. That cannot continue.

According to UNICEF, without immediate
treatment 1 million children are at risk of dying due
to severe acute malnutrition. Therefore, humanitarian
interventions must prioritize those vulnerable groups
and actively target them to ensure that they are not left
behind. We should also scale up delivery mechanisms by
supporting pre-existing platforms, such as the Afghan
National Solidarity Programme and the Community
Development Councils, which have been used in the past
to facilitate the distribution of humanitarian assistance.
We should also support national non-governmental
organizations, which are key to the distribution of
humanitarian assistance.

The Taliban have also supressed peaceful protests
and continue to engage in revengeful killing despite
its so-called amnesty. In addition, we have not seen
any concrete steps by the Taliban to broaden the base
of their transitional authority and establish a road
map for peace that can lead to a truly inclusive and
democratic Government.

That scale-up requires significant additional
funding from the donor community to the United
Nations and other international organizations working
on the ground. The people of Afghanistan are grateful
for the very generous pledges announced during the
Secretary-General’s high-level ministerial meeting
on the humanitarian situation and at the Group of 20
extraordinary leaders’ meeting on Afghanistan, but it
is not enough. I urge donors to continue to fund the
humanitarian appeals and programmes of the United
Nations, as needs are far greater than the current
funding level can address.

The members of the Security Council rightfully
said on many occasions that they would not judge
the Taliban on their words but on their actions. The
Afghan people expect the international community to
keep that promise and pressure the Taliban to pave the
way for an inclusive Government that has both internal
and external legitimacy and represents the voices of
all Afghans.
18/24

The United Nations remains one of the main
lifelines of support for the majority of Afghans today,
but humanitarian aid will not be enough to prevent a
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

collapse of the Afghan economy. The international
community must find ways to operate across the
humanitarian, development and peace continuum.
While doing so, it is, of course, critical to not directly
fund the Taliban regime or implement operational
modalities that indirectly aid them.
In that regard, I applaud the efforts of the United
Nations Development Programme and other United
Nations agencies to establish a Trust Fund and other
mechanisms to pay the salaries of health personnel and
teachers and transfer cash directly to poor households.
I urge the Council to find ways to address the current
banking crisis and continue to exempt humanitarian
and service delivery operations from sanctions.
Secondly, to overcome the perpetual state of crisis
in Afghanistan, it is imperative to resuscitate the
dormant peace process that began in Doha and work
towards a long-term and durable peace.
The situation in Afghanistan is extremely fragile.
It is only through an inclusive Government that we can
safeguard against a new civil war along ethnic lines and
the use of Afghan territory by foreign terrorist outfits,
as well as make a transition from a perpetual state of
humanitarian crisis to a more stable economy.
The role of the United Nations as an impartial and
honest broker in putting together a road map for peace is
paramount. In that regard, I echo Ms. Karim’s call for the
organization of an international conference that can turn
the current crisis and transition into new opportunities
for peace and lead to an inclusive government in which
Afghans of all ethnicities and backgrounds, including
women, see themselves. Towards that aim, we ask the
Council to consider, during its deliberations in March,
a comprehensive and strong mandate for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan that can
initiate dialogue among Afghans for lasting peace.
Thirdly, it is important that the international
community engage with the Taliban in accordance with
the commitments made in various Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, that is, not to recognize
the reinstatement of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan
or any Government imposed by force. Women’s
rights, girls’ education, freedom of media and the
establishment of an inclusive Government, including
with the participation of women, should be at the centre
of international engagement with the Taliban.

S/PV. 8908

Fourthly, the international community must
establish a human rights monitoring and accountability
mechanism in Afghanistan. We are pleased with the
decision of the Human Rights Council establishing a
Special Rapporteur for Afghanistan, but more needs to
be done to hold the Taliban and other parties accountable
for past and ongoing violations of human rights.
Fifthly, we call on the international community
to engage Afghans, not as victims but rather as
stakeholders, in building sustainable peace in
Afghanistan. While the Taliban has not changed, the
Afghan population has. Many Afghans today are well
educated and have benefited from the opportunities
provided during the past 20 years and remain determined
to change their country for the better. They can provide
alternative voices, inform policies and drive local and
national change.
Therefore, I urge the international community
to consult and engage Afghans, particularly women,
in all its actions, and to directly support civil society
organizations, including human rights defenders on
the ground.
At this challenging time, we ask the international
community for its support in getting us back on track
to halt the spiral of crisis facing my country and
work towards a stable Afghanistan that can fulfil its
obligations to its citizens and protect and promote
the rights and dignity of all its citizens without
any discrimination.
The overarching desire of every Afghan is to
achieve a just and durable political settlement and
the establishment of an inclusive and representative
government that includes women and all ethnic groups.
That settlement must lead to a dignified and lasting
solution to the conflict and the preservation of the gains
of the past 20 years, especially for women and girls.
We need the support of the international
community in those efforts. The United Nations, and
most notably the Council, must be clear that it will
not recognize a government that is not inclusive and
representative. It must be made clear that women’s
rights and empowerment are non-negotiable issues and
that any Government wishing to enjoy international
support has to provide constitutional guarantees for the
rights of all its citizens and comply with Afghanistan’s
international commitments.

21-3430219/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the need for
urgent action to address the humanitarian crisis and
achieve sustainable peace in Afghanistan. As Special
Representative Lyons mentioned, the collapse of
Afghanistan is not only an Afghan issue. It is an issue
that should concern the entire international community.
While Afghans are the primary victims of the tragedy
today, we are unlikely to remain the only ones in
the future.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting.
I would also like to thank Special Representative Lyons
for her briefing and for leading the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Today’s meeting is very timely and important,
given that Afghanistan is facing serious challenges.
The humanitarian situation is highly alarming. As
winter approaches, the people are facing an imminent
humanitarian crisis. That makes the provision of
humanitarian aid to Afghanistan more urgent.
The role of the United Nations in the current
situation is crucial. We support the efforts of UNAMA
and other United Nations agencies in aiding the
Afghan people.
As a neighbouring country, and based on the
common historic, cultural, linguistic and religious
bonds between our two nations, Iran cannot remain
indifferent to the plight of the people of Afghanistan. For
over four decades, we have hosted millions of Afghans
and generously helped them, particularly during
the pandemic and under severe economic situations
resulting from unlawful United States sanctions.
Since mid-August, thousands of Afghans have
been entering Iran on daily basis. If the humanitarian
situation is not addressed urgently and properly,
hundreds of thousands more Afghans are estimated to
enter Iran in the coming winter months. To date, we have
done everything in our power to help Afghans entering
Iran, including through the provision of basic needs.
Additionally, we have dispatched many humanitarian
convoys to Afghanistan.
However, due to unlawful and inhumane United
States sanctions and in the absence of sufficient new
20/24

17/11/2021

financial resources, we will no longer be able to help
them on our own.
Let us be straightforward. This is not a local
challenge, and Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries
must not be left alone and expected to address this
extremely difficult challenge single-handedly. We
call on the international community and in particular
donor countries to live up to their responsibilities
and extend new and adequate financial resources to
Afghanistan’s neighbours to help Afghan refugees and
displaced persons.
The timely provision of humanitarian assistance
and the release of Afghanistan’s frozen assets, which
are essential for reviving Afghan’s economy and saving
people’s lives, should in no way be politicized or
conditional. Parallel efforts must also be made to avoid
a total collapse of the Afghan economy. However, these
urgent efforts must not deflect our attention and efforts
from the need to counter terrorism and drug trafficking
in Afghanistan.
The recent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan,
including the ones that took place in Kabul today, are
alarming and of grave concern. They indicate how
essential addressing these threats have become for
regional and international peace and security. They also
exhibit, once more, the brutalities of terrorists. There
should therefore be zero tolerance towards terrorism
and those who finance, organize and support it in
Afghanistan. It must be ensured that the territory of
Afghanistan must never be used for terrorist activities
or operated as a safe haven for terrorist groups or as
source for producing, and trafficking in, drugs.
The establishment of a truly inclusive and
representative government, with the participation of all
ethnic and religious groups, committed to combating
terrorism and organized crime and guaranteeing and
protecting the human rights of all Afghans including
ethnic, linguistic, and religious minorities and women,
based on true Islamic teachings and principles, is
vital for building a secure, stable, and prosperous
Afghanistan. To that end, Iran will continue its
engagement with all parties in Afghanistan, including
the Taliban. In pursuing our peaceful and humanitarian
endeavours in the country, Iran’s Special Representative
for Afghanistan is currently visiting Kabul. During
his visit, he has met with senior Taliban officials and
discussed urgent issues, such as humanitarian aid,
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

refugees, and security and economic challenges that the
people of Afghanistan are facing.
We will also continue our consultations with
Afghanistan’s neighbours as well as regional and
international partners, including the United Nations,
to help bring durable peace, security, and stability to
Afghanistan. In that context, on 27 October 2021, we
hosted the second ministerial meeting of neighbours
of Afghanistan, including China, Iran, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, as well as
the Russian Federation. In a statement issued at the
end of that meeting, the participants expressed their
strong support for achieving peace, stability and
national reconciliation in Afghanistan and encouraged
all parties in the country, including the Taliban,
to continue political dialogue and consultations to
establish an inclusive and representative government
with participation of all groups and segments of
the country.
Iran will continue to assist the people of Afghanistan
and to work with Afghanistan’s neighbours and other
partners to ensure a durable peace and sustainable
development in the country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Hikmat (Tajikistan): I thank the Mexican
delegation for convening today’s meeting. I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Freshta Karim
for her insightful story. We also thank the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for the
work that it has been doing in Afghanistan.
With the withdrawal of coalition forces,
Afghanistan has entered a new era — an era that has
begun with growing economic, financial and political
challenges, rampant discontent and increasing doubts
about the future of the country. Achievements and
progress that the country had made during the last
20 years, particularly in empowering and protecting
the rights of women and girls, are fading out. Today
Afghanistan stands at a critical juncture.
A grave humanitarian crisis is unfolding in the
country. Almost half of the population is already in
need of humanitarian assistance. Some 7 million people
have no access to health-care facilities. Many people do

S/PV. 8908

not have enough to eat, with 3.1 million children at risk
of severe acute malnutrition, and there are high levels
of violence and displacement. This is the Afghanistan
that the international community has left behind. The
current difficult situation in Afghanistan requires us,
its immediate neighbours, to make more efforts to
restore peace and stability in this country.
The Taliban’s takeover of Kabul has worsened the
internal political, socioeconomic and security situation
in the country, which will have greater implications not
only for countries of the region but also for countries
beyond the region. The exportation of extremism,
terrorism and radical ideologies, an increase in drug
trafficking and a greater flow of refugees are some of
the immediate challenges the countries of the region
could face if the situation further deteriorates. There is
therefore a great need for the international community
to undertake concerted efforts aimed at preventing the
aforementioned challenges at Afghanistan’s borders.
With the Taliban’s current approach, we will
be heading towards the point of no return sooner
rather than later. Through different formats in Italy,
Russia, India, Pakistan and Turkey, the international
community has sent clear messages to the Taliban: to
form an inclusive government, cut their ties with other
terrorist organizations, not turn Afghanistan into a safe
haven for terrorists, and ensure the fundamental rights
of women, children and ethnic groups. So far, none of
our demands has been met or, to be exact, none of their
promises has been kept. Their caretaker Government is
entirely dominated by the representatives of one ethnic
group — a terrorist group.
In cooperation with Al-Qaida, the Islamic State and
other terrorist organizations, the Taliban continue their
military operations in the Panjshir province against the
National Resistance Forces led by Ahmad Massoud.
Today the Taliban have concentrated their forces in the
northern part of Afghanistan settled by such terrorist
groups as Al-Qaida and Jamaat Ansarullah next to the
border with Tajikistan.
In the Taliban’s medieval mindset and in their
misinterpretation of sharia law there is no place for
the rights of women and girls. They made that crystal
clear by abolishing the Ministry of Women’s Affairs
and stating that women would not be part of their new
Government. It is important to note that the removal
of women from decision-making posts and other
controversial decisions by the Taliban are contrary to

21-3430221/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Taliban’s own previous promises.
Twenty years have passed, and the world has
changed, but the Taliban have not. Nevertheless,
Afghanistan has changed during these years. Certain
progress has been made in ensuring the rights of
women and girls. A new generation of young people and
educated women — individuals who have witnessed
the changes and freedoms that the last 20 years have
brought — has emerged; to them the lifestyle and
barbaric governance methods of the Taliban are alien.
We therefore should not be misled by the Taliban’s
empty promises. Real change should take place on the
ground before the international community makes the
next move. As an international community, we should
be consistent in our approach and cohesive in our
actions. We must apply additional pressure on Taliban
to make sure that they hear our messages and comply.
Tajikistan strongly condemns all forms of
lawlessness, murder, robbery and persecution of the
Afghan people, including Tajiks, Uzbeks, Hazaras and
other ethnic groups. Long-suffering Afghanistan and its
people should not be drawn again into another bloody
war. As a country sharing not only common cultural and
linguistic ties but the longest border among the Central
Asian countries with Afghanistan, Tajikistan cannot
remain indifferent when the entire Afghan people are
on the brink of a humanitarian catastrophe.
The winter is coming. The current socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation will deteriorate even further.
To that end, urgent, unimpeded and direct humanitarian
assistance should be provided to the Afghan people and
distributed in a non-discriminatory manner across all
sections of Afghan society, under the auspices of the
United Nations. In that endeavour, the international
community should take care to avoid strengthening and
boosting the Taliban.
In that connection, we commend the recent efforts
and initiative of the United Nations Development
Programme to pay the salaries of more than 23,000
health workers in Afghanistan, providing $15 million
to prevent the collapse of the entire sector. Tajikistan
is ready to lend its infrastructure and territory to help
deliver the necessary humanitarian assistance to the
Afghan people.
Tajikistan has always supported the restoration of
lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan and remains
22/24

17/11/2021

committed to its position. We reiterate that we will
only support an inclusive Government in Afghanistan
in which all social and ethnopolitical strata of the
country are represented. We also hope that the future
Government of Afghanistan will guarantee the
fundamental rights and freedoms of all Afghan citizens,
particularly women. Tajikistan will not recognize any
Government formed through oppression, persecution
and without taking into account the interests of the
entire Afghan people, especially ethnic minorities.
At this historical juncture, we believe that the
creation of an inclusive Government is the only way to
meet the hopes of millions of Afghan people who strive
to see peace and prosperity return to Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The delegation of
Pakistan is grateful for this opportunity to participate
in the Security Council’s review of the situation
in Afghanistan.
We commend Ambassador Deborah Lyons, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her very
comprehensive briefing, in which she described the role
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan.
We also heard from two Afghan citizens— Ms. Karim,
whose emotional message obviously resonates with us,
and Ambassador Isaczai, who represents a country, but
not a Government. We believe that this Council meeting
and similar meetings would benefit from those who are
actually ruling in Kabul and getting a comprehensive
picture of the situation there, rather than relying on an
ex parte discussion of this nature.
The nightmare scenarios that were feared after
15 August have not come to pass. There has been no
widespread violence or violations of human rights in
Afghanistan. According to United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations, the security situation is
vastly improved. The interim Government has allowed
and facilitated the provision of direct assistance to
the Afghan people, including through women aid
workers — and I would like Ms. Lyons to confirm
that. It is responding positively to engagement with the
international community, including the neighbouring
countries. The glass may be only half full, yet
engagement has yielded progress on several concerns
of the international community. Unfortunately, that has
not been fully reflected in today’s debate.
21-34302

17/11/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

Schools for girls through the sixth grade are open
all across Afghanistan. I think Ambassador Lyons can
confirm that as well. Universities are open, with women
attending those universities, albeit in segregated classes.
What is not open is secondary school, where — we are
told by the Taliban — they lack teachers and the ability
to pay the teachers in order to open those schools.
The immediate challenge, of course, is the dire
humanitarian and economic crisis in Afghanistan.
Half the population — 28 million people — face acute
food insecurity. Winter will exacerbate hunger and
deprivation, especially in the inaccessible parts of
Afghanistan. We commend the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral, the United Nations and international
organizations — the World Food Programme (WFP), the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF, the
World Health Organization and others — in responding
to the food and other humanitarian needs of the Afghan
people. They report that they are receiving — and I
quote the Secretary-General —“excellent cooperation”
from the Government in Kabul. We are grateful that
the Secretary-General’s flash appeal for 2021 has been
fully funded.
But we all realize that more help will be needed to
avoid a humanitarian disaster and an economic collapse.
Humanitarian organizations are also facing practical
challenges due to the existence of bilateral and Security
Council sanctions. As the Secretary-General has said,
humanitarian assistance must be unconditional. I am
therefore shocked at the demands here to leverage
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan in order
to extract political concessions. That is contrary
to international law. We hope that the appropriate
decisions will be made to enable the United Nations and
other organizations to overcome the practical problems
that are impeding the critically needed assistance to the
Afghan people.
The larger crisis that is looming is the danger of a
complete economic collapse. Cash is needed to revive
the economy — to pay salaries, restore small businesses
and revive the banking system. We welcome the
establishment of the special trust fund for Afghanistan.
We hope that this and similar mechanisms will be set
up quickly to scale up the flow of money and stabilize
the Afghan economy and that the unjustified freeze of
Afghanistan’s assets will be lifted soon.

S/PV. 8908

The consequences of a major humanitarian crisis
and economic collapse in Afghanistan would be
horrendous — massive human suffering, the outflow
of millions of additional refugees, the likelihood of
chaos and further conflict and the strengthening of
Da’esh and other terrorist groups. When millions of
Afghan refugees start flowing across our borders, we,
who are already hosting 4 million Afghan refugees,
will not be able to take in any more. They will have
to go elsewhere. These are consequences that the
international community must avoid.
Pakistan is doing all it can. We have committed
$30 million in assistance to Afghanistan. Wheat,
rice, emergency medical supplies and other essential
items are being sent to Afghanistan. We have lifted
duties on imports of Afghan commodities. We are
facilitating transit trade, providing essential medicines
and refurbishing Afghan hospitals. Pakistan is also
facilitating the WFP’s delivery of 10,000 tons of
wheat flour, and a humanitarian air service — an air
bridge — has been set up between Islamabad and Kabul.
During the recent visit of the acting Foreign
Minister of the Kabul authorities, accompanied by
Kabul’s acting Finance, Trade and Aviation Ministers
to Islamabad, Pakistan agreed to provide training in
aviation, safety and other fields for doctors, nurses
and paramedics. We have also taken other steps to help
stabilize Afghanistan’s economic governance.
Pakistan has also taken concrete steps towards
Afghan stability. We initiated the platform of the six
neighbouring countries plus Russia, which has met
twice and will meet again in China early next year.
The aim is to promote a regional consensus on steps
to normalize the situation in Afghanistan, especially
through economic integration and connectivity.
The extended troika grouping — China, Pakistan,
Russia and the United States — is a key format to
promote the political decisions required to stabilize
Afghanistan and the region. The extended troika met
last week in Islamabad, and also interacted with the
visiting acting Afghan Foreign Minister. The meeting
conveyed the expectations of the members of the
extended troika on inclusivity, human rights, girls’
education and women’s participation, the prevention of
vengeful acts against former Government officials, the
elimination of the presence of terrorist organizations
within Afghanistan and controlling drug trafficking.
For his part, the acting Foreign Minister of Afghanistan

21-3430223/24

S/PV.8908

The situation in Afghanistan

conveyed that the authorities in Kabul have disavowed
revenge and announced an amnesty for its former
opponents and functionaries who are now incorporated
in the governance structures and ministries in Kabul.
Evacuations of people wishing to leave Afghanistan are
allowed in the normal process.
There has been progress towards opening of girls’
schools and universities. Women are working in the
health and education sectors, and their right to work in
other sectors is recognized. The interim Government
has also reaffirmed assurances in all formats that
Afghanistan’s soil will not be used against any country
and that it will take effective action against Da’esh and
the Islamic State-Khorasan Province. It has sought
assistance in countering the menace of drug trafficking.
It has also called for the unfreezing of Afghanistan’s
assets. That would be the best reaffirmation of solidarity.
The process of engagement with the interim
Government in Kabul has produced progress towards
the objectives and expectations of the international
community; it should be continued and intensified. It is
through such further engagement and dialogue, rather
than coercion, that the international community will be
able to advance its desire for an inclusive Government,
respect for human rights, especially the rights of
women, and effective counter-terrorism. While pressing
its concerns, the international community must also
remain responsive — and realistic — to Afghanistan’s
humanitarian and economic needs, its culture and its
historical circumstances.

24/24

17/11/2021

I endorse the Special Representative’s suggestion for
a road map towards normalization in Afghanistan, one
that would eventually lead to international acceptance,
recognition and representation of the new Government
at the United Nations. Pakistan believes that UNAMA
will continue to have an important and vital role in the
process of normalization in Afghanistan. We hope that
UNAMA’s renewed mandate will be responsive to the
role it should play in such a process of normalization.
Unfortunately, there are some in our region that,
for narrow national reasons, continue to play the role
of spoiler in Afghanistan. They are still involved in
schemes to destabilize Afghanistan. They must be
exposed and isolated.
After 40 years, there is an opportunity for peace
throughout Afghanistan, an opportunity to root out
terrorism from there. That opportunity must not be
sacrificed at the altar of ego, revenge or disappointment,
much less allowed to be sabotaged by those who see
personal or strategic gain in continued conflict and
chaos in Afghanistan.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I would
again like to thank Ms. Karim for her participation in
today’s meeting.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

21-34302
