UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2464th

MEETING:

NEW

11 AUGUST

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2464)
Adoption of the agenda

... ... .... ... ... .. .... .... ... .. ... ..

1
1

.,.............................................

Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15914). . . . . . . . . . . * .,..... n.,.........

I
1

.
:.
::

WPV.2464

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfjciaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system,‘which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2464th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,

11 August 1983, at 6.30 p.m.

President: Mr. Luc de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France).

Jamahiriya to the President of the Council in a letter
dated 8 August.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. Members of the Council also have before them the
following documents: S/15912, containing the text of a
letter dated 6 August from the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the President of the Council;
S/15913, containing the text of a letter dated 8 August
from the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to the Secretary-General;
S/l 59 19 and
S/15920, containing the texts of two letters dated 10
August from the representative of the United States to the
President of the Council.

Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2464)
1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda

.,

Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15914)
The meeting was caled to order at 6.55 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 8 August 1983 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/15914)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Cuba, Democratic Yemen, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and the Syrian Arab Republic in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. In keeping with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Burwin (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya) took a pIace at the Council table; Mr.
Garcia Iturbe (Cuba), Mr. Al-A@ (Democratic Yemen),
Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran) and Mr.
AI-Atassi (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
Security Council is meeting today in response to the
request made by the representative of the Libyan Arab

4. Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a- letter dated 11 August from the -representative of the
Sudan to the President of the Council. The text of this
letter will be distributed tomorrow as document S/15921.
5. The first speaker is the representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, on whom I now call.
6. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya).(interpretation from Arabic): Mr. President, I wish at the outset to
express to you, and through you to the other members of
the Council, our thanks for the prompt response to our
request for the convening of the Council. There is no
doubt that this prompt response clearly indicates the
Council’s desire to discharge its responsibilities concerning the maintenance of international peace and security.
7. In a message conveyed by Colonel Muammar Qaddafi, Leader of the victorious Revolution of glorious Sep
tember, addressed to the President of the Council and the
Secretary-General, he indicated the threats posed to international peace and security, as well as the reasons for
convening a meeting of the Council [see S/25912]. He
informed the President of the Council that international
security was faced by a threat of the utmost gravity in the
Arab region and Africa as a result of the landing of
United States forces of all kinds in these areas, -some of
them taking place-on Libya’s borders; and that the landing of those forces presents a direct threat to the security
of Libya, which is compelled to defend itself from the
threat posed by the landing by sea and by air of American
forces on its borders.
8. The Leader of the revolution

added:

“I wish to inform you that the responsibility for any
breakdown of international security in this region as a
result of that landing lies entirely with the Government

of the United States, and consequently with the Security Council, if it does not intervene to compel the
Government in question to halt this large-scale troop
landing, which threatens security in this extremely sensitive and troubled region.

enough to indicate here that after that date we conveyed a
letter-on 10 May to the President of the Council concerning the aggressive and provocative acts of the United
States Administration
[S/Z57.5.5l. I should like to point
out briefly that the United States aggressive policy against
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has been embodied in concrete acts since 1972, as follows.

“I request the Security Council to take all measures
consistent with its responsibilities for safeguarding the
security of States Members of the United Nations and
also peace and security in the region.” [ibid.]

13. Since 1972 the United States has refused to enter
into a dialogue and to establish normal diplomatic relations with Libya. Since 1973 American aircraft have so far
violated Libyan airspace 336 times, 174 of them during
the past months; 158 violations took place after the meetings of the Council last February. It seems that the United
States is in complete accord with the international community! In 1974 the United States stopped the delivery of
eight C-130 aircraft despite the fact that they had ,been
paid for. In January 1977, the United States Defense
Department added Libya to the ‘list of enemies of the
United States of America. In 1978 the United States
launched an undeclared economic war and froze the civil
Boeing aircraft deal which was about to be concluded with
the Libyan Arab Airlines. In the period 27 to 30 July 1978,
the United States Sixth Fleet conducted provocative
manoeuvres near the Libyan coast. On 22 April 197?, a
.United States jet fighter intercepted a civil Libyan aeroplane which was on a regular flight between Benghazi and
Damascus. On 8 August the United States Sixth Fleet conducted further provocative manoeuvres near Libyan territorial waters. In May 1980, espionage cells spying on the
Jamahiriya were discovered.

9. As representatives know, the Council met last February [2416th meeting] when it was acquainted with United
States aggressive intentions and provocations against the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. We had hoped that the United
States Administration would change its conduct and cease
its provocations and violations of Libya’s territorial sovereignty and allow the Libyan people to live in peace and
build its country in security like any other nation. But the
United States Administration, which is driven by a lust for
power, still believes that military power is enough to frustrate the will of the people and change the political systems
in the smaller countries which oppose its policy, reject the
domination of its hegemony, pursue a free policy and
observe the principles of non-alignment. Thus the United
States Administration has persisted in its aggressive policy
against Libya and escalated the tension in the area, using
all means and designs in order to create the pretexts it
believes necessary to attack the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
10. The United States has been an enemy of Libya since
the 1969 revolution in Libya. The reasons for this enmity
are crystal clear. Libya pursues a non-aligned policy, and
the United States wants it to be one of the puppet re imes,
under its hegemony, as was the case before the revo Pution.
Libya dismantled the American bases that were on its soil,
and the United States wants to restore those bases to use
them in acts of aggression against the neighbouring countries, as it did in 1967 when American aircraft took off
from Willis Air Base to ‘attack Nasser’s Egypt and help
the Zionist entity in its aggression against the Arab countries, as well as support the racist rt!gime in South Africa
and provide it with weapons from those bases.

14. Since 1981 there has been an intensification of the
inimical media campaign against the Jamahiriya. In May
United States authorities closed the Libyan People’s
Of&e in Washingtori and expelled all those who worked
there. On 3 July, the plot hatched by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to assassinate Colonel Qaddafi, the
Leader of the Libyan Revolution, was unveiled. On 19
August, United States aircraft violated Libyan airspace
and engaged in a skirmish with two Libyan aircraft that
were on a regular flight. Also, the aircraft-carrier Nimitz
entered the territorial waters in the Gulf of Sidra. Since
August pressure has been brought to bear on American
oil companies to stop their operations in Libya. On 18
September, the United States Administration
prohibited
the comfiletion of American spare parts for the maintenance of civil aviation in Libya. On 10 December, the
United States Administration
advised all Americans to
leave Libya and prohibited American citizens from travelling to Libya with a view to preventing Libya from exporting oil and, consequently, undermining its economy.

11. Libya nationalized the oil companies and put an end
to the American monopolies; it liberated its economy. But
the United States does not want it to control the main
resources of its economy so that the United States may
continue its enslavement of our country and keep it linked
to the will of American imperialism. Libya stands by
countries under colonial and racist domination and supports their liberation movements, as in the cases of the
peoples of Palestine, Namibia and South Africa. The
United States supports the two racist rigimes in Pretoria
and Tel Aviv. It considers them its allies, and that is the
reason it can never support the policy of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and its support of freedom.
:.
:.
.*.
:.
.‘.
:.
:.
. .
:_
:.
:.
:.
:.
:.
:.
:.
:_
:.

15. On 10 March 1982. the United States Administration prohibited the -imp&tation
of Libyan oil and the
exportation of spare parts and technical equipment used
in the oil industry in Libya. On 26 March, exportation of
all equipment and technical devices to Libya was
prohibited.

12. Therefore, Libya has been the object of virulent
media campaigns and a series of direct and indirect
threats and provocations and aggression. We have given
details of those acts in the United Nations, in addition to
our statement before the Council on 22 February [24ISth
meeting]. There is no need to go over those details. It is

16. On 16 February 1983, the United States Administration sent four AWACS aircraft to Egypt and moved the
aircraft-carrier Nimitz to the Libyan coast. On 18 Febru2

ary, the Nimifz jammed radio broadcasts inside the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and obstructed civil wireless
communications. On 18 March, the American Administration enacted legislation preventing Libyan students
from studying nuclear energy or aviation in the United
States. And just yesterday, nine Libyan students were
arrested in Miami and put in jail by the American authorities. On 31 January, American tighter jets intercepted a
Libyan aeroplane on a regular flight from Greece to
Libya. The Rapid Deployment Forces are at present conducting manoeuvres in two countries neighbouring on
Libya; and we already stated our views with regard to
those manoeuvres, along with a number of other States, in
document S/15872 of 18 July.

20. The United States has reneged on all its international
responsibilities as a major Power and a permanent member
of the Security Council, and it has begun to engage in and
lead international terrorism, as well as to commit acts of
piracy and terrorism as a day-to-&y policy. The deployment and spread of American bases and the American fleet
throughout the world has but one aim-that of intimidating
peoples and protecting imperialist monopolies, as well as to
protect racist regimes, strangle liberation movements and
fight against nationalist regimes.
21. The actions being taken by the United States confirm the gravity of the American policy, a terrorist policy
aimed against international peace and security and the
freedom and independence of peoples. The sending of
such troops to Africa and the increase of its naval flotilla
off the Libyan coast is a direct threat to the security and
sovereignty of the people of Libya. On 5 August, we sent
a letter to the President of the Security Council setting
forth our point of view [see S/25910].

17. All that is from the historical perspective. But what
is the present situation? The United States is exploiting
the civil war in Chad and has begun to send its troops and
to concentrate them in three countries bordering on the
Jamahiriya, as well as off its coast. These forces have in
the last few days been sent in successive waves consisting
of military aircraft, ships and spy planes, as well as aeroplanes capable of in-flight fuelling, all within the framework of preparing for aggression against the Jamahiriya
under the camouflage of helping and protecting the rebel
regime in Chad, claiming strategic interest in the region.
The sophisticated military machinery being directed
against Libya, which includes the aircraft-carrier Eisenhower and another ship carrying guided missiles and seven
escort ships are now north-west of Benghazi, off the
Libyan coast. A helicopter carrier is stationed south of the
island of Crete, along with four other ships. Along the
border between the Sudan and Libya there are at present
two AWACS aircraft, 16 F-15 jet fighters and 4 tanker
aircraft for refuelling in the air, as well as Y-2 reconnaissance aircraft. The strategic American reconnaissance
planes are conducting military missions, and two of them
are engaged in continuous 24-hour-per-day operations
along the Libyan-Egyptian-Sudanese-Chadian
borders.
One of these planes takes off from an Egyptian airbase
while the other takes off from Sudanese territory. Four
recqnnaissance aircraft fly continuously over the Libyan
coasttwo of them are based in Greece, one in Cyprus and
the fourth in Egypt.

24. The American provocations and threats directed
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and other peoples in
the world are part of the American strategy of intervention in the affairs of independent States which refuse to
yield to the policies and colonial interests of that country
and that reject racism, monopoly and hegemony.

18. As for the American aircraft stationed in Egypt,
there are two AWACS and six airborne refuelling aircraft,
as well as 24 F-16s and 40 military helicopters. One C-135
began flying aggressive missions aimed at monitoring
movements in Chad from Sudanese territory. A satellite
station has been placed in N’Djamena, as well as missile
platforms furnished by the United States to the rebel
Habre in N’Djamena near the Sudanese border.

25. Such aggressive practices are violations of the Charter
of the United Nations and of international law, especially
the principles prohibiting the use or threat of force and
calling for non-intervention in the internal affairs of other
States and recognition of the rights of people freely to
choose their political, economic and social systems. They
are also a violation of United Nations resolutions aimed
at turning the Mediterranean into a zone of peace and
co-operation.

19. The United States persists in bringing pressure to
bear on Egypt and the Sudan to compel them to send their
troops to Chad. The United States has sent a group of
transport aircraft to Zaire to transfer more of that country’s troops to Chad to light alongside the rebel Hissein
HabrC and possibly to play a part in the American conspiracy and aggression against the Jamahiriya.

26. The continuation of such practices on the part of the
American Administration
constitutes a source of aggression, intervention and instability in many parts of the
world. It is also support of the racist regimes in Palestine
and southern Africa against the interests of the Arab and
African peoples. Libya is now alerting the international
community of the threats being posed to it and to the

22. I cannot fail at this juncture to draw the attention of
the Council once again to the serious situation that has
resulted from the intensification by the American Administration of tension both in the Mediterranean and in
Africa through its official statements, which are of a
threatening nature, as well as through the sending of units
of the Sixth Fleet to the waters off the coast of Libya and
of advisers and military equipment to Chad, not to mention the AWACS planes to neighbouring countries of
Libya with a view to monitoring Libyan airspace.
23. That policy and the practices being pursued by the
American Administration
confirm the fixed aggressive
intentions of that Government against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, intentions that we have drawn attention to in
the past.

3

.-:___’
,/,’
.‘_>
_‘,_
_‘,’

,-:
/,’, I
;:,‘_’
,,‘_
,-.
:

security and peace of its people, and the gravity of the
situation in the Mediterranean and Africa and is thus
drawing attention to the danger to international peace
and security inherent in that policy.

32. The Council today is confronted with a most grave
threat to international peace and security and a brazen,
contemptuous challenge to the bedrock principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. This threat and this challenge come primarily from one source-and let there be
no doubt on this score. Libya is engaged in open, flagrant,
unprovoked aggression against the legitimate Goveinment of the sovereign nation’of Chad. Libyan ground and
air forces have invaded Chad. These forces, with Libyan
tanks, Libyan aircraft and Libyan artillery, attacked and
overwhelmed the key lmilitary outpost of Faya-Largeau.
That town has been subjected to vicious bombardment by
Libyan war planes manned by Libyan pilots-indiscriminate bombardment with napalm and high explosives on
civilian as well as military targets.

27. The claims of protecting interests on which the
American intervention is based have made many coun‘tries of the : world subject to American provocations,
.aggression and intervention in their internal affairs. The
United States has arrogated to itself the right to act as
international
policeman and has assumed the right,
through its troops, military bases and agents to dominate
the world and usurp the competence of the Security Council and to immobilize it by resorting to the exercise of its
right of veto against draft resolutions aimed at protecting
the rights of people. It thus flouts the will of the international community and stands beside the racist and-imperialist regimes. It has exercised its veto power more than
30 times against the causes of various peoples.

33. This is Libya’s war..‘It is Libya that is guilty of
aggression. It is Libya that stands in contemptuous disregard of its obligations under the Charter. And one more
basic fact must be confronted: in this assault on the very
concept of non-use of force in reconciliation of differences
between States, the outlaw regime of Muammar Qaddafi
is supported, supplied and encouraged by a permanent
member of the Council, the Soviet Union.

28. This is sufficient. I shall not delve into the American
conspiracies and aggressive acts in different parts of the
world, especially in Central America. It is sufficient to
mention what it does against Nicaragua, Cuba and Grenada. We mentioned something to this effect at last February’s meeting.

34. And now the Soviet Union joins Libya in an attempt
to obfuscate the clear issue we have been confrontingthe fact of Libyan aggression against Chad-with a smokescreen of patently diversionary countercharges.’ TheyLibya and the Soviets-allege United States intervention,
United States interference, in the affairs of African
nations. And so it is necessary, as a first order of business,
to sort out these various issues, even as we keep our principal focus on the overriding issue of Libyan expansionism.

29. We are a small, peaceful, non-aligned people. We
work at building our country. We want peace for ourselves and security for ourselves and other peoples. The
people of Libya, which liberated its country from the
American and British bases, liberated its economy and
achieved mammoth development progress, wishes to have
relations based on mutual respect and non-intervention
with all nations, including the United States. We have
tried to enter into dialogue with the United States, and we
are still ready to do so, and to consider any present problems, if there are any, with the American Administration.
But that Administration continually refuses the policy of
dialogue and insists on the policy of dependence, putting
us in the position of puppets, which we refuse. I wish to
confirm that the Libyan people will protect its freedom,
sovereignty and achievements, whatever the circumstances and whatever the sacritices,,and will never be intimidated by the aircraft carriers or the AWACS aircraft on its
borders.

35. One of the peripheral issues injected into the debate
as a deliberate diversion is that of joint training exercises
in the Middle East in which United States forces will be
engaged along with those of several other nations--even,
I might note, as the Soviets and Libyans engage in such
exercises, as recently, indeed, as 30 June to 4 July of this
year. These exercises have absolutely nothing to do with
the events we confront in Chad, as the Libyans and
Soviets know perfectly well, and as the. United States
Government made perfectly clear in a letter of 22 July
addressed to the President of the Council [S/Z5887J, and
reiterated in its letter dated IO-August [S/15919]. I quote
from that letter: ’

30. In conclusion,-1 should like to say that the Security
Council must discharge its responsibilities in full and condemn the American provocations and put an end to them
if it really wishes to preserve the prestige of the United
Nations and its reputation as a means of maintaining
peace and security in the world.
a
31. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): At
the outset, I must comment on the dramatic and revealing
contrast between the dignified and compelling presentation that we heard earlier today from the Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Chad,
addressing a real and urgent issue of international peace
and security, and the combination of fabrications and
irrelevances that we have just heard from the representative of Libya.

“The purposes and scope ofthese joint exercises are
clearly set forth in my letter of 22 July [S/l58873 to
you, and in advance announcements by several of the
Governments whose forces are participating in the
exercises. These training exercises threaten no one, are
,wholly defensive in nature, do not involve contested
land or sea space and are entirely consistent with international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
“The United States unequivocally states that the
exercises pose no threat to the security of any country
in Africa and the Middle Eastern region and that the
exercises are not a response to any other situation or
activity which may’be taking place in any neighbouring
country or countries.
4

“These exercises were scheduled and planned before
Libya launched its invasion of Chad with ground and
air forces. No amount of obfuscation on the part of
Libya can disguise the fact that Libyan conspiracies,
threats, and aggressions against its neighbours-now
graphically demonstrated by Libyan armoured battalions and warplanes operating deep within the territory
of Chad-have
upset the peace and security of the
region.”

38. On 24 June, Libya&supported
rebel forces led by
Goukouni Weddey captured the key outpost of FayaLargeau from the army of Chad, led by its President,
Hissein Habrt. The town of AbechC fell to rebel forces on
8 July. But then, to Libya’s apparent consternation, the
army of Chad recaptured Faya-Largeau on 30 July, as it
had re-taken Abtcht on 12 July; and it was this dramatic
turnabout that sparked a sudden escalation of Libyan
involvement in Chad, which was extensive before that
battle and which has been critical to the insurgents all
along. Indeed, since August of last year, Libya had been
building up the insurgent forces of Goukouni, principally
at a training base at the town of ‘Sebha in Libya.

36. A second issue intended simply and solely to divert
attention from Libyan aggression is that of alleged United
States intervention in northern Africa, as charged in a
tandem of complaints by Libya and the Soviet Union
earlier this week [S/Z5920 and S/25923, annex]. The
United States Government has also replied to these utter
fabrications in a letter to the President of the Council
dated 10 August [S/25920], from which I wish to quote:

39. Elements of 15 Libyan battalions have been active in
northern Chad, going back to last August. These include
commando, mechanized infantry, armed reconnaissance,
artillery and tank battalions. The artillery that was used
with such devastating effect in June in the battle of FayaLargeau, for example, was manned by Libyans.

“The statements contained in these two letters are
clearly designed to divert attention from the fact that
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya itself bears the primary
responsibility for tension and conflict in Chad and the
surrounding area. It has been conclusively demonstrated that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is engaged in
the unlawful use of armed force against the territorial
integrity and political independence of Chad. Over an
extended period, aircraft of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya have conducted an intensive campaign of bombing
cities in Chad using incendiary as well as conventional
bombs. Units of the Libyan Army have penetrated
deeply into Chad and are now engaged in offensive
military action against the armed forces of Chad.

40. The insurgents have been massively armed with new
and sophisticated Soviet equipment by Libya. Almost
everything the insurgents have, from heavy artillery to
shoes to food, has been provided by Libya.
41. Insurgent administration,
logistics and operational
planning have all been under the authority of the Libyan
commander at ,Sebha.
42. During the last two weeks in July, just before the
recapture by the armed forces of Chad of Faya-Largeau,
several Libyan units were dispatched to Ounianga KCbir
and Ogoui, both located in northern Chad, but well to the
south of the contested Aouzou Strip-in
the territory-of
Chad, that is to say, even by Libya’s own definition-to
permit the insurgents, with Libyan advisors, to concentrate on Faya-Largeau. Libyan transport aircraft in this
period made daily flights to Faya-Largeau with arms and
supplies. But at this point in the campaign Libya had not
yet committed major ground forces on a scale comparable
to the 7,000 to 9,000 Libyan troops sent to Chad in 1980
and then withdrawn in 1981. Apparently the Libyans
thought Goukouni would win without them.

“These Libyan forces have been equipped by the
Soviet Union with highly sophisticated military equipment, including aircraft, helicopters, tanks, armoured
personnel carriers, missiles and artillery, which is being
used against military targets and civilian population
in Chad.
“The United States and other concerned countries
have responded to this unlawful use of force. At the
request of the Government of Chad, a country with a
very limited and purely defensive military capability,
the United States has provided logistical support and
assistance in monitoring the situation to aid Chad in its
struggle to defend itself against the unprovoked acts of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The Council should be
aware that we are dealing with a case of aggression by
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya which constitutes a major
threat to the peace and security of the region.
“All .of the actions of the United States have been
designed to assist the Government of Chad to exercise
its inherent right of self-defence. These actions are
wholly consistent with international law and the Charter of the United Nations.*’

43. The immediate Libyan reaction to the re-taking of
Faya-Largeau on 30 July was bombing raids on Faya,
using Soviet-supplied SU-22 ground-attack aircraft from
’ the Libyan airbase near the town of Aouzou in the Aouzou Strip. On this day, 30 July, there was a squadron of
SU-22s at the Aouzou airbase, as well as several SF-260
attack aircraft and Soviet-supplied MI-24 attack helicopters. In the initial attack the SU-22s used napalm, cluster
bombs and high-explosive bombs and concentrated their
attacks on the centre of Faya-Largeau. There were comparable air attacks virtually every day after 30 July until
Faya-Largeau fell on 10 August.

37. Now let us return to the realm of harsh reality:to the
factual record of Libyan aggression against Chad, which
is and must remain our primary focus today, as it also
constitutes the sole present threat in that region to peace
and security.

44. On 1 August, SF-260 attack planes and MI-24s
were moved to airfields at Ounianga Kebir and Ogoui in
northern Chad, much closer to the front. During fhe night
of l-2 August, two Mirage F-1s flew sorties over Faya5

Largeau,
bombs.

dropping

both

napalm

campaigns for many European capitals. The infamous
“Carlos” has operated out of Libya for several years. The
weapons found on the French terrorists Breguet and Kopp
had been sold originally to the Libyan army. It was their
release that Carlos demanded.

and high-explosive

45. The attacks continued throughout this first week of
August, carried out by SU-22s, TU-22s and, for night-time
raids, Mirage F-1s. During the night of 2-3 August, three
F-1s were employed, and on the night .of 34 August four
F-1s. The fir% -wave of SU-22s at dawn on 5 August
dropped no fewer than 48 bombs, and on that same day the
Chad Government forces brought down their first SU-22,
whose Libyan pilot was captured and has since confirmed
that the air attacks, using napalm, were carried out by
Libyan planes, flown by Libyan pilots, operating under
Libyan command.

51. Assassination has been an important Libyan tool,
and the proof of Libya’s utilization of this tool is not hard
to come by. The murders in 1980 and 1981 of a dozen
Libyan exiles, primarily in Western European capitals,
have been reported in detail -in the international press.
Less widely known are a 1975 plot to murder the prime
minister of a neighbouring country; plans to kill United
States ambassadors in several Middle Eastern countries
and in at least -one European capital; and a November
1981 attempt to plant explosives in the American
Embassy Club in Khartoum, explosives concealed in
stereo speakers and designed to detonate on a Saturday
evening ,when scores of people would have been present
and killed.

46. Meanwhile, at the Sebha and Kufra barracks in
southern Libya, artillery and armoured convoys were
formed and began moving jnto Chad. An entire Libyan
mechanized infantry battalion was sent to Ogoui on 31
July, and another had arrived there by 4 August, with
more than 30 armoured personnel carriers and both T-54
and T-55 tanks. As we meet here today, upwards of 2,500
or 3,000 Libyan troops have overwhelmed, and now
occupy, Faya-Largeau in this Libyan war against its neighbour, Chad.

52. A major facet of Libyan foreign policy has been and
remains subversion .and destabilization -of independent
Governments in the Middle East, Africa and elsewhere.
Chad has, of course, been a principal victim as it is the
victim today-but
Libyan aggression against Chad is but
one element of a clearly systematic pattern. In the Horn of
Africa, in the Sudan and Somalia, Libya works to overthrow the Governments. In February of this year, the
Sudan uncovered a Libyan-backed coup plot against the
Government of President Gaafar Nimeiri and, just in
time, apprehended Libyan-sponsored insurgents and infiltrators. As all of us will recall, the Council met in urgent
session last February [2415th to 2418rh meetings] to consider that Libyan plot-fortunately
an unsuccessful one.
But the effort continues: Libyan *‘advisers” continue to
train Somali and Sudanese guerrillas; Libya supplies
arms, ammunition,
explosives and other material to the
Somali Salvation Front and to Sudanese rebels. Libya’s
delivery of increasingly sophisticated weapons to warring
tribes in the Sudan has contributed to death and violence
in that region.

47. These are the plain, grim, undeniable facts. They
constitute the tangible scenario of open and unprovoked
Libyan aggression that mocks the Charter of the United
Nations, and the message seems clear to my Government:
if that aggression is permitted to go unpunished, then the
Council will be revealed as impotent and Qaddafi’s brutal
“new colonialism*’ will threaten even more urgently the
security of northern and north-central Africa.
48. Nor, indeed, should any of this come as a surprise to
us. The pattern of Libyan expansionism, Libyan aggression, Libyan misconduct-in
Africa and far beyond-is
long-standing.
49. Colonel Qaddafi conducts a virulent, hostile foreign
policy which respects the territorial integrity, national
independence, right to peace and security and selfdetermination of no one. Along with offensive military
power-arrayed, as in Chad, against the powerless and the
impoverished-Qaddafi
pursues his expansionist goals
through a combination of economic and military aid to
radical Governments around the world; bribery of officials; help to international terrorists by providing sanctuary, funds, weapons and operational planning; assassination of exiled opponents and the planned assassination of
the officials of target Governments; and assistance to
guerrilla groups working to overthrow established
Governments.

53. Elsewhere, even in the Western Hemisphere, Libya
delivers military equipment to guerrilla groups and to military dictatorships-always
in opposition to democratic
regimes to established Governments.
54. This is the pattern of Libyan misconduct, worldwide. It constitutes, as I have said, a most grave threat to
international peace and security, in violation of the Charter of the United Nations, the Charter of the Organization
of African Unity, of every norm of rational, civilized
behaviour. The culprit in this proceeding is identified
beyond any reasonable doubt or question.

50. The Qaddafi r&ime has been engaged in all these
activities almost since-it took power. In i9?2, for example,
Libya provided sanctuary to the perpetrators of the
Munich Olympics murders. Qaddafi also gave refuge to
the terrorists who took hostages at the meeting held at
Vienna in 1975 by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). Libya has consistently been used
as a safe haven in which terrorists have planned their

55. What then is to be done? The immediate, urgent
requirements are simple enough to state. First, the unprovoked, flagrant aggression .of Libya must be labelled for
what it is: a direct challenge to the Charter and a grave
threat to international peace and security. Secondly, there
must be an end-now, today-to this latest in the longstanding pattern of Libyan lawlessness, by whatever
6

appropriate means are available to the Government of
Chad and to those nations in Africa and elsewhere which
have responded to that Government’s appeal for help.

in the internal affairs of Chad is paving the way for sending more AWACS spy planes and F-15 fighter aircraft
and increased military assistance to Chad in an attempt to
tighten the vise around this young Libyan Revolution.

56. With an end to Libyan aggression, the enduring
problems of that embattled nation can be addressed in a
reasonable way, in a spirit of reconciliation that will promote international peace and security.

64. The United States realizes fully that its accusation
against Libya of intervention in Chad is transparent and
based on no firm facts. The United States of America is
not unaware that the situation in Chad has been the same
for approximately
18 years without Libya having interfered at all in the situation. The United States cannot deny
that it knows that foreign forces are present in Chad;
rather, it blesses those forces. Their presence will only fuel
the fires in that country, which has many ties with my
country. The fact that the United States of America has
sent military experts to Chad is an overt, flagrant challenge to the OAU, which is still in control of the situation
and exerting all possible efforts to find the appropriate
African solution to the situation in Chad. The United
States is not deaf to or unaware of all those facts. Instead
it deliberately ignores them so as to find justification for
escalating its virulent campaign against the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, that young State which has chosen the path
of revolution and steadfastness in the face of the Zionists*
imperialist designs.

57. With an end to Libyan aggression all things are possible. As long as this lawless behaviour continues, it must
be condemned and it must and will be vigorously
opposed.
58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
59.

Mr. AL-ATASSI

(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretaMy delegation has already had an
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month, when this
important
organ has shouldered the responsibilities
entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations in
reviewing the situation in the occupied Arab territories
and the practices of the Zionist racist entity as a result of
the criminal attack perpetrated by Zionist settlers against
the students of the Islamic University of Al-Khalil. As
representatives will recall, the Council’s work ended in
failure owing to the negative vote of a super-Power, the
United States. On this occasion I repeat my delegation’s
congratulations to you, Sir, a true son of France, which is
linked to my country by ties of friendship and affection.
tion from

Arabic):

65. If the United States were truly willing to maintain
international peace and security, it would have been more
appropriate for it-instead of accusing Libya of endangering international peace and security-to
use such language in the case of Israel when that country invaded
Lebanon in the summer of last year. It would have been
more appropriate to use such language in respect of Israel
when it annexed Jerusalem. It would have been more
appropriate to use. such language when Israel annexed the
Syrian Golan Heights. Unfortunately, the United States
of America did not consider those Israeli acts as any
threat to international peace and security. It did not send
AWACS spy aircraft. It did not send F-15 aircraft. Nor
did it send American military advisers to assist those
States which fell victim to Israeli aggression. That would
be an exception to the rule, since Israel is the favoured
strategic ally of the United States, the guardian of American interests in the area.

60. I wish also to express to the representative of China
my own admiration and that of my delegation for the wise
and able manner in which he guided the Council’s work
last month.
61. Today the Council is meeting at the urgent request
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which believes there is a
threat against its national security and its sovereignty over
its lands and resources, and its people with death and
annihilation, by a super-Power, a permanent member of
the Security Council, a State which claims to have great
responsibilities, including responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. That State is the United
States.

66. My delegation believes that the rancour of the
United States against the Libyan Revolution has been
lurking since its inception on 1 September 1969. The first
achievement of the Revolution was the elimination of foreign military bases from all its territory and, more importantly, the maritime Willis Air Base in the Libyan Capital
of Tripoli. I had the honour of serving in Tripoli as a
representative of my country when the Libyan Revolution
took place. I assure the members of the Council that the
Libyan people, who were forbidden even to approach the
walls of the American base, had many stories to tell about
the huge base and its role in the Zionist aggressive war
against the Arab nation in 1967. It was even said that the
base was being visited by an Israeli official every week to
co-ordinate and harmonize activities against the Arab
nation.

62. It is truly natural and right that the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya should feel endangered. The series of events
justifies its recourse to the Council. The intensive military
manoeuvres to train American soldiers in desert
fighting-training
being carried out by the United States
with its friends and allies on the eastern borders of
Libya-and
its sending of AWACS spy planes over
Libyan territory in themselves pose a great threat to the
people of the African continent and to the Arab people as
a whole and, indeed, to international peace and security.
63. The United States Administration’s
tion against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

recent accusaof intervention
7

67. We would need many words and long speeches were
we to list all of the factors that led American imperialism
to escalate its campaign against the young Libyan revolution. The United States is against every revolution in the
world. It is against the aspirations of all peoples to build
their future for themselves with their own resources. The
United States feels that its interests are threatened and it
does not hesitate to employ a policy of oppression and of
injustice and even of threats of aggression against all revolutions throughout the world. How otherwise can one
explain the presence of the American fleet in Central
America? Is it for pleasure, or for fishing, or is it rather to
flex its muscles in the face of the Sandinist Nicaraguan
revolution and to attempt to strike at thai revolution both
from within and without? How otherwise can one explain
the presence of the American Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean, if not to strike at the Libyan Revolution and other
Arab revolutions and to support the Zionist entity in
occupied Palestine? Has there not been an American
attempt to strike at the Iranian revolution from American
bases and ships in the region? It is truly paradoxical that
the United States should be the country to’carry out all
those acts while it is’a Permanent Member of the Security
Council, and claims to defend international peace and
security when in fact it is threatening international peace
and security.
68. The Syrian Arab Republic shares Libya’s concern at
the American provocations. Syria considers itself to be in
the same boat as Libya in the struggle for independence and
sovereignty. It has been written that we are to take the
difficult path, the path of struggle, for this is the path of
dignity, instead of the easier path, the path of capitulation,
defeatism and humiliation as set forth in the Camp David
accords. American threats against Libya and the military
manoeuvres being carried out on the borders of Libya, as
well as the many names and denominations being brought
into play-Rapid
Deployment Forces, American Strategic
Alliance, “Bright &r-83”-all
motivate our Arab people
.to renew their commitment to fight on to victory. Viet Nam
is an example that is still remembered.
69. We hope that the Council will be able to prove its
credibility before all the peoples of the world. We hope
that it will demonstrate its independence and its commitment to the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We hope that it will lift the threat and injustice from the
shoulders of the oppressed peoples. The Articles of the
Charter are clear to all who attempt to pose a threat to
international peace and security.
70. The PRESIDENT
(intepretationfrom
Fretich): The
next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
71. Mr. AL-ALFI (Democratic Yemen) (interpret&ion
from Arabic): It gives me great pleasure at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this month. We are confident that your wellknown wisdom and abilities will contribute to the success
of the Council’s deliberations. I should also like to pay a
tribute to the wise guidance of your predecessor, Mr. Ling

Qing of the People’s Republic of China, during his term
as President last month.
72. The resentment of the international community with
regard to the provocativespolicies and practices of the
United States is increasing, those policies and practices
are creating hotbeds of tension and entail threats of the
use of force in order to prevail and of intervention in the
internal affairs of peoples and States throughout the
world, especially those States that have opted for an independent economic and social system. Those policies being
pursued by the American Administration
are in contravention of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
principles of international law and pose a threat to international peace and security.
73. In order to achieve its strategic aims of dominating
the natural resources and plundering the wealth of the
peoples of the world, the United States has invoked the
pretext of its security, even at distances of thousands of
miles. It has no qualms about resorting to the threat or
use of force against nationalistic, progressive States, as
well as against liberation movements resolved to confront
its conspiratorial and aggressive policies.
74. On the pretext of security and national interest the
American Administration
has engaged in a series of military provocations and threats against many States in the
Middle East, the Far East, Africa and Latin America,
aimed at extending American influence and at compromising the freedom and independence of peoples that
long for peace and stability. In Central America, Nicaragua, that peaceful country in the process of building its
new society amidst unfavourable economic circumstances, is being subjected to every sort of provocation and
threat, as well as to military,‘ political and economic pressures on the part of the United States, culminating in the
sending of the American fleet to the Nicaraguan coasts in
an operation fraught with the threat to employ force
against the Sandinist Revolution. The Council has witnessed broad-based denunciations by the international
community against these aggressive acts.
75. Today the Council, for the second time in less than
six months, is seized of the complaint of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya against American provocations that are jeopardizing its security and sovereignty-provocations
that
have been brought to a grave stage by the sending of
American mattfriel and equipment, including AWACS
spy planes and F-15 fighters, to the countries neighbouring the Jamahiriya. Equally provocative has been the
United States admission that it does spy on Libyan territory and that it is doubling its military assistance to Chad,
which now amounts to $25 million, in its attempt to escalate the civil war now raging in that country. All this is
being done in order that the United States can have a
pretext for intervening in the internal affairs of African
States.
76.. These foolhardy provocations against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya are but one manifestation of the aggressive policy pursued by the American Administration
in
the Arab area in particular and in other parts of the world

generally. It is not a pure coincidence that the American
provocations against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya occur
at the same time as the military manoeuvres conducted by
the American forces in collaboration with the United
States’ agents in the area since the establishment of the
Rapid Deployment Forces, for which the United States
set up a military command in the Middle East. One of
these exercises will take place near the coast of Democratic Yemen.

and airspace of Libya, in contravention of all international laws and norms. This is an expression of its
aggressive frantic intentions in preparation to launch
a treacherous aggression against the Libyan Revolution, and is an attempt to force the brotherly Libyan
people to retreat from its position that is nationalistic
and inimical to imperialism and Zionism. These aggressive acts, which are simultaneous with the provocative
manoeuvres of the Rapid Deployment Forces on the
territories of certain Arab countries, are but one new
act in a series of attacks and conspiracies against the
national liberation movement of the Arab world, and a
serious challenge to the security, stability and progress
of our entire Arab peoples. This is a matter that
requires more resolve and steadfastness againt all the
manifestations
of the hostile, imperialist,
Zionist
activity.

77. Democratic Yemen has more than once drawn attention to the gravity of the American goals and the provocative actions of the United States aimed at returning our
area to the era of direct colonialism, hegemony and imperialist domination over the destiny and riches of the peoples of the area.
78. Democratic Yemen, together with other concerned
countries, sent the President of the Council a letter dated
18 July [S/Z5872l, drawing the Council’s attention to the
fact that a major Power’s conducting these manoeuvres
poses a grave danger to the security and independence of
the peoples of the area and is considered a direct intervention in their internal affairs. We also made it clear that
these repeated provocative manoeuvres represent part of
the American policy based on aggression and intervention
in the affairs of other States, and that the United States
thereby proves that it has abandoned its responsibilities as
a permanent member of the Security Council, foremost
among whose tasks is the maintenance of international
peace and security.

“We in Democratic Yemen, the Party, the people
and the Government, reaffirm our unlimited support
for the fraternal Libyan people in its confrontation
with the American provocations in all their forms and
in defending its territories and its territorial waters, and
denounce the American circles’ aggression iu this
respect. Moreover, we call upon Arab States and peoples and all the forces of liberation and peace in the
world to stand by the fraternal Libyan people and to
condemn the American aggressive intentions.”
82. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interprerationfrom
Russian): Only six months ago, in
February, the Council considered the item concerning
provocations of the United States against Libya. Now the
Council once again has to return to this item, since the
situation in and around Libya is once again.dangerously
tense.

79. Democratic Yemen regards the conducting of such
manoeuvres near its territories as a threat to its security
and stability as well as to the security and stability of the
whole area. It also draws attention to the fact that the
goals of these manoeuvres go beyond the flexing of muscles. They become a direct threat not only to Democratic
Yemen but to many of the other countries of the Middle
East and Africa, because of the aggressive designs of the
United States, whose tentacles stretched as far as Lebanon, exposing Syria to threats of deliberate aggression,
with the aim of shaking its steadfastness against imperialist as well as Zionist designs. This also exposes the Palestinian cause to the danger of total liquidation:

83. Major units of the American fleet, including two
air-strike task forces, have been sent in haste towards the
Libyan coast. United States military aircraft are daily carrying out provocative flights near the Libyan border, seeking
American
. a pretext for a military confrontation.
arrcraft such as the AWACS spy plane are carrying out
all kinds of reconnaissance deep in Libyan territory.
Finally, in the territories of countries neighbouring on
Libya or near it, major exercises have begun with the
participation of American troops. The anti-Libyan nature
of all of these manoeuvres is quite clear.

80. At the same time as denouncing the American provocations against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Democratic Yemen declares its full support for, and solidarity
with, the Libyan revolution in standing firm against these
American provocations and threats, aimed at compromising the security, independence and sovereignty of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. They reveal aggressive intentions against Libya.

84. All of these militaristic preparations are accompanied by a systematic campaign of threats and intimidation
waged by the American Administration
against Libya
and its leadership. Under various sorts of fallacious and
trumped-up pretexts, the atmosphere of tension around
Libya is being whipped up. The United States feels it can
virtually give that sovereign State an ultimatum, dictating
what policy it should pursue.
‘.(

81.. I wish to conclude my statement by reading the text
of a telegram sent by President Ali Nasser Mohammed to
his brother, Muammar Qaddafi:

85. The question arises: does simple coincidence explain
the fact that the United States is now involved in large;
scale flexing of its military muscle both .in the Middle East
and in Central America? Is it mere happenstance that
Washington applies virtually the same policy to Libya

“We are following with deep concern the news of the
escalation of the American aggressive provocation
against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya; where fleets and
American military aircraft violate the territorial waters
9

and Nicaragua? We see the very same basic components
and elements: open threats and blackmail, demonstrative
emplacement of aircraft carriers and reconnaissance aircraft and so-called routine manoeuvres in areas adjacent
to the borders of those two countries.

91. Finally, yet another study published by the Centre
for Strategic International Study of Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., entitled “The Future of Conflicts in the 198Os”, asserts that the main sphere of
conflicts of lesser intensity would be the third world and
that those conflicts would arise primarily out of internal
complications and instability there. Further on in that
study cynical scenarios are given as to how the United
States and other Western Powers might best interfere in
these internal conflicts.

86. Logic and history have taught us that repeated phenomena-often conceal a pattern. In this case it is- the
aggressive militaristic essence of the policy of the United
States which from all the evidence has begun to consider
holding sway in the countries of the third world with the
help of the military fist and the big club. Libya and Nicaragua have today had to bear the brunt of imperialistic
attack because those two small developing countries are
pursuing an independent foreign policy and not asking for
advice from Washington. Tomorrow any other nonaligned State whose policy for some reason does not suit
the United States might also become a victim.

92. One wonders what this is: is it an innocent academic
exercise carried out by a few irresponsible authors? No: it
involves something far more serious. These are by no
means mere theoretical studies. They are guidelines for
action. Suflice it to state that in the current United States
Administration
almost half of the assistants to the Secretary of State and other high-ranking foreign policy officials are members of that Council on Foreign
Relations-almost
half. In the current Administration
no
less than 40 high-ranking officials are graduates of the
Stanford research complex, including the particular institute which I mentioned. Finally, the Georgetown centre is
represented in the current Administration
by the UnderSecretary of State, by a number of officials on the
National Security Council, and also-1 would like especial
note to be taken of this-by the Permanent Representative
of the United States to the United Nations. In other words,
those who recently developed these vile schemes directed
against third-world countries are placed today in official
posts so that they can make the appropriate policy for the
United States.

87. This is how serious the situation is. Events in and
around Libya prove that what is involved is in essence an
attempt by imperialist forces to achieve most dangerous
neocolonialist
plans against developing States and
against the Non-Aligned Movement as a whole.
88. Today we cannot but refer to specific pieces of information and the plans of the Pentagon and the CIA. They
are still secret, but today we can point to facts that are
known and form part of the preparations for these vile
schemes. And that is what we intend to do.
89. The brain trusts in the United States have worked
out these plans in good time. We can refer in particular to
a study entitled “Collective Management’! issued recently
under the aegis of a well-known New York institution, the
Council on Foreign Relations. There, quite clearly, is
dependence on the collapse of such organizations of the
third world as OPEC, the Group of 77, the OAU and
even the Organisation of American States if it escapes
control by Washington. There are also frank attempts “to
complete the elimination of ‘third world’ from the vocabulary of contemporary international relations”.

93. And that policy is already being carried out in actual
fact. The United States has established the so-called
Rapid Deployment Forces, which are directed, first and
foremost, against the countries of the Near and Middle
East. The first of January 1983 saw the establishment of a
new military command in the Pentagon, which has been
called the Central Command. It is responsible for 19
States in Asia and Africa as well as a substantial part of
the Indian Ocean, including the Persian Gulf and the Red
Sea. The United States is relentlessly seeking for itself
greater and greater military advantages and bases in those
areas, and it is establishing spring-boards under the label
of so-called multi-national
forces. States there are being
arbitrarily united, one after another, in a sphere of “strategic” or “vital” interests of the United States. Thus, what
is involved is a global plan for carrying out punitive operations against relcalcitrant developing countries which do
not wish to follow along with Washington’s policy.

90. Let us turn to other American sources. Let us take a
recent publication of the Stanford Research Institute
entitled “Seven Tomorrows”. Of the seven versions of
tomorrow chosen there for the possible developments
over the next 10 to 15 years-the 1980s and the 199Ostwo versions provide for the economic recolonization by
the United States of States that have freed themselves
from colonial dependency. The other .five versions are
geared towards direct military intervention by the United
States against those countries. In particular there is provision for-and I think this is useful for all to knowAmerican
military
operations against Mexico, the
countries of North Africa, the countries of the Middle
East, in particular Kuwait, and against Iran, the Philip
pines, Indonesia, Jamaica and, finally, China. In this context the authors believe it possible in particular to make
an
- ._ attempt by military means to seize the oil fields in
Libya.

94. That is why what is occurring today in and around
Libya-like
what is occurring in and around Nicaraguais only, so to speak, the tip of the iceberg. It is but a part of
what American strategists have in store for countries in
Asia, Africa and Latin America: an attempt to re-colonize
liberated States under a new facade, and to go back to the
times of the colonizer’s pith helmet and gun-boat
diplomacy-perhaps
even to usher in a new era. of
“aircraft-carrier diplomacy”.
10

95. One cannot fail to see that such activities and hegemonistic United States claims to the role of “international
policeman*’ are in flagrant contradiction of the main principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
obligations of the United States as a permanent member of
the Security Council. We are now able to understand quite
clearly why the United States and other countries members
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) voted
against the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States,
which was adopted by the General Assembly in 1981.’
They did not wish to tie their hands by any obligations but
preferred to keep them free for intervention.

101. The United States of America claims to be concerned about peace. Yet it rushed to the rescue of Habre.
How we wish it had hurried to save Lebanon when it was
subjected to a sea, land and air invasion. We do not know
what the United States Administration
has given to the
people and Government of Lebanon or to the Arabs or to
the Palestinian people. The representative of the United
States has given only his veto to the cause of the Palestinian people-to
the cause of self-determination. How
we wish that the United States would really put into practice all the principles it preaches. All these principles
should be applied to South Africa. Hqw we wish it wobld
rush to liberate Angola and force South Africa to desist in
attacking Angola, Mozambique and other countries in
the region. How we wish it would apply human rights to
black Africans in South Africa.

96. In these circumstances, the Soviet delegation considers as appropriate and valid the appeal by Libya to the
Council for the protection of its sovereignty and national
independence against imperialistic meddling. Motivated
by feelings of friendship and solidarity for peoples of
young developing countries, the Soviet Union strongly
condemns the policy of military blackmail and threats
pursued by the United States against Libya. Through its
actions, the United States is attempting to’ exacerbate
what is already a hotbed of international tensions in the
Middle East, and to create yet another serious threat to
international peace and security. Such conduct is unacceptable and inadmissible in relations among States. Washington’s great-Power high-handedness and its systematic and
flagrant interference in the internal affairs of other States
must immediately come to an end.

102. Muammar Qaddafi does not act as a world policeman as does the United States Administration.
As for the
United States training exercises which were said to have
been planned long in advance, they have become an unacceptable myth because they always coincide with events.
As our past experiences have taught us, they are prepared
in advance, tiled and put into action at the appropriate
time.
103. The United States representative mentioned the
matter of the Libyan pilot as did the representative of
Habre. I had wanted to deal with,this subject at the previous meeting, but did not have a chance to do so. I wish
to say that that pilot is part of the Libyan Aviation Club.
His aircraft was downed in 1981. He was imprisoned by
HabrZs forces in 1981 and Habre now brings him out to
try to prove a point.

97. I should like to say a few words about the statement
made by the representative of the United States. By his
frequent use of the words “Soviet Union” and “Soviets”,
he tried to convey a fallacious idea of the source of the
threat to third-world countries. But the facts speak more
eloquently. It is not the Soviet Union, but the United
States, which is dispatching its naval fleet to the shores of
small, young countries. It is not the Soviet Union, but the
United States, which has covered the globe with its military bases, which number close to 1,500.

104. As for the OPEC incident mentioned by the representative of the United States--it seems that he does not
even know the details of the incident, and that everything
that happens is traced back to Libya-I
wish to draw his
attention to the fact that a Libyan national was a victim of
that terrible event. He was Yusuf Al-Zamari, who was a
member of the Libyan delegation to OPEC at that time.

98. It is not the Soviet Union but the United States
which has 43 per cent of all its military forces outside its
borders in the territories of others. It is not the Soviet
Union but the United States which has declared as a
sphere of vital interest regions which are tens of thousands of kilometres distant from the United States.
Finally, it is not the Soviet Union but the United States
which, with cowboy bravado, is today spreading nuclear
weapons all over the world.

105. AS for attempted acts of sabotage, assassination and
d&tat, I shall quote from a speech made by Mr.
Treiki on 22 February before the Council. He said:

coups

“Provocations, threats and acts of aggression against
Libya are nothing new; they fall within the United
States strategy of intervention in the affairs of States
which refuse to acquiesce in its colonialist policies and
colonialist interests.

99. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has asked
to speak again, and I now call on him.

“It is an open secret that the United States intervenes
in the internal affairs of States all over the world. In
Asia, the- United States waged a war of aggression
against the Vietnamese people that ended in the defeat
of the United States.

100. Mr. BURWIN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset I wish categorically to
deny the allegation of Libyan intervention in Chad made
by the representative of the United States. Talking of
Chad is but a pretext the United States has searched for or
probably created to enter the region.

“We all know of its continued intervention in
Korea’s affairs, the latest being those aggressive
manoeuvres a few weeks ago in which more than
11

70,000 American soldiers participated, designed to
threaten North Korea and destabilize the area.

“The United States Administration
tries persistently
to stop the ‘winds of change’ in Latin America through
the destruction of progressive regimes; it uses all means
to achieve its ends and to support those regimes loyal
to it, as in the case of El Salvador and other countries.

“The United States also intervened in the affairs of
the Iranian people, overthrew the patriotic Government of Mossadegh and imposed a puppet regime in
1953, supported the dictatorship of the Shah and provided it with all means of torture through its intelligence. However, the struggling
Iranian people
triumphed and the American influence ended. The
United States did not despair; it went on working . . .
against the Iranian Revolution . . . and it launched an
act of direct aggression against Iran’s sovereignty. It is
now trying to prolong the war between Iran and Iraq
in order to smash the Iranian Revolution and debilitate
and distract Iraq from its national goal of confronting
the Zionist enemy . . .

“In Africa the United States Administration
supports and is allied with the racist regime in South
Africa. It supports that regime militarily, economically
and politically.
It obstructs the achievement by
Namibia of its independence and tries to implant its
military bases there . . .
“. . .
“The New York Times of 16 January published an
article . . . in which it stated that at a moment when the
Reagan Administration
is forcing most Government
agencies to retrench, the CIA and its fellow intelligence
organizations are enjoying boom times. With a budget
increase of 25 per cent for 1983 as compared with the
previous year, this is the fastest growing major agency
in the Federal Government. The article goes on to say
that the Agency has invested vast sums of money in the
technology .of intelligence [and that numerous plots,
including assassination and other subversive activities,
had been uncovered]. There were also revelations
about . . . surveillance of American citizens . . .

“In Latin America, acting from the viewpoint that
that region falls within the American sphere of influence, the United States undermined unity there when it
partitioned Greater Colombia.
“In 1963 the United States dispatched 23,000 soldiers to the Dominican Republic and imposed a proAmerican Government.
“The United States became hostile to Cuba once its
lackey, the dictator Batista, was overthrown . . . The
United States tried to invade Cuba several times, the
most important attempt being the so-called Bay of Pigs
invasion, and when it failed the United States made
several attempts to assassinate President Castro
through the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and
laid political and economic siege to Cuba.
“In 1954 it intervened in Guatemala
Government to its own liking.

“The CIA conducted extensive domestic spying during the 1960s and early 1970s under the pretext of gathering foreign intelligence information.*’ [2415Zh meeting,
paras. 3044.]

106. In general the United States accuses Libya of intervening in the affairs of its neighbours. As Mr. Treiki said,

and imposed a

“In Chile it overthrew the elected Government in
1973 . . . As the facts have shown, Kissinger personally
planned this operation, which was implemented by the
CIA.
-’
“In Nicaragua the United States Administration supported the feudal, oppressive tigime of the dictator
Somoza, which conformed to American interests. The
United States Administration
tried to prolong the life
of that regime although it was aware of its violations of
human rights. Since that regime was overthrown, that
Administration
has financed and plotted terrorism
against the people of Nicaragua. Here I would recall
that the Coordinator
of the Council of the Government of National Reconstruction declared in a recent
statement before the Conference of Ministers for Foreign .Affairs of the Non-Aligned Countries held at
Managua from 10 to 14 January that the ‘CIA was
behind all the military operations waged against his
country and that it was using the neighbouring countries as springboards in implementing
its plans for
further intervention in the the internal affairs of Nicaragua [see S/i5628, annbx, appendix ,fl.

“even if we assumed that differences actually existed
between Libya and its neighbours . . . instead of working for pacification and calling upon neighbours to
come to agreement, it has resorted to the policy of
creating discord and provocation” [ibid., par4.
44.
107. As for Libya, I should like to quote from what is
said against it in American circles. On 17 May 1981, the
DaiZy News of New York said that the Reagan Adminis-.
tration has secret plans to use Egypt and other Arabic
countries to overthrow the Qaddafi regime. It stated that
“the American off’cials describe Qaddafi as a cancer that
had to be removed”. The paper also stated that a highranking official in the State Department said the efforts to
achieve that end do not include assassination. The newspaper also quoted a high State Department official as
saying that “Secretary of State Alexander Haig considers
Qaddafi in the same light as Castro because his course
was counter to the national interests of the United States
of America*‘. The Christian Science Monitor of 29 July
1981 stated that “contrary to what is known there were
reports that William Casey, the Director of the CIA, had
not allowed that Agency to overthrow the Qaddafi
Government.” The newspaper went on to say that according to these reports President Sadat had on many occasions expressed the wish that he might have a friendly
12

neighbour as a leader for Libya. Another article, this time

the Soviet Union, for a fascinating, exhaustive and
extremely revealing scholarly analysis of certain .texts
which have recently appeared from the independent and
autonomous institutions of American academia. I am
always astonished and filled with awe at the perfect way in
which the representative of the Soviet Union always
imposes on the practices of pluralistic democracy the plots
and schemes and systematic designs of what, I imagine, is
the only system he knows well, that of authoritarian totalitarianism. But then, I suppose, all of us are the captives of
our experience in this regard.

in The Washington Post of 31 July 1981 by the famous

journalist Joseph Kraft, stated that “the differences in Congress about William Casey are centered on the plan he
sanctioned to launch a coup d&at in Libya and assassinate
its strongman Muammar Qaddafi.”
108. On 3 August 1981, African News mentioned that
CIA efforts to overthrow the Libyan Government would
in no way surprise any of those who followed the statements of the Reagan Administration
since January and
quoted Chester Cracker, the Assistant Secretary of State
for African Affairs, as saying before the Senate a month
ago that “Libyan diplomacy is an unprecedented obstacle
to American”interests and aims” and pledged to provide
assistance to those rdgimes that oppose Libyan aggression, as he called it. African News added that Newsweek
magazine had mentioned, in July 1981, that it had learned
that the CIA had a broad, multi-stage and very costly
plan to overthrow Qaddafi and that that plan included a
campaign against the reputation of the Libyan leader and
the establishment of a resistance and para-military activity against him. African News added that Newsweek had
inadvertently corroborated the reports that the CIA was
financing a campaign against Qaddafi and that the funds
for that campaign were wasted. The magazine had published a picture of Qaddafi surrounded by oil wells and
Arabs carrying guns, with the caption “Tl& most dangerous man in the world”.

112. I must also make it perfectly clear to the members
of the Council that we in the United States delegation,
and, indeed, we in the Government of the United States,
in no way hold Georgetown University responsible for the
views and the activities of Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick.
We
only thank Georgetown University for giving her the
opportunity to develop and practise her considerable
scholarly talents.
113. May I say to the representatives of both the Soviet
Union and Libya that I stand by every fact and every
piece of incontrovertible,
concrete evidence that I presented in my statement earlier this evening, including the
careful and even loving choice of adjectives.
(interpretationfrom French): The
114. The PRESIDENT
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
has asked to speak in exercise of,his right of reply. I invite
him to make his statement.

109. I could cite many more examples, but I do not wish
to make a lengthy speech. The representative of the United
States has tried to criticize the Soviet Union and its relations with Libya. We would simply like to say that the
Soviet Union is a friend of peoples struggling for selfdetermination. It is a friend to national liberation movements, the same movements that the United States calls
“terrorist movements**. It is ,sheer coincidence that the
interests of oppressed States are in line with the interests of
the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union did not ask to set up
military bases in Libya; it did not trv to take over our
natural resources. Our relations with the Soviet Union are
based on mutual respect. We thank the Soviet Union for
all the assistance provided to us.
110. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
representative of the United States has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply. I now call on him.
111. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): I
beg your indulgence, Sir, and that of my colleagues for a
few moments only. I would not want to let the occasion
pass without commending our friend, the representative of

115.. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist,
Republics) (interpretationfiom
Russian): If a so-called pluralist democracy gives rise to such foul plans against
third-world countries, then shame on such a democracy.
If a pluralist democracy puts people who work out such
plans in Government posts so that they may carry out
those plans, then shame on such a democracy.
116. I note that the representative of the United States
has not refuted the essence of those vile schemes directed
against third-world countries.
-’

The meeting’rose

at 9.05 p.m.

NOTE

I Resolution

36/103

of 9 December

1981. annex.

.

B~f[g~~rndPtRB~~~~~~~~~~~~~=
~bIB+nKGI.

ill~#~‘l~a5r~fc!anaah~ietl

BOW .TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONi
PUBLICATIGNS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write IO: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications dcs Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libratries CI les aeences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre librairc ou adressez-vous a : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes. New York ou Gentve.
KAK I-IOBY‘lHTb
M’J~AHkIR OPI-AHM3AUHM
OG-bEAMHEHHbIX
HAUMtl
M3nanna Oprann3aumi 06benIiHCHHblX
HawR
MOmHO
KYlMTb
B KHlOWHblX
stara3inta~
H areflTcrBa% BO acex paponax Mnpa. Haeonnre cnpaakn 06 W’InaHWRx
B BaueY KHWSHOM
MaramHe
wttt nritmrre no nnpecy: Oprattwsauaa O6&eDHHeHxblX
Hauttf!. Cewtn no
nponame n3natinR, Hbm-%pK
*m Xetieea.
COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACiONES UNIDAS
Las pubhcaciones de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijasc a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

LithI

9060205-October

1991-2.050
