A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/47/111
5 April 1993

Forty-seventh session
Agenda item 97 (~)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/47/678/Add.l)J
47 /111.

Effective implementation of international instruments on
human rights. including reporting obligations under
international instruments on human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 46/111 of 17 December 1991, as well as its
other relevant resolutions,
Reaffirming that the effective implementation of United Nations
instruments on human rights is of major importance to the efforts of the
Organization, pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1/ to promote universal respect for and
observance of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Reaffirming its responsibility to ensure the proper functioning of
treaty bodies established pursuant to instruments adopted by the General
Assembly and, in this connection, also reaffirming the importance of:
(~)
Ensuring the effective functioning of systems of periodic
reporting by States parties to these instruments;

(Q)
Securing sufficient financial resources to overcome existing
difficulties with the effective functioning of treaty bodies;

(£)
Addressing questions of reporting obligations and financial
implications whenever elaborating any further instruments on human rights,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

I • ••
93-21125

AIRESl47ll11
Page 2

Recalling the conclusions and recommendations of the second meeting of
persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies, held at Geneva from 10 to
14 October 1988, II and the endorsement of the recommendations aimed at
streamlining, rationalizing and otherwise improving reporting procedures by
the General Assembly in its resolution 461111 and the Commission on Human
Rights in its resolution 1992115 of 21 February 1992, JI
Taking particular note of the conclusions and recommendations of the
third and fourth meetings of persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies,
held at Geneva from 1 to 5 October 1990, !I and from 12 to 16 October 1992, ~I
respectively,
Expressing concern about the increasing backlog of reports on
implementation by States parties to United Nations instruments on human rights
and about delays in consideration of reports by the treaty bodies,
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General £1 on progress
achieved in enhancing the effective functioning of the treaty bodies,
Recalling the study 11 on possible long-term approaches to enhancing the
effective operation of existing and prospective bodies established under
United Nations instruments on human rights, prepared by an independent expert,
and aware of the need to update the study,
Welcoming the decision taken at the Fourteenth Meeting of States Parties
to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination on 15 January 1992 ~I to amend paragraph 6 of article 8 of the
Convention and to add a new paragraph, as paragraph 7 of article 8, by which
the members of the Committee established under the Convention shall henceforth
receive emoluments from United Nations resources on such terms and conditions
as may be decided by the General Assembly,

ll

See Al44l98, sect. VII.

JI
See Official Records of the Economic and Social council, 1992,
Supplement No. 2 (Ell992l22), chap. II, sect. A.
!I

See Al45l636, annex.

~/

See Al47l628, annex.

§.I

A/44/539 and Al46l503.

1/

See Al44l668, annex.

~/

See CERD/SP/45, annex.

I • .•

A/RES/47/111
Page 3

Welcoming also the decision taken at the Conference of the States
Parties to the Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment, on 9 September 1992, i/ to delete
paragraph 7 of article 17 and paragraph 5 of article 18 of the convention, to
insert a new paragraph, as paragraph 4 of article 18, 10/ by which the members
of the Committee established under the Convention shall receive emoluments
from United Nations resources on such terms and conditions as may be decided
by the General Assembly, and to recommend that the Assembly take action for
the implementation of the proposed amendment at its forty-seventh session,
Welcoming the reports of the Secretary-General 11/ examining the
financial, legal and other implications of providing full funding for the
operation of all human rights treaty bodies,
1.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the meetings of
persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies aimed at streamlining,
rationalizing and otherwise improving reporting procedures, and supports the
continuing efforts in this connection by the treaty bodies and the
Secretary-General within their respective spheres of competence;
2.
Expresses its satisfaction with the study by the independent
expert on possible long-term approaches to enhancing the effective operation
of existing and prospective bodies established under United Nations
instruments on human rights, which contains several recommendations on
reporting and monitoring procedures, servicing and financing of supervisory
bodies and long-term approaches to human rights standard-setting and
implementation mechanisms, and which was presented to the Commission on Human
Rights for detailed consideration at its forty-sixth session, and, in the
light of the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the
fourth meeting of persons chairing the human rights treaty bodies,~/ requests
that the report of the independent expert be updated for submission to the
Commission at its fiftieth session and that an interim report be presented to
the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session and be made available to the
World Conference on Human Rights in June 1993;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to give high priority to
establishing a computerized database to improve the efficiency and
effectiveness of the functioning of the treaty bodies;
4.
Again urges States parties to make every effort to meet their
reporting obligations and to contribute, individually and through meetings of
States parties, to identifying and implementing ways of further streamlining
and improving reporting procedures as well as enhancing coordination and
information flow between the treaty bodies and with relevant United Nations
bodies, including specialized agencies;

~/

See CAT/SP/SR.4.

10/
As a result of this amendment, the existing paragraph 4 of article
18 will be renumbered paragraph 5.

il/

A/46/650 and A/47/518.

I .••

A/RES/47/111
Page 4

5.
Welcomes the emphasis placed by the meetings of persons chairing
the human rights treaty bodies and by the Commission on Human Rights on the
importance of technical assistance and advisory services and, further to this
end:
(g)
Endorses the request of the Commission to the Secretary-General to
report regularly to it on possible technical assistance projects identified by
the treaty bodies;
(Q)
Invites the treaty bodies to give priority attention to
identifying such possibilities in the regular course of their work of
reviewing the periodic reports of States parties;
6.
Endorses the recommendations of the meetings of persons chairing
the human rights treaty bodies on the need to ensure financing and adequate
staffing resources for the operations of the treaty bodies and, with this in
mind:

(g)
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide
adequate resources with regard to the various treaty bodies;
(Q)
Requests the Secretary-General to report on this question to the
Commission on Human Rights at its forty-ninth se3sion and to the General
Assembly at its forty-eighth session;
7.
Calls upon all States parties to meet fully and without delay
their financial obligations under the relevant instruments on human rights,
and requests the Secretary-General to consider ways and means of strengthening
collection procedures and making them more effective;
8.
Emphasizes that any administrative and budgetary measures shall be
taken without prejudice to the duty of States parties under United Nations
human rights instruments to meet all their current and outstanding financial
obligations pursuant to such instruments;

9.
Endorses the amendments to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 12/ and the Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment 13/ and requests the Secretary-General:

(g)
To take the appropriate measures to provide for the financing of
the committees established under those conventions from the regular budget of
the United Nations, beginning with the budget for the biennium 1994-1995;
(Q)
To take the necessary measures to ensure that the two committees
meet as scheduled until the amendments enter into force;
10.
Requests the Secretary-General to take the appropriate steps in
order to finance the biennial meetings of persons chairing the human rights
treaty bodies from the resources available from the regular budget of the
United Nations;

12/

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

13/

Resolution 39/46, annex.

A/RES/47/111
Page 5

11.
Also requests the Secretary-General, in the light of the views
expressed at the forty-ninth session of the Commission on Human Rights and the
thirty-seventh session of the Commission on the Status of Women, to submit to
the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session a report examining the
conclusions and recommendations of the fourth meeting of persons chairing the
human rights treaty bodies, held in October 1992; ~/
12.
Decides to give priority consideration at its forty-eighth session
to the conclusions and recommendations of the meetings of persons chairing
human rights treaty bodies under the item entitled "Human rights questions".

89th plenary meeting
16 December 1992
