UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/166
27 February 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 25 FEBRUARY 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Further to my briefing of the Security Council yesterday regarding my
recent mission to Baghdad, please find attached a copy of the Memorandum of
Understanding which I signed with Mr. Tariq Aziz, Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq.
Although the text of the Memorandum was made available informally to the members
of the Council prior to the briefing, I should appreciate it if it could now be
formally brought to their attention.

(Signed)

98-04797 (E)

270298

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1998/166
English
Page 2

Memorandum of Understanding
between
the United Nations and the Republic of Iraq

1.
The Government of Iraq reconfirms its acceptance of all relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, including resolutions 687 (1991) and
715 (1991). The Government of Iraq further reiterates its undertaking to
cooperate fully with the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
2.
The United Nations reiterates the commitment of all Member States to
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
3.
The Government of Iraq undertakes to accord to UNSCOM and IAEA immediate,
unconditional and unrestricted access in conformity with the resolutions
referred to in paragraph 1. In the performance of its mandate under the
Security Council resolutions, UNSCOM undertakes to respect the legitimate
concerns of Iraq relating to national security, sovereignty and dignity.
4.
The United Nations and the Government of Iraq agree that the following
special procedures shall apply to the initial and subsequent entries for the
performance of the tasks mandated at the eight Presidential Sites in Iraq as
defined in the annex to the present Memorandum:
(a) A Special Group shall be established for this purpose by the
Secretary-General in consultation with the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM and the
Director General of IAEA. This Group shall comprise senior diplomats appointed
by the Secretary-General and experts drawn from UNSCOM and IAEA. The Group
shall be headed by a Commissioner appointed by the Secretary-General.
(b) In carrying out its work, the Special Group shall operate under
the established procedures of UNSCOM and IAEA, and specific detailed procedures
which will be developed given the special nature of the Presidential Sites, in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
(c) The report of the Special Group on its activities and findings
shall be submitted by the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM to the Security Council
through the Secretary-General.
5.
The United Nations and the Government of Iraq further agree that all
other areas, facilities, equipment, records and means of transportation shall be
subject to UNSCOM procedures hitherto established.
6.
Noting the progress achieved by UNSCOM in various disarmament areas,
and the need to intensify efforts in order to complete its mandate, the United
Nations and the Government of Iraq agree to improve cooperation, and efficiency,
effectiveness and transparency of work, so as to enable UNSCOM to report to the
Council expeditiously under paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991). To achieve
this goal, the Government of Iraq and UNSCOM will implement the recommendations
directed at them as contained in the report of the emergency session of UNSCOM
held on 21 November 1997.
/...

S/1998/166
English
Page 3

7.
The lifting of sanctions is obviously of paramount importance to the
people and Government of Iraq and the Secretary-General undertook to bring this
matter to the full attention of the members of the Security Council.

Signed this 23rd day of February 1998 in Baghdad in two originals in
English.

For the United Nations

For the Republic of Iraq

Kofi A. Annan
Secretary-General

Tariq Aziz
Deputy Prime Minister

/...

S/1998/166
English
Page 4

Annex
to the Memorandum of Understanding
between the United Nations and the Republic of Iraq
of 23 February 1998

The eight Presidential Sites subject to the regime agreed upon in the
present Memorandum of Understanding are the following:
1.

The Republican Palace Presidential Site (Baghdad).

2.

Radwaniyah Presidential Site (Baghdad).

3.

Sijood Presidential Site (Baghdad).

4.

Tikrit Presidential Site.

5.

Tharthar Presidential Site.

6.

Jabal Makhul Presidential Site.

7.

Mosul Presidential Site.

8.

Basrah Presidential Site.

The perimeter of the area of each site is recorded in the survey of the
"Presidential sites" in Iraq implemented by the United Nations Technical Mission
designated by the Secretary-General, as attached to the letter dated
21 February 1998 addressed by the Secretary-General to the Deputy Prime Minister
of Iraq.

-----
