S/2018/1103*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 December 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering
the period from 2 September to 30 November 2018)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2406
(2018), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 March 2019 and, in accordance with prior
resolutions, requested me to report on the implementation of the mandate every 90
days. It covers political and security developments between 2 September and
30 November 2018, the humanitarian situation and progress in the implementation of
the Mission mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
2.
During the reporting period, South Sudanese parties and stakeholders signed the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and took initial steps towards the implementation of pre -transitional tasks.
While enhancing outreach to opposition leaders, the national dia logue steering
committee and the secretariat continued to prepare for the planned regional dialogue
forums.
Peace process
3.
Following continued extensive engagement by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and regional leaders, supported by the African Union and
international partners, South Sudanese parties signed the Revitalized Agreement in
Addis Ababa on 12 September. The President of South Sudan, Salva Kiir, signed for
the incumbent Transitional Government of National Unity, Riek Machar for the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition, Gabriel Changson for
the South Sudan Opposition Alliance (SSOA) and Deng Alor for the SPLM “Former
Detainees”. Representatives of the Other Political Parties group, other stakeh olders
and the guarantors also signed. The Agreement stipulates a pre -transition period of
eight months leading to the formation of a new transitional government of national
unity, to govern during a three-year transitional period that will culminate in elections.
4.
A breakaway alliance of constituent members of SSOA maintained that the
agreement failed to address the root causes of conflict in South Sudan and had been
imposed on the parties by the regional guarantors. On 2 October, the alliance
announced the appointment of General Thomas Cirillo Swaka of the National
* Reissued for technical reasons on 12 December 2018.

18-20894* (E)

121218

*1820894*

S/2018/1103

Salvation Front (NAS) as its Chair, while, on 17 November, it announced its renaming
to the South Sudan National Democratic Alliance. Government and opposition leaders
continued engagement to persuade the breakaway group to join efforts to implement
the Revitalized Agreement.
5.
Implementation of the Revitalized Agreement has made progress but remains
behind schedule. On 21 September, the President of the Sudan, Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir, organized a ceremony in Khartoum with South Sudanese parties and
stakeholders to celebrate the signing of the Agreement. On 31 October, President Kiir
hosted a national peace celebration ceremony in Juba. The event was attended by Riek
Machar and other opposition leaders and by the heads of State of Ethiopia, Somalia,
the Sudan and Uganda, and the Prime Minister of Egypt.
6.
During the weeks following the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, the
parties nominated their representatives to the various pre -transitional institutions and
mechanisms. On 25 September, President Kiir appointed the 10 -member National
Pre-Transitional Committee, mandated to oversee and coordinate the implementation
of pre-transitional activities. In a statement issued on 27 September followi ng a
workshop in Djibouti, South Sudanese women leaders called upon the parties to
ensure that nominations to the various institutions and mechanisms of the Agreement
reflected their broad commitment to gender diversity and the specific commitment to
the 35 per cent representation of women in the executive and transitional justice
institutions. On 15 October, the Transitional National Legislative Assembly ratified
the Agreement, following similar adoption of the text by the leadership organs of the
other parties. The Government also made available 100 million South Sudanese
pounds and $1 million to fund pre-transitional activities.
7.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism
convened workshops in Khartoum on 24 and 25 Septemb er and on 24 and 25 October.
The Mechanism’s Board was reconstituted on 27 September and its Technical
Committee convened five times during the reporting period in Khartoum. UNMISS
participated at the technical level in those meetings, given its anticipate d role in
supporting the agreed security arrangements. The National Pre -Transitional
Committee and the reconstituted National Constitutional Amendment Committee held
their inaugural meetings in Khartoum on 21 and 22 October, agreeing on working
modalities and a workplan for the implementation of pre-transitional tasks. In a
significant milestone in the peace process, the two committees began to meet in Juba.
On 5 November, members of the National Constitutional Amendment Committee
convened in Juba to draft a constitutional amendment bill incorporating the
Revitalized Agreement into the Transitional Constitution of South Sudan of 2011. The
National Pre-Transitional Committee convened again on 7 November and from 12 to
15 November to agree on its structure and terms of reference. The Joint Defence
Board, the Joint Military Ceasefire Commission, the Joint Transitional Security
Committee and the Strategic Defence and Security Review Board convened inaugural
meetings in Khartoum during the last week of November.
8.
Regional and international partners continued active engagement to promote
inclusive peace implementation. On 22 October, the IGAD Chiefs of Defence
Staff/Forces met in Khartoum, pursuant to the decision of 12 September of the IGAD
Assembly of Heads of State and Government to engage the Security Council on the
full deployment of the UNMISS regional protection force to execute its mandate and
to review it to allow Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda to serve as guarantors
of the Revitalized Agreement to contribute forces. The IGAD Chiefs of Defence
Staff/Forces established a joint technical assessment team, which visited South Sudan
from 3 to 10 November to assess the security situation, with a view to reviewing the
regional protection force mandate. On 22 November, the assessment team presented
its report to the IGAD Chiefs of Defence Staff/Forces, who decided to formalize its
2/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

recommendation to integrate forces from Djibouti, Somalia, the Sudan and Uganda
into the UNMISS regional protection force.
Other national political developments
9.
On 3 September, the national dialogue steering committee began its third
plenary session to prepare for regional dialogue forums. To date, members discussed
the outcomes of the grassroots consultations, plans for three regional dialogue forums
(for greater Equatoria, greater Upper Nile and greater Bahr el -Ghazal) and related
preparations. The steering committee passed a summary of the reports on the
grassroots consultations, entitled “The People have spoken”, four technical notes on
governance, the economy, security and social cohesion, and a proposal on the
reorganization of the South Sudanese State based on emerging issues from the
grassroots phase. The steering committee renewed calls for the inclusion of
opposition constituencies in the coming phases of the national dialogue process and
continued to stress the complementarity between the Revitalized Agreement and the
national dialogue. Following an appeal by President Kiir on 31 October for opposition
leaders to embrace the national dialogue, the SPLM/A in Opposition announced on
2 November that it had established a committee to consider the dialogue.
10. President Kiir announced several senior appointments. On 24 September, the
President removed Moses Hassan Ayet Tiel from his position as Minister of Trade,
Industry and East African Community Affairs and replaced him with Paul Mayom
Akech. He also appointed Deng Dau Deng Malek and Lieutenant General Malek
Reuben Riak, respectively, as the new Deputy Minister for For eign Affairs and
Deputy Minister of Defence, the latter of whom is currently under sanctions by the
Security Council, Canada, the United States of America and the European Union.
11. On 2 October, President Kiir issued a decree changing the name of the national
army from the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) to the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces (SSPDF), effective immediately.
Economic developments
12. Key macroeconomic indicators have shown signs of stabilizing, but the
prospects for recovery remain weak. On the parallel market, the South Sudanese
pound has been relatively stable, at approximately 220 pounds to the United States
dollar. According to the National Bureau of Statistics, consumer prices fell in August
and September, while the rate of inflation in the 12 months to the end of September
was 49 per cent (down from past levels of more than 100 per cent). There is no
indication that the official removal of the fuel subsidy has had a negative i mpact on
the prices of goods and services. Oil production remained at approximately 120,000–
130,000 barrels per day.

III. Security situation
13. Since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement, there are signs that the ceasefire
has taken hold in large part in most of South Sudan. Recent efforts by SSPDF and the
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition on the ground to open communication lines has
contributed to confidence-building. The Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, however, has verified localized sporadic
fighting between the Government and opposition forces and between opposition
groups in the Yei area, Central Equatoria, the Wau triangle area in Western Bahr
el-Ghazal and Koch, Unity. While the overall scale and frequency of clashes remained
low, fighting between warring parties, intercommunal violence and cattle -raiding,

18-20894

3/18

S/2018/1103

especially in Lakes and Jonglei, remained a cause of civilian casualties, displacement,
abductions and looting.
Greater Upper Nile region
14. While the greater Upper Nile region saw a reduction in armed clashes, fighting
and cases of criminality around the Bentiu protection of civilians site and forceful
recruitment were reported in Unity. On 24 September, in the framework of the
reintegration of pro-Taban Deng Gai forces into SSPDF, a military convoy escorting
the reintegration committee for SSPDF and pro-Taban forces was attacked, allegedly
by the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition in the Mirmir-Ngony area and in Kuok
area, Mayendit County, resulting in the killing of one SSPDF soldier. During the
clashes, SSPDF allegedly burned houses, leading to civilian displacement. There were
also reports of forceful recruitment, including of children, for integration into SSPDF.
On 10 October, allegations of attacks were reported by both government and
opposition forces in Kuok and Mirmir. On the same day, SSPDF-aligned young people
in Koch allegedly attacked opposition-held villages in Mirmir, looted civilian
property and burned houses. On 5 November, SSPDF and p ro-Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition forces allegedly clashed in Bil, an opposition -controlled area northeast of
Nimni, Guit County. In Jonglei, Panyikang County, SSPDF forces reportedly clashed
with pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces in Ardeb on 23 November.
Greater Equatoria region
15. In greater Equatoria, clashes between warring parties caused civilian casualties
and displacement, in particular in Western and Central Equatoria. In Western
Equatoria, on 5 September, NAS forces allegedly attacked pro -Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition forces in Kadiba and Lakamadi, resulting in the killing of one NAS soldier
and the displacement of civilians to Minga and Lakamadi. On 28 September, a former
member of an armed group detonated a grenade in Saura during a funeral with more
than 500 attendees, killing 8 people and injuring more than 30. Insecurity remained
as the local pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition commander in Mundri East reported
on a series of attacks launched by NAS forces on opposition positions since the
beginning of November, in particular on 19 November, when pro -Machar SPLM/A in
Opposition and NAS forces allegedly clashed in Losoh, Mundri East.
16. In Eastern Equatoria, road insecurity continued to be reported, in particular
along the Juba-Torit road, which was only recently reopened by the Torit Governor
after its closure in August. Following an ambush by armed men on 23 September,
organized forces were reportedly deployed to the area. Insecurity continued to be
reported along the Torit-Kapoeta road, where three separate ambushes by 10 armed
men were reported on 17 October in Ilieu, near Hakuma Mafi. In another
development, on 20 November, a senior pro-Taban Deng Gai forces commander
reported on an alleged plan for an integrated operation by pro -Taban Deng Gai and
SSPDF forces reportedly based in Narus town in Losolia County to launch an
offensive on NAS bases in Kapoeta, with the aim of dislodging them from Narus and
Kapoeta.
17. In Central Equatoria, clashes were reported between SSPDF and pro -Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition forces in Kopera County between 1 and 4 September, with the
latter accusing SSPDF of attacking their positions in Kajo -Kaji on 3 and 4 September.
The pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition claimed that SSPDF had recaptured Kopera
on 9 September and attacked displaced persons settlements in Bungit and Mundu, in
Lainya County, wounding three civilians. On 11 and 12 September, SSPDF allegedly
attacked pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition bases in Kajo-Kaji. On 16 September,
the ongoing fighting between SSPDF and pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces
in Kopera County resulted in the killing of four SSPDF soldiers. The fighting
4/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

continued through early October and reportedly resulted in civilian displacement from
Mundu in Lainya County towards the Ugandan border. Additional alleged clashes
between SSPDF and the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition also took place in Mundu
on 7 October. In Mukaya County, pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces clashed
with a coalition force of NAS and the South Sudan National Movemen t for Change
(SSNMC) on 23 September, killing one civilian. In addition, clashes were also
reported in Minyori, approximately 10 km from Yei town, between pro -Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition and SSPDF forces on 11 and 12 October, which were
reportedly followed by an alleged attack by SSNMC and NAS forces on pro-Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition forces in the same area. As a result, 24 civilians were
reportedly killed. On 28 October, fighting was reported in Kenyiba village between
NAS and pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces, reportedly killing 15 civilians.
The two forces clashed again on 7 November in Kenyiba, Morobo County, reportedly
killing 17 NAS soldiers. SSPDF and pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces also
reportedly fought on 7 November in Kiju, Lainya County, and in Mundu, Kopera
County. Pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition and NAS forces reportedly exchanged
heavy gunfire around the Jumbo and Mugwo areas on 9 November and in Wundogori
Paayam, Mugwo County, on 13 November. A local authority in Lobonok County
further confirmed that, on 18 November, NAS forces had reportedly ambushed an
armed group in Karpeto Boma in Lobonok as they entered an area under NAS control,
reportedly injuring seven members of the armed group.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
18. During the reporting period, clashes and ceasefire violations were reported in
Western Bahr el-Ghazal, in particular in the greater Bagari area. On 24 September, a
convoy organized by the Wau state authorities facilitating the return of civilians to
Mboro was reportedly attacked by pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces, during
which one SSPDF soldier was reportedly killed and 18 injured. Government forces
alleged that opposition forces had attacked them in Bisellia and Bagari on
25 September, Wadhalelo on 25 and 26 September, and Mboro on 26 September. They
also alleged that, on 29 September, pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition forces had
carried out an attack in Wadhalelo, resulting in civilian displacement towards Wau.
The pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition authorities claimed that SSPDF had launched
attacks in opposition-controlled areas in Ngobagari and Faragullah on 24 September
and on Gokazi Boma on 26 September, during which SSPDF forces allegedly killed
one civilian and abducted three and looted civilian property. On 2 October,
government authorities in Wau claimed that the opposition had attacked SSPDF
positions in Natabu Boma. On 3 October, renewed attacks were reported by SSPDF
against the opposition in Ngo Bagari. In turn, the opposition accused SSPDF of
attacking their positions in Ngo Kbere, Mboro. On the same day, information received
pointed to SSPDF attacks in Ngorku that continued through 13 October, with
additional reports of clashes in Ngisa Boma and Tado village on 12 and 13 October.
On 29 October, SSPDF soldiers based in Wadhalelo town allegedly attacked Mabiu,
a pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition-held area, killing two civilians, while
opposition troops allegedly ambushed government forces between Iyat and Ngorku
village. On 30 October, opposition forces reportedly ambushed SSPDF forces close
to Ngorku, Angisa, and attacked the SSPDF base in Wadhalelo, killing two opposition
soldiers. Clashes persisted in greater Baggari as SSPDF soldiers allegedly launched
an attack in Ngo Alima village on 4 November.
Intercommunal conflict
19. Intercommunal violence continued throughout the reporting period, especially
in Lakes and Jonglei. In Lakes, intercommunal tensions were heightened by the
ongoing civilian disarmament process, which created imbalances bet ween armed and
18-20894

5/18

S/2018/1103

disarmed communities. Attacks involving armed Pakam young people who had
evaded the disarmament process continued in Western Lakes, Eastern Lakes and Gok.
In addition, the movement of armed Pakam communities reportedly resulted in
civilian displacement from Adiong, Barajah, Tit-Makoi and Kon to Paloch town and
Yirol East. There were further displacements into cattle camps in Jier and Mamer.
Meanwhile, brewing intercommunal tensions between Aluakluak young people from
Eastern Lakes and Akot young people from Western Lakes that resulted in the killing
of a United Nations agency contracted national staff member spilled over into
Rumbek, resulting in a shooting incident at the Rumbek airfield. Furthermore, the
killing of the communal chief on 13 November has heightened tensions in areas
between Atiaba, Akot and Aluakluak. In Lakes, intercommunal violence and cattle raiding continued in Rumbek Central County, with allegations of raids by the Dinka
Gok on the Kuei section of the Dinka Agar and by Pakam young people on the Ruop
section of the Dinka Agar in Malek Paayam.
20. In Jonglei, intercommunal and intracommunal violence continued, in particular
near Pibor. In Lukurnyang village, northeast of Pibor, Lango and Bothonya young
people reportedly clashed in a revenge attack, resulting in the killing of three
Bothonya and one Lango. Two incidents between Kurenen and Lango young people
in Pibor and Vuvet, west of Gumuruk, resulted in 11 deaths on 9 September. Between
16 and 17 September, two further incidents of fighting were reported near Pibor, again
between Lango and Kurenen young people and Lango and Bothonya young people,
resulting in one fatality. On 19 September, intra-Murle hostilities in Wunngony
resulted in the killing of one Kurenen young person and nine people injured, including
four police officers. Intracommunal fighting was also reported between sub -clans of
the Lou Nuer, which resulted in the killing of six persons near Akobo on
28 September. The following day, a revenge attack between two other sub-clans of
the Lou Nuer reportedly resulted in three fatalities in Pieri, Uror County. In greater
Pibor, the signing on 21 September of a peace agreement between Jie and Murle
representatives failed to prevent an attack on 2 October by suspected Ji e community
members, who raided cattle from Murle settlements in Maruwa, reportedly resulting
in 10 Murle and more than 60 Jie fatalities, 12 child abductions and cattle stolen. On
12 October, Jie reportedly attacked Ngatibela village, Maruwa, and burned d own a
number of Murle houses, following the movement of Murle cattle keepers towards
Labraab, Pibor County.

IV. Humanitarian situation
21. The humanitarian situation remained grave. By the end of October, the total
number of people displaced by the conflict in South Sudan stood at 1.97 million.
Some 2.5 million were seeking refuge in neighbouring countries. Violence continued
to affect civilians. In Western Bahr el-Ghazal, in Mboro Medina, approximately 2,000
people, including almost 500 children and new mothers, were registered as in need of
assistance and protection. Intercommunal violence forced nearly 10,000 people to flee
their homes in Central Equatoria. Following fighting in the UNMISS protection of
civilians site in Juba in mid-August, humanitarian agencies and UNMISS coordinated
the relocation of approximately 4,000 internally displaced persons from the site to the
community of Mangateen in Juba. South Sudan continues to have one of the highest
rates of out-of-school children in the world, presently estimated at 2.2 million
children.
22. Ebola virus disease was declared in the neighbouring Democratic Republic of
Congo on 31 July. South Sudan has been placed at a level of “very high risk” by the
World Health Organization (WHO), having had three Ebola outbreaks (in 1976, 1979
and 2004). The Government of South Sudan has set up a national task force, chaired
6/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

by the Ministry of Health and supported by WHO, to enhance national capacities for
Ebola preparedness and response. The national health syste m, eroded by years of
conflict, remains weak and unable to effectively manage demands placed on it by a
possible Ebola outbreak. The United Nations, including UNMISS and agencies, has
developed a preparedness and contingency planning process to mitigate ri sks and
support national efforts. UNMISS has developed a separate contingency plan in case
its staff are confirmed with Ebola.
23. An estimated 6.1 million people, or 59 per cent of the population, were severely
food insecure at the peak of the lean season (July–August). This is the highest
proportion of the population noted as food insecure since the start of the Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification in South Sudan in 2008. It included 47,000 people
who were classified as being in “catastrophe” conditions (Phase 5). More than 6 million
people were classified as being in a “crisis” (Phase 3) or “emergency” (Phase 4)
situation. Food security improved slightly with the harvest in September. Further
improvements are expected in the post-harvest period between October and December
2018, when the number of people in “crisis” or worse is likely to fall to 4.4 million.
The areas of most concern in October–December 2018 are expected to be Leer and
Mayendit in Unity (where localized famine was declared in Febr uary 2017), Pibor in
Jonglei, Panyikang in Upper Nile and greater Bagari in Western Bahr el -Ghazal. Mass
displacement from the greater Equatoria region, which traditionally has the highest
agricultural production, has exacerbated food insecurity. Approxima tely 1.1 million
children under the age of 5 are at risk of acute malnutrition, of whom an estimated
260,000 are severely malnourished.
24. In October, 58 access incidents were reported, down from 65 in September, with
the majority in Central Equatoria, Jonglei, Unity, Upper Nile and Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. A total of 41 percent of the incidents involved violence against staff and
assets, which included assault, detentions, burglaries and ambushes. Nearly a quarter
(24 per cent) involved bureaucratic and administrative impediments, which represents
the highest number of such incidents reported in any month to date in 2018. Sixteen
incidents (28 per cent) were of a severe nature, involving the killing of 2 aid workers,
prolonged detentions of 27 staff in six separate incidents, restrictions on movement
and two serious road ambushes in Central Equatoria. Insecurity in Bagari, Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, continues to prevent partners from assisting people in need in areas
such as Ngok, Ngisa and Mboro, notwithstanding a high-level mission to broker
sustained access in August. Access to Bagari remains a recurrent challenge: a United
Nations mission in early November to identify those newly displaced from greater
Bagari by ongoing fighting — 28,000 people in Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification Phase 4, with pockets of people in Phase 5 — was blocked by the state
government in Wau, notwithstanding having previously obtained all the clearances
necessary from the relevant national and state government authorities .
25. Violence against humanitarian workers and assets continues to hamper the
delivery of humanitarian assistance. For the third consecutive year, South Sudan
remains the most violent place in the world in which to deliver humanitarian
assistance. In September, one aid worker was killed by unknown armed men in Limbe,
Yei County, while traveling in a clearly marked vehicle. In October, two aid workers
were killed in separate incidents: one was killed in an ambush by unknown armed
men on the Juba-Lainya road at Kworijik while traveling in a clearly marked convoy,
and another was killed when on duty at a nutrition facility in Fangak, Jonglei. This
raises the total number of aid workers killed since the start of the conflict to at least
112.
26. Notwithstanding the challenges, by the end of August, humanitarian partners
had provided life-saving assistance to 4.7 million of the 6 million people targeted.
That total includes more than 4.2 million people who have received food and
18-20894

7/18

S/2018/1103

livelihood support. Nearly 700,000 girls, boys and new mothers were given support
for acute malnutrition and nearly 1 million people were given access to improved
water sources and sanitation.
27. The Humanitarian Response Plan was 60 per cent funded in mid -October, with
$1 billion received towards the $1.7 billion required. The preparations for the 2019
response plan are under way.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
28. The implementation of tasks under the UNMISS protection of civilians mandate
continued to be guided by the three-tiered approach for the protection of civilians.
Under tier one, protection through dialogue and political engagement, UNMISS
engaged national authorities and other stakeholders at the national and local levels,
including visiting Yei on 31 October to meet state authorities and a group of 1,500
displaced individuals and recent returnees from Uganda in order to discuss areas of
potential additional UNMISS support to create a climate for returns. Engagements in
Khartoum with leaders of the parties in the lead -up to the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement also were used to emphasize the primary responsibility of authorities to
protect civilians and to identify areas for constructive collaboration. That messaging
was bolstered by a joint United Nations-African Union delegation visit to South
Sudan from 7 to 9 October, led by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Executive Director of the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union and a member of the African Union Panel of the Wise,
namely, the former Vice-President of Uganda, Specioza Wandira Kazibwe.
29. UNMISS conducted 24 workshops at the subnational level on subjects relating
to social cohesion, reconciliation, conflict management and the role of traditional
leaders, women and young people in peacebuilding. A total of 3,245 participants were
reached (1,029 of whom were women), including representatives of internally
displaced persons and host communities, state and county officials, members of the
organized forces, traditional leaders, and youth and women’s representatives. In
Boma, UNMISS facilitated a dialogue forum to address intergenerational violence
among male “age sets” of the Murle. To prevent the recurrence of clashes between
local farmers in Amadi and migrating pastoralists from Terekeka in the upcoming dry
season, UNMISS facilitated a forum during which stakeholders identified gaps in
regulating pastoral migration and agreed to strengthen norms to prevent conflict. In
continuing a programme to strengthen communal relations between communities in
greater Lakes and Unity that had begun in May, UNMISS, in collaboration with a
non-governmental organization (NGO), supported a peace conference in Yirol,
Eastern Lakes, at which issues of compensation for lives lost and the need for civilian
disarmament were discussed. In Maban, Upper Nile, UNMISS delivered a two-day
forum that focused on local police and community relations, including how traditional
conflict management mechanisms could complement the delivery of police services.
30. Under the second tier, protection from physical violence, as at 30 November,
UNMISS was protecting 195,747 internally displaced persons in five Mission
protection of civilians sites. That total included 115,525 internally displaced persons
in Bentiu, 32,113 in Juba, 29,190 in Malakal, 2,267 in Bor and 16,652 in Wau. The
temporary protected area adjacent to the UNMISS base in southern Unity continues
to provide protection to 1,379 internally displaced persons, a decline from 2,500
reported previously. The decongestion of the Wau protection site conti nued to reduce

8/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

the number of internally displaced persons there. The civilian character of the
protection sites continued to be reinforced through the conduct of weekly meetings
with community leaders to remind them of their own responsibility in curbing
criminality in the sites. Searches were regularly conducted in the protection sites and
at the entry points to control weapons and contraband in the sites. Regular town hall
meetings with community representatives were organized in the Bentiu, Bor, Malakal
and Wau protection sites to discuss UNMISS responses to criminality.
31. During the reporting period, a total of 391 crimes and security incidents were
recorded at the protection of civilians sites (136 at Wau, 105 at Bentiu, 65 at Juba,
71 at Malakal and 14 at Bor). A total of 96 persons suspected of involvement in
serious security incidents were detained at UNMISS holding facilities in Bentiu, Juba
and Malakal. As part of the UNMISS project to promote accountability, the Mission
referred nine cases to national authorities for possible criminal investigation and
prosecution. National authorities, with logistical support provided by UNMISS,
constituted a mobile court to prosecute five persons charged with sexual violence
crimes committed in the Malakal protection of civilians site. Those trials resulted in
convictions and sentences to a term of imprisonment ranging from 18 months to
10 years. UNMISS handed over the convicted persons to national prison officials on
24 October. On the basis of the success of the mobile court in Malakal, a mobile court
is scheduled for December 2018 to prosecute referred cases from the Bentiu site.
32. Beyond the protection of civilians sites, UNMISS continued to focus on
deterring and mitigating violence against civilians throughout South Sudan. During
the reporting period, a total of 9,185 patrols (short and long duration, dynamic air,
riverine and foot) were conducted, including 1,764 patrols to support the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. In Upper Nile,
UNMISS maintained its patrolling on the west bank of the Nile River and in the areas
of Kaka, Tonga and Aburoc. UNMISS also continued regular patrols in other
opposition-controlled areas such as Maiwut, Mathiang, Atar and Pagak and Ulang, a s
well as villages on the banks of the Nile River. The UNMISS base in Kodok has
contributed to a conducive and safe environment for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. In Jonglei, UNMISS continued its presence through regular integrated
long-duration dynamic air patrols in SPLM/A in Opposition-held areas of Akobo,
with the aim of supporting the safe delivery of humanitarian assistance, gaining
enhanced environmental understanding and facilitating voluntary and dignified
returns. In Unity, confidence-building and integrated patrols were increased, with a
focus on priority locations under the Beyond Bentiu Response Strategy and hotspots
such as Leer, Thonyor, Gandor, Rubkuay, Pilling, Padeah, Adok, Koch and Buaw.
Targeted short and long duration patrols in Gandor, Padeah, Meer, Rubkuai, Bieh,
Koch and Buaw have deterred attacks that could have caused harm to civilians.
33. Under the third tier, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
continued engagement with civil and military authorities, comm unities and
humanitarian partners, aiming to create a more conducive environment for displaced
populations to return. In Bentiu, Unity, UNMISS completed the establishment of a
200 m weapons-free zone around the base and the protection of civilians site to deter
criminality in the immediate vicinity of the sites. UNMISS confidence -building
patrols in southern Unity fostered the return of more than 1,000 internally displaced
persons from the temporary protection area in Leer to their villages. In Malakal,
Upper Nile, UNMISS continued advocacy with authorities to further demilitarize the
town, which led to an increase in the number of internally displaced persons leaving
the site to conduct activities in town during the day, indicating an improved security
environment. Internally displaced persons have also begun to visit home areas on the
west bank of the Nile to assess the situation and the possibility for their eventual
return. In Jonglei, UNMISS, in coordination with humanitarian partners, supported
18-20894

9/18

S/2018/1103

the voluntary return of 244 internally displaced persons from the Bor protection site
to Akobo. In Yambio, Western Equatoria, UNMISS collaborated with development
partners and diplomatic missions to support the launch of a partnership for recovery
and resilience programme, which is intended to re-establish access to basic services,
restore productive capacities and rebuild trust between citizens and institutions to
further foster the return of internally displaced populations.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
34. UNMISS documented an overall decline in the number of reported human rights
violations and abuses by parties to the conflict following the signature of the
Revitalized Agreement. During the reporting period, UNMISS verified 141 incidents
that posed a threat to human rights and protection. Those incidents included instances
of killing or wounding civilians, abduction, sexual violence, arbitrary arrest and
prolonged detention, the recruitment and/or use of children by armed groups or forces,
forced displacement, looting and the destruction of civilian property and extortion.
The incidents resulted in the deaths of at least 151 civilians and the wounding of 103
others. Of the 141 incidents, 41 were attributed to SSPDF, 27 to the pro -Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition, 7 to the South Sudan National Police Service, 7 to the
National Security Service and 59 to other armed elements, including those engaged
in intercommunal violence.
35. A total of 187 cases of conflict-related sexual violence were recorded, including
rape, gang rape and the abduction of women and girls for sexual slavery. In a series
of attacks between 19 and 29 November, at least 157 women and girls sought medical
assistance after being raped by unidentified armed men in government -controlled
territory while travelling on public roads near the villages of Guit and Nhialdiu in
Northern Liech. UNMISS immediately opened an investigation into the incidents. Of
the remaining 30 cases, which involved 12 minor girls, 6 were attributed to SSPDF,
8 to the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition and 1 to the South Sudan National Police
Service, while the remaining 15 cases have not yet been attributed.
36. On 26 September, the Government issued Republican Order No. 17/2018, which
provides for the immediate release of all “prisoners of war” and “detainees”, as part
of human rights-related confidence-building measures under the Revitalized
Agreement. During a stand-off on 7 October with government forces at the detention
facilities of the National Security Service headquarters in Juba, several detainees
contacted media sources, demanding that the Government respect their rights to due
process and honour the commitments made. Between 18 and 25 October, 25 individuals,
2 of whom were confirmed to be political prisoners, were released from government
detention. Separately, on 15 October, the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition released
four SSPDF elements from captivity. On 2 November, the spokesperson of the
SPLM/A in Opposition, James Gatdet, and a South African forme r military adviser to
Riek Machar, William Endley, were released, pursuant to an order announced by
President Kiir during the 31 October peace celebrations in Juba.
37. On 18 October, UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights jointly released a report, entitled “Violations and
abuses against civilians in Gbudwe and Tambura states (Western Equatoria), April –
August 2018”. In the report, it was noted that nearly 900 civilians had been abducted
for sexual slavery and forced recruitment by pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition
forces, and there were calls for their immediate release. In a statement released on
19 October, a spokesperson for the group denied the allegations contained in the
report but said that they would be investigated by the group’s leadership.

10/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

38. In collaboration with partners, including the South Sudan Council of Churches
and the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, UNMISS organized six training sessions on monitoring, reporting and
combating hate speech for 152 media professionals, community leaders, political
figures and other members of civil society in Aweil, Juba, Malakal and Yambio, of
whom 47 were women. Undue restrictions continued to be imposed on those
expressing opinions perceived as critical of the Government or the reputation of the
country. For example, on 3 September, the National Security Service ordered the
removal of an article scheduled to appear in a local newspaper in Juba that was critical
of the delayed payment of government workers’ salaries.
39. The continued use of the death penalty by South Sudan remained of serious
concern, given the limited ability of the country’s national justice system to fully
comply with minimum due process and fair trial safeguards. On 9 September, 34 death
row prisoners (31 men, 2 women and 1 male juvenile) were transferred from Torit to
Juba as part of the implementation of an order issued by the Director General of
Prisons in May 2018 directing the transfer of death row prisoners from state prison
facilities to Juba and Wau for security reasons. In addition, 14 death row prisoners,
including 2 alleged juveniles, were reported in Bor, Kapoeta and Yambio prison
facilities, which marked an increase, compared with the previous reporting period.
Three prisoners were transferred from Kapoeta to Juba Central Prison. During the
reporting period, UNMISS confirmed that five executions had been carried out since
July 2018 (four in Juba and Wau central prisons and a fifth outside of Juba central
prison following a military court martial). UNMISS continued to advocate national
authorities for a moratorium on executions.
40. On 6 September, the special court set up for the trial relating to events at the
Terrain Hotel in 2016 delivered a final judgment, convicting 10 of 12 defendants o n
charges relating to the murder of a South Sudanese journalist and the rape of 5 foreign
humanitarian workers. The court handed down sentences of prison terms ranging from
seven years to life imprisonment.
41. Access issues continued to have an adverse effect on ability of UNMISS to
investigate alleged human rights violations and abuses. During the reporting period,
UNMISS human rights teams experienced nine incidents of access denial, all of which
were attributable to government forces and authorities.
42. UNMISS continued to provide technical assistance to justice sector institutions
to address prolonged and arbitrary detention. A task force was constituted in Juba
Central Prison to expedite the resolution of priority cases, including juvenile cases
and persons in pretrial detention for more than one year. A group of 24 juveniles under
the age of 14 and persons accused of minor crimes was released at the end of
September. UNMISS is also supporting the revitalization of a mobile court in Juba
Central Prison to facilitate the review of all remand cases, in compliance with South
Sudanese law. UNMISS also launched a human rights forum in Bentiu and Torit to
engage government authorities and civil society stakeholders to address human rights
issues at the state level.
43. During the reporting period, the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting on children in armed conflict documented 90 verified
incidents of grave violations, including the recruitment and use of children (31), rape
and other forms of sexual violence (30), abduction (19), killing and maiming (10) and
denial of humanitarian access (1). At least 126 children (72 boys; 45 girls; 9 sex
unknown) were affected. In addition, the task force verified 4 incidents of attacks on
schools (3) and hospitals (1) and 12 incidents of the military use of schools (8) and
hospitals (4), all affecting an estimated 2,568 children (1,328 boys and 1,240 girls).
Between 4 and 7 November 2018, the Working Group on Children and Armed
18-20894

11/18

S/2018/1103

Conflict delegation went on mission to South Sudan and met government officials,
including the First Vice-President, to advocate moving forward with the development
of a comprehensive action plan to halt grave violations against children. The Working
Group also met civil society organizations and humanitarian partners, affected
communities and children in the context of a response for the survivors of grave
violations and humanitarian partners’ involvement with the task force in
implementing a comprehensive reintegration programme for children released from
armed forces and groups. UNMISS provided capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities on child protection to 4,835 participants (1,819 of whom were women),
including 961 members of government security forces (149 wome n), local civil
society and community members.
44. UNMISS facilitated 203 capacity-building and awareness-raising activities on
human rights, benefiting 2,528 participants (1,112 of whom were women), including
individuals from the South Sudan National Police Service and civil society, as well
as other stakeholders. As part of the internal mainstreaming of human rights,
UNMISS facilitated sessions on the human rights mandate for 1,426 UNMISS
uniformed personnel, including 273 women.

C.

Creating the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
45. UNMISS continued to work alongside humanitarian partners to enhance security
for ongoing response operations. Eleven humanitarian force protection tasks were
completed, providing armed escort along high-threat routes. Ongoing protection tasks
are being met to secure eight airfields used by humanitarian air services. UNMISS is
playing a central role in Ebola virus disease preparedness contingency planning,
working with the Ministry of Health, WHO and humanitarian partners to determine
capabilities and access requirements, pre-position equipment and ready screening sites
at border crossings. UNMISS-protected convoys enabled partners to reach Yei for the
first time in several months, completing a critical resupply of food and medicine to
humanitarian storage sites and delivering essential Ebola preparedness equipment and
supplies. During the reporting period, UNMISS also conducted four civil -military
coordination workshops with humanitarian partners and UNMISS civilian offices to
improve the coordination and integration of efforts essential for maintaining conditions
conducive to the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
46. The Mine Action Service surveyed and cleared humanitarian compounds in
Central Equatoria, Upper Nile, and Unity. On 27 September, the National Mine Action
Authority launched the second national mine action strategy (2018 –2021), which is
focused on the building of national capacity to oversee and implement mine action in
South Sudan. During the reporting period, 22 mine action teams were deployed
throughout the country. A total of 2,115,415 m 2 was surveyed and released and a
further 4,334 explosive hazards and 101,738 rounds of small arms ammunition were
removed and destroyed. The Mine Action Service further completed the destruction
of all confiscated weapons and ammunition in and around protection of civilians sites,
including 1.2 tonnes of explosive remnants of war and more than 10,000 rounds of
small arms ammunition.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement and
the peace process
47. UNMISS continued its good offices engagement with South Sudanese parties
and stakeholders, both in South Sudan and in the region. These engagements included

12/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

several separate interactions between my Special Representative and President Kiir
and Riek Machar, in which both expressed their commitment to undertaking
confidence-building measures and fully implementing the Revitalized Agreement.
My Special Representative also met senior government officials in the region,
including the Foreign Ministers of Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda, and the IGAD
Special Envoy in several forums, in which he highlighted the collective responsibility
and continuing essential role of the region and international partners to provide
effective oversight of the implementation of the Agreement. UNMISS also
encouraged the timely implementation of pre-transitional tasks, including confidencebuilding measures and the nomination of representatives to t he various institutions
and mechanisms, and attended meetings of the National Pre -Transitional Committee
as an observer.
48. UNMISS continued to provide the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism with logistical support to e nable it to fulfil its
ceasefire monitoring and verification mandate. This included force protection and air
support. UNMISS also actively participated in meetings of the reconstituted Board
and the Technical Committee of the Mechanism.
49. UNMISS also continued to engage with the steering committee and secretariat
of the national dialogue to promote an inclusive, participatory and credible process,
as well as to explore the greater complementarity between the national dialogue and
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement.
50. UNMISS, in coordination with government and Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission efforts, supported the dissemination of information about the
Revitalized Agreement, including through workshops with civil society and
journalists, the printing and distribution of 3,000 copies of the signed Agreement and
other activities, such as hosting a peace football tournament with local universities.

E.

Women and peace and security
51. As reflected in paragraph 28 above, from 7 to 9 October, a joint United Nations African Union delegation visited South Sudan to send a strong message of support
for the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. It emphasized the importance
of the participation of women in the implementation of the Agreement and adherence
to the gender provisions therein. The delegation met Cabinet ministers, women
leaders of civil society organizations and women in protection of civilians sites and
heard the concerted demand for the parties to the Agreement to ensure that the 35 per
cent quota for women would be met not only at the national and state levels, but also
in all pre-transitional and transitional structures, and to address the current shortfall.
The delegation subsequently briefed the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union on 10 October and the Security Council on 16 November.
52. On 25 and 26 September, UNMISS convened a consultative workshop with
stakeholders at the national and subnational levels to report on the drafting of a
Mission-wide sexual and gender-based violence prevention strategy aimed at
improved protection in and outside the protection of civilians sites. In October,
UNMISS facilitated several workshops with women civil society organiza tions to
promote women’s participation in the peace process to meet the 35 per cent quota.

18-20894

13/18

S/2018/1103

VI. Mission staffing, the status of deployments, and conduct
and discipline
53. On 27 November, the number of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,673,
comprising 897 international staff members (244 women, 27 per cent), 1,379 national
staff members (195 women, 14 per cent) and 397 United Nations Volunteers (129
women, 32 per cent).
54. The police strength stood at 1,893 (of an authorized 2,101 officers), compr ising
659 individual police officers (176 women, 27 per cent), 1,171 personnel in formed
police units (230 women, 20 per cent) and 63 corrections officers (13 women, 21 per
cent).
55. Of the authorized 17,000 troops, including up to 4,000 for the regional
protection force, UNMISS troop strength stood at 14,637 military personnel: 214
military liaison officers (27 women, 13 per cent), 405 military staff officers (55
women, 14 per cent) and 14,018 military contingent personnel (476 women, 3 per
cent). A total of 2,226 regional protection force personnel have been inducted to date.
Full complements of the Bangladesh Engineering Unit, the Nepalese High Readiness
Company and the Ethiopian and Rwandan infantry battalions have been deployed. A
Ghanaian company inducted on 26 August and a Vietnamese Level 2 hospital were
deployed with essential equipment on 17 October.
56. During the reporting period, UNMISS, in collaboration with United Nations
country team task force on the prevention of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse,
operationalized community-based complaint mechanisms in 10 locations, with a
further 8 to be established. To ensure consistency throughout the country, focal points
from various agencies were appointed and trained.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
57. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 51 incidents constituting
violations of the status-of-forces agreement. Particularly concerning was the firing of
gunshots at an UNMISS patrol team on 15 September by one SSPDF soldier in an
attempt to forcefully stop the patrol near the UNMISS base in Yei, Central Equatoria,
resulting in a gunshot wound to an UNMISS patrol team member.
58. UNMISS recorded 19 incidents attributed to the Government of movement
restrictions that affected UNMISS operations, some of which were directed at
UNMISS personnel monitoring and reporting on the human rights situation. Three
new cases of arrest and detention of UNMISS personnel by government agents were
also reported. In one case, an UNMISS national staff member was arrested in Kuajok
on 8 October over a private dispute and detained by South Sudan National Police
Service officers at a local police station. He was released on 18 October. The
Government did not formally notify UNMISS of the arrest and detention of the staff
member, and UNMISS has not been informed of any legal process instituted against
him. The whereabouts of two staff members arrested in 2014 remain unknown. The
Government has neither granted UNMISS access to them nor provided information
about their condition, notwithstanding regular requests.
59. Violations of the obligation to facilitate the entry of UNMISS personnel into
South Sudan continue to occur. Of concern has been the delay in granting entry visas
to nine UNMISS military staff officers, who have been waiting for between three and
eight months. Five of the nine officers were recently granted pre -entry approval.
Other violations recorded during the reporting period include an intrusion into the
14/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

UNMISS temporary protected area in Leer by two SSPDF soldier s, one of whom was
armed with a grenade; an intrusion into the UNMISS protection of civilians site in
Juba by a National Security Service officer who was armed with a pistol; the
harassment and intimidation of UNMISS members in Juba and Eastern Equatoria,
respectively; the assault of UNMISS members in Wau by an SSPDF soldier; and the
demand for the payment of unauthorized fees from an UNMISS international
contractor by Directorate of Passports, Nationality and Immigration officers in Juba.
UNMISS continues to notify the Government of violations through a monthly record
of incidents and in-person meetings with officials.
60. Three incidents involving interference with UNMISS activities by the
pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition were recorded in Upper Nile and Jo nglei.
61. UNMISS continued efforts to strengthen the safety and security of United
Nations personnel, premises and assets by implementing its Mission-level action plan
based on the recommendations set forth in the report by Lieutenant General (retired)
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled “Improving security of United Nations
peacekeepers”, and the approved country security risk management document.

VIII. Financial aspects
62. The General Assembly, by its resolution 72/300, appropriated the amount of
$1,124,960,400 for the maintenance of UNMISS for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019. As at 27 November 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNMISS
Special Account amounted to $168.2 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to
$1,682,900. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the
period up to 31 July 2018, while reimbursement of the costs of contin gent-owned
equipment has been made up to 30 June 2018, in accordance with the quarterly
payment schedule.

IX. Observations and recommendations
63. The signing of the Revitalized Agreement on 12 September is a significant
development in the path to returning South Sudan to peace and stability. I applaud the
parties for demonstrating a spirit of compromise to agree on this framework, which
provides the basis for an inclusive political solution. Full and timely implementation
of the peace agreement in its letter and spirit is the sole responsibility of the parties
to the conflict.
64. It is now incumbent upon the South Sudanese leaders to assume their
responsibilities and demonstrate the political will necessary to make the eight -month
pre-transitional period successful in order to pave the way for the transitional period
that will lead to elections. I therefore urge the parties to achieve two benchmarks,
namely, the establishment of the revised transitional security arrangements and the
formation of the revitalized transitional government of national unity, as a matter of
priority during the pre-transition period.
65. Unless the signatories to the Revitalized Agreement urgently make the
compromises necessary to find a comprehensive and realistic agreeme nt on the
cantonment and integration of their forces and on the security arrangements necessary
to support its implementation, the transition will lack a fundamental political and
security foundation. This weakness cannot be compensated for by the deployme nt of
additional forces to the UNMISS regional protection force and needs to be addressed
politically. I therefore encourage the leaders of the region and the parties to redouble
18-20894

15/18

S/2018/1103

their efforts towards finding a comprehensive security agreement for the cant onment
and integration of forces and the return of all leaders to Juba.
66. I commend the IGAD mediation and recognize the commitment of the Heads of
State and Government of IGAD, in particular Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan and Uganda,
for their collective efforts to enable the signing of the Revitalized Agreement. In this
regard, I strongly urge IGAD, the African Union and the Security Council to remain
seized of the matter and to ensure that the momentum generated by the signing of the
Agreement is maintained and that all its provisions are fully implemented. The United
Nations stands ready and is fully committed to supporting them in this effort.
67. While implementation timelines have slipped, tangible progress is being
registered. I welcome the recent joint field visits of SSPDF and SPLM/A in
Opposition and remain hopeful that such confidence-building measures, combined
with the finalization and implementation of the security arrangements, will help to
silence the guns and begin to bring the peace that the people of South Sudan expect.
The engagement of the signatories in the National Pre -Transitional Committee, the
National Constitutional Amendment Committee and several organs of the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism is also
commendable, and I note that the signatories have made their nominations to all
mechanisms of the Revitalized Agreement. I call upon the signatories and IGAD to
accelerate their efforts, and in this regard, I extend the support of the United Nations
where necessary.
68. These developments notwithstanding, I am mindful that the Revitalized
Agreement is yet to have a decisive impact on the security environment for the local
population. Sporadic fighting continues between the Government and opposition
forces, as well as between opposition groups in the Yei area, Central Equatoria and
the Wau triangle in Western Bahr el-Ghazal. In addition to the adverse effects on the
population, continued fighting has meant that UNMISS and humanitarian partners
continue to be prevented from reaching populations affected.
69. I also condemn in the strongest terms the continued prevalence of sexual
violence, of which recent attacks in Unity are a stark reminder. Such brutality is
indefensible, and I urge the parties to spare no efforts in bringing to justice all those
who were responsible for those atrocities. There can be no meaningful peace without
an end to and accountability for the brutalizing of innocent civilians.
70. The humanitarian situation in the country remains of grave concern and is a
direct consequence of the conflict. In addition, attacks on humanitarian workers, the
dangers posed to them and the impediments created by the parties to the conflict are
unacceptable. I remain deeply concerned about the two UNMIS S staff members
arrested in 2014, whose whereabouts remain unknown. I call upon all parties, in
particular the Government, to ensure a safer and more conducive environment for
humanitarian workers who operate tirelessly to deliver assistance to the most
vulnerable of South Sudanese civilians.
71. The Revitalized Agreement provides an unparalleled opportunity to end the
conflict that has subjected South Sudan and its citizens to appalling devastation,
violence, dire humanitarian conditions and grave human rights violations. At the same
time, the national dialogue, if conducted impartially and inclusively, could
complement the implementation of the Agreement. I encourage the national dialogue
steering committee to continue its efforts towards a participatory and credible
process, including its outreach to opposition leaders. The United Nations will
continue to support both processes, in close cooperation with IGAD, the African
Union and international partners.

16/18

18-20894

S/2018/1103

72. In conclusion, I also convey my sincere appreciation to UNMISS military,
police and civilian personnel who, under the leadership of my Special Representative,
David Shearer, work courageously to protect civilians in vulnerable situations,
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, safeguard human rights and support
the peace process. I particularly thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
that have provided much-needed uniformed personnel and assets to UNMISS. I
further commend the United Nations country team and NGO partners for their
tremendous courage and sacrifice in providing vital humanitarian assistance to the
population, in arduous and often dangerous conditions. I thank the IGAD Special
Envoy, Ismail Wais, for his efforts in steering the peace process and supporting the
early steps in the implementation process. Lastly, I commend the tireless efforts of
the IGAD Heads of State and Government for their steadfastness in guiding the peace
process. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation for the active and personal
engagement of the Chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat,
in the collective effort for peace in South Sudan.

18-20894

17/18

S/2018/1103

18/18

18-20894
