SECURITY COUNCIL

1925 th

MEETING:

11 JUNE 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1925) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of tlte agenda . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/12093) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

S/PV. 1925

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Offiial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1925th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 11 June 1976, at 4 p.m.
President:

Mr. Rashleigh

E. JACKSON

(Guyana).

At the invitation
of the President, Mr. Tiirkmen
(Turkey) and Mr. Papoulias (Greece) took places at
the Council table.

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China,, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

3. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I have received
a letter dated 11 June from the representative
of
Turkey in which he requests that Mr. Nail Atalay be
permitted to participate in the debate. I should like to
propose, if I hear no objection, that in accordance
with the practice followed on previous occasions the
Council should extend an invitation
to Mr. Atalay
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/l925)

of the agenda

It was so decided.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/12093)
The meeting

4. Before proceeding with the consideration of the
item on the agenda, I should like to inform the members of the Council that the Secretary-General is on his
way. His plane has been slightly delayed, but he will
be here shortly.

was called to order at 5.25 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

5. The first speaker is the Minister
Affairs of Cyprus, on whom I now call.

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Report of the Secretary-General
operation in Cyprus (S/12093)

for Foreign

6. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES
(Cyprus): Mr. President,
may I at the outset offer you my sincere and warm
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of this august body. We are convinced that your high
qualifications,
your recognized diplomatic
skill and
great experience are valuable assets for the proper
conduct of the deliberations of the Council. I wish also
to.pay a tribute to you as the very able representative
of Guyana, a small country which plays a leading
role in the United Nations and the non-aligned
movement and with which my country maintains the
best of relations, based on common principles and
ideals.

on the United Nations

1. The PRESIDENT:
I have today received a letter
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, who
requests that Cyprus be invited to participate in the
debate and indicates the composition of its delegation.
This request for participation
is based on Article’ 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.,In conformity with the usual ractice, and
with the consent of the Council, I there sore propose
to invite the delegation of Cyprus to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

7. Further, I should like to express on behalf of my
Government
our deepest appreciation
and warmest
feelings of gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his
untiring and praiseworthy efforts to promote the noble
aims of the United Nations in Cyprus and to serve
the cause of peace in-the world.

AY the invitation of the President, Mr. Christophides
(Cyprus) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received letters,
dated 9 and 11 June respectively, from the representatives of Turkey and Greece in which they ask to he
invited to participate in the discussion in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the
provisional
rules of procedure. In conformity
with
the usual practice, and with the consent of the Council,
I therefore propose to invite these representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

8. Our warm, thanks and deep appreciation go also to
the UnderSecretaries-General
Mr. Roberto Guyer and
Mr. Brian Urquhart for their dedicated work with
regard to Cyprus.
9. We are particularly grateful to Ambassador Perez
de Cdllar, the Secretary-General’s
Special Represen1

tative in Cyprus, whose dedication and devotion in
the exercise of his duties, which he carries out in an
exemplary manner, are recognized by all. We also
acknowledge and commend the very valuable contribution of Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand, and of
the officers and men working under him, to the cause
of peace in Cyprus.

Nations and even calls in question the values and the
fundamental
principles
on which the continued
existence of the Organization depends..
14. .When on 20 November
1975 the General Assembly adopted, by 117 votes to l-that
of Turkey.resolution 3395 (XXX), we had serious grounds for
believing, on the basis of past experience, that this
resolution too would receive the same ill treatment by
Turkey and would suffer the same fate as the previous
resolutions on Cyprus. That belief of ours was not
based solely on Turkey’s negative vote nor on what
its representative had stated during the relevant debate
on Cyprus in the General Assembly. It was a belief
resulting from Turkey’s attitude towards the unanimously adopted General Assembly resolution 3212
(XXIX), for which it had voted but which it had chosen
to ignore and flagrantly violate.

10. Finally, I wish to express our profound gratitude
to the Governments which make the United Nations
operation in Cyprus possible, through their voluntary
contributions of personnel and funds, thus enabling the
United Nations to continue carrying out its commendable peace-keeping role.
11. It is a sad fact that I am not present in the
Council in order to report any progress in the search
for a just and peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem.
On the contrary, my coming here has been necessitated
by the agonizing prolongation
of the tragedy of the
people of Cyprus and by certain ominous developments
which have further aggravated the situation and which,
if they continue unchecked, can lead to an even worse
crisis, with grave dangers to peace in Cyprus and the
sensitive region of the Eastern Mediterranean.
These
developments
are, on the one hand, the stalemate
reached in the intercommunal
talks as a result of the
negative Turkish attitude and, on the other, the
deliberate creation of fuifs accomplis
by Turkey,
which, as a prelude to partition,
is expelling the
remaining Greek Cypriots from the area it occupies
and is colonizing’ that area by the massive importation of tens of thousands of mainland Turks in an
obvious effort to change the demographic composition of Cyprus. The combined result is that unless
these trends are reversed, any remaining hopes of
reaching a negotiated settlement to the Cyprus problem
will disappear.

15. It is our conviction, considering Turkey’s record,
that whether its vote is negative or positive, Ankara’s
attitude towards the resolutions on Cyprus is one of
contemptuous disregard. If anyone has any proof or
even an indication
to the contrary, let him come
forward. Indeed, I would welcome it. In the meantime,
we are entitled to ask: Which United Nations resolutions on Cyprus has Turkey ever respected? What
provision of which resolution has Turkey ever implemented? What indication has Turkey ever given even
to create the impression that it intends to implement
these resolutions?
16. We recall in this respect that, since the Turkish
aggression, a total of 15 resolutions on Cyprus have
been adopted-12
by the Security Council and three
by the General Assembly. None of these resolutions
has been implemented
by Turkey and none of their
provisions has it respected. Fifteen United Nations
resolutions have met with the full contempt of Ankara
and have been treated by Turkey as scrap paper
devoid of any value. If I may paraphrase: never in
the history of the United Nations have so many
resolutions been trampled upon by a single country
within such a short time. But even beyond that, Turkey
has chosen a policy by which it does not merely
ignore United Nations resolutions
but also takes
specific and arbitrary action in flagrant violation of
those resolutions,
thereby creating fuits accomplis
to aggravate the situation further and destroy all hopes
for a peaceful settlement.

12. In the present worsening conditions, the purpose
of my presence here is to protest against the injustice
done to Cyprus and its people and to plead before this
body that the United Nations, as the repository of
the conscience of mankind, take appropriate action
in order to remedy a situation which causes immense
human suffering and threatens international peace and
security.
13. The picture Cyprus presents is grim, and its
component elements remain the 200,000 refugees; the
thousands of parents and relatives of those killed
in cold blood and of those missing and unaccounted
for; the international
crime of the invasion, the continued occupation of nearly 40 per cent of the territory
of Cyprus and the illegal presence in Cyprus of
40,000 Turkish troops, with the untold misery which
they cause to the Cypriot people, Greek and Turkish
alike. That, in broad lines, constitutes the drama of
the Cypriot people, to whom pain, suffering and agony
have sadly become a way of life. But beyond the
suffering of a people, the situation in Cyprus poses a
grave challenge to the effectiveness of the United

17. Upon these actions of Turkey’s and the recent
disquieting
developments
in the Cyprus problem
I should like to dwell somewhat extensively,
for
I consider it my duty to advise this body which is
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security of the dangerously deteriorating situation
in Cyprus.
18. It will be recalled that at the third round of the
intercommunal
talks, held in Vienna in August 1975,
it was agreed [S/11789, annex] that the Turkish
2

Cypriots who remained in the Government-controlled
areas would be allowed to move to the Turkish-held
areas, and the Greek Cypriots who remained in the
occupied areas would be free to stay there and would
be given every facility to lead a normal life, including
facilities for education and the practice of their religion,
as well as medical care from their own doctors and
freedom of movement in the occupied ‘area. It was
also agreed that the United Nations Peace-keeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
would have free and
‘normal access to the Greek Cypriot villages in the
occupied areas. Turkey, having secured the implementation of those provisions of the agreement which
were to its advantage, chose to throw by the wayside
and violate the rest. Not only did Turkey under various
pretexts prohibit :teachers, priests and doctors from
entering the occupied area, not only did it prevent the
Greek Cypriots who remained in the occupied area
from moving about freely and leading a normal life and
deny to UNFICYP
the exercise of its agreed role, it
also embarked
upon a process of systematically
expelling them through tactics of oppression, harassment and brute force. Since August 1975, when the
agreement on humanitarian
matters was signed in
Vienna, and up to 31 May of this year, a total of
1,982 Greek Cypriots have been expelled from the
occupied areas-over
1,000 of them during the last
three months. Those inhuman expulsions, which are
constantly increasing in number, add to the drama of
the Cypriot people and enlarge the dimensions of the
tragedy.

21. It was soon after the invasion and occupation
of the northern part of Cyprus by the Turkish army
that the importation
of Turks from Turkey was
organized. This form of colonization has recently been
intensified and has assumed tlie dimensions of a mass
population
transfer for the purpose of furthering
Ankara’s insidious partitionist
aims through changes
in the demographic character of Cyprus. In order to
facilitate the transfer of those “settlers”
to Cyprus,
the Turkish Government
has established offices in
Ankara and Mersin which have in fact become centres
for the distribution
of other people’s houses and
properties. Crowds of idle and illiterate persons from
the depths of Turkey daily converge in front of these
offtces, anxious to snatch the loot of war.
22. In an effort to mislead world public opinion,
Turkey at first alleged that those settlers were seasonal
workers and technical experts. With the increase of
their number, and given that 25 per cent of the Turkish
Cypriot work force have remained unemployed in the
occupied area since the invasion, Ankara realized
that the myth regarding seasonal workers and experts
was no longer tenable. The version had to be changed
and a new story invented. The “settlers”,
whose
number is now nearing 45,000 and is constantly
increasing, it was then alleged, were Turkish Cypriots
who had been forced in the past by the Government of
Cyprus to emigrate abroad. In its effort to present
such false allegations, the Turkish-Cypriot
leadership
resorted to a falsification
of figures. Mr. Denktas
stated on 4 October 1975 that during the 1954-1959
period 30,000 Turkish Cypriots had had to leave the
island. This was in the Turkish
“Special
News
Bulletin”
of 4 October 1975. In accordance with the
official statistics, which date back to the period of the
British administration-and
the British are well known
for the accuracy of their statistics-the
number of
Turkish Cypriots who emigrated during that period
was in fact 10,625. Similarly,
Mr. Celik alleged, on
2 February 1976, that in the period 1963-1974, 25,000
Turkish Cypriots had emigrated abroad. In fact, the
number of Turkish Cypriot emigrants during that time
was 6,481, of whom only 302 went to Turkey. Incidentally, and for the sake of comparison, the number
of Greek Cypriots who emigrated from 1955 to July
1975 was 79,185. These statistics are at the disposal of
anyone for scrutiny. Ankara’s attempt purposely to
inflate the figures is but a piece of mathematical
alchemy performed in an effort to cover its sinister
designs against Cyprus, which it is carrying out at the
expense of both Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots.
For indeed it should not be overlooked that the latter
are also victims of this influx of alien population and
are discriminated
against in relation to the settlers, as
a result of the policy followed by the occupying forces.

19. The explanation given by the Turkish Cypriot
leadership as to the expulsions, that the expelled signed
so-called voluntary
applications
asking for their
transfer to the Government-controlled
areas, is, to
say the least, an offence against the integrity of
hundreds of neutral observers and an unconvincing
attempt to underestimate human intelligence. Ankara
can no longer conceal from the world the inhuman
methods used by the Turkish Cypriot leadership and
the Turkish troops to secure the so-called .voluntary
exodus of Greek Cypriots from the occupied areas.
20. ‘. Restrictions of movement, deprivations,
intimidations, continuous harassment and increasing threats
against their lives give a grim picture of the living
conditions of these people under the Turkish occupation. Under such humiliation
and physical dangers,
the forced decisions of some to leave their homes
and property and save their lives are being described
by the invaders as “voluntary”
departures. But who
would wish to abandon his ancestral home and the
fruits of long labour without serious reasons connected
with his very existence? Who would ever decide freely
to abandon his land and property in order to go and
live under subhuman conditions in a refugee camp?
The bleak reality is that these wholesale expulsions
have been resorted to by Turkey for the purpose of
“homogenizing
the Turkish region”, as it calls it, and
with a view to facilitating its perpetuation of yet another
repugnant international crime, that of the colonization
of the occupied areas.

23. The ‘purpose of the expulsions and colonization
is only too obvious. Turkey is, as I have already
mentioned, trying to “homogenize”
the occupied area
and bring about changes in the demographic character
of Cyprus, with a view to paving the way for the
3

partition of Cyprus and the de facto annexation by
Turkey of the occupied area. At the same time, the
creation of these new faits accomplis enables Turkey
to repeat ad nauseam its favourite tune of “new
realities” in an effort to avert international
pressures
for the return of the refugees to their homes and lands,
and for the just settlement of the territorial aspect of
the problem.
24. Turkey’s policy in Cyprus consists in the creation
by the use of force offaits accomplis which it tries to
justify to the world by false pretences and misrepresentations.
Turkey calls such faits accomplis
“new realities” and asks the Greek Cypriots and the
world to accept them. The original faits accomplis
are followed by others, and the original “realities”
become “newer realities”,
supported by new false
justifications and lame excuses. The policy of the stepby-step solution of international
problems is in fact
used by Turkey in reverse: not for the peaceful solution of the Cyprus problem but for the forced dissolution of the Republic of Cyprus.
25. The participation
of the Turkish side in the
intercommunal
talks should also be viewed in the
light of the constant objective of Turkey regarding
Cyprus-that
of partition.
Turkey’s attitude in the
talks has been one of procrastination
and dilatoriness,
and the Turkish presence at the negotiating table is
not motivated by any desire for the achievement of
a just solution to the Cyprus problem. Ankara, in fact,
uses the time of the talks for the purpose of consolidating its position in the occupied area and for
shaking off the pressures of the international
community and of individual countries. Whenever Turkey
is given friendly advice to make concessions in Cyprus,
it always leans back on the comfort of the intercommunal talks and remains idle, doing nothing. And
so does the Turkish Cypriot representative
at the
talks, whose instructions are strict and unequivocal:
to prevent any progress in the talks, and by any
means to lead them to stagnation--even
by the breach
of promises or agreements, and even by the sheer
negation of truth.
26. It is by such conduct that Turkey has rendered
devoid of any substance or meaning the intercommunal
talks which commenced in January 1975. I will not take
up the Council’s time by going into the details of the
intercommunal
talks which were held last year in
Vienna and New York, as you had occasion to be
informed of these details at previous meetings of the
Council at which the Cyprus problem was debated.
Suffice it to say that, owing to the attitude of Turkey
that prevented any meaningful
negotiations,
those
talks produced no results at all, notwithstanding
the
untiring efforts of the Secretary-General.
27. As everyone knows, the abortive talks of 1975
were resumed, and in February 1976 at the fifth round
of the intercommunal
talks held in Vienna, as a result
of the commendable efforts of the Secretary-General,

it was agreed that the two sides should, within a
fixed time-limit,
exchange concrete proposals on all
aspects of the Cyprus problem. This the Greek Cypriot
side considered an encouraging development,
and,
faithful to its undertaking,
it submitted within the
prescribed period concrete and constructive proposals
on all aspects of the Cyprus problem: namely, those of
territory, federation and the powers and functions of
the central Government.
In formulating its proposals
the Greek Cypriot side had as its main objective that
Cyprus should remain an independent,
sovereign,
territorially
integral and non-aligned State, and was
guided by its desire to build the future of Cyprus
on sound foundations which would ensure for the
people of Cyprus-Greek
Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot
economic
alike-lasting
peace,
progress
and
development.
28. To the Greek Cypriot proposals, Mr. DenktaS
replied in a provocative and unacceptable manner. He
returned that part of the proposals which referred
to the territorial aspect, for the simple reason that it
was linked to the procedural suggestion made by ‘the
Secretary-General
in Vienna, and asked for the submission of other proposals in a form more to his liking.
Such unbecoming conduct confirmed once again the
intransigence and bad faith of the Turkish side, which
sought on various pretexts to avoid submitting
proposals on the territorial
aspect of the Cyprus
problem. As expected, Mr. Denktaz failed to include in
his side’s proposals, which he subsequently submitted,
any concrete proposals on territory. Instead, he chose
to put forward generalities and bizarre conceptions
which he described as “criteria”.
When studying
these “criteria”
one may wonder whether the whole
of the island of Cyprus would be enough to satisfy
the Turkish
demands. Furthermore,
the Turkish
Cypriot proposals on the constitutional
aspect of the
problem are such as to leave no doubt that the
Turkish side does not aim at a genuine and viable
federation but at the creation of two separate States
connected in such a loose and fragile manner as to
lead unavoidably to the disintegration
of the Republic
of Cyprus.
29. In this respect, the contents of the recent letter
dated 25 May, which the Turkish Cypriot representative at the intercommunal
talks sent to the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General
[S/12093,
annex VZ] is very revealing of the Turkish intentions.
In his letter, the Turkish Cypriot negotiator puts
forward certain conditions
and principles
for the
solution of the Cyprus problem, the acceptance of
which would be tantamount to the partition of Cyprus,
if not worse. From the letter it is abundantly clear
that the Turkish side is aiming at the abolition of
the Republic of Cyprus as an independent, sovereign
and territorially
integral State. For how can one
explain the conditions put by the Turkish side that
the Turkish and Greek regions of Cyprus, as it calls
them, shall be homogeneous,
both demographically
and geographically and that each region shall be solely

responsible for its own defence? The Turkish position,
evidently, provides no basis for constructive negotiations and is flagrantly contrary to the fundamental
concept of the relevant United Nations resolutions
according to which Cyprus should remain an independent, sovereign, territorially
integral and nonaligned State.

however, has been one of bad faith and broken
promises, and this is unmistakably
borne out in the
Secretary-General’s
report which is before us.
34. The Government of Cyprus continues to regard
the intercommunal
talks as the best means for the
achievement of a peaceful and lasting solution to the
Cyprus problem. We consider, however, that the talks
must be meaningful and productive, and so does the
Secretary-General,
as is evident from paragraph 69
of his report. In order to achieve this, not only must
good will be shown, but each side must also honour
all commitments
undertaken by it during the talks,
including the humanitarian
agreement reached at the .third round of the talks held in Vienna and the
.procedural agreement of the fifth round of the talks,
regarding the submission of concrete proposals by
both sides on all aspects of the Cyprus problem,
including the territorial aspect [S/if 993 of24 February
1976, annex]. At the same time, all unilateral actions
contrary to these agreements and the relevant resolutions should immediately
cease and steps be taken
for their reversal.

30. In their pursuit of a prolongation of the Cyprus
crisis, in the ail too apparent efforts of Ankara to
consolidate its position in the occupied area, there
develops between Ankara and the Turkish Cypriot
leadership a game of transfer of responsibility for the
failure of the Turkish side to submit concrete proposals
on the territorial aspect of the problem. Mr. Denktas
whispers about the political difficulties of Ankara,
whilst Ankara makes veiled references to the uncomprising attitude of the Turkish Cypriot leaders. If,
indeed, the present Turkish Government
is unable,
because of internal difIIculties,
to make the decisions
required for a just settlement, then the utility of the
continuance
of the intercommunal
talks becomes
questionable since they are turned into a monologue
-as has, indeed, been the case until now. As to the
attempt to mislead public opinion by shifting responsibilities, no one should be hoodwinked. The presence
in Cyprus of 40,000 Turkish troops places Ankara
in a position of dominance
and this fact speaks
eloquently for itself.

35. I very much regret to say that Turkey has
adopted the same stand of arbitrariness and complete
lack of co-operation even on the purely humanitarian
problem of the more than 2,000 missing Greek Cypriot
civilians and unaccounted-for prisoners of war.
36. It is a well-known fact that despite General
Assembly resolution 3450 (XXX) and Human Rights
Commission resolution 4 (XXXI), the Turkish military
authorities have until now bluntly refused to co-operate
with the International
Committee of the Red Cross and
have repeatedly denied to representatives
of that
Committee the request permission for access to the
occupied areas for the purpose of carrying out searches
or of collecting and verifying information as to the fate
of the missing persons.

31. It is by such conduct as I have described that
Ankara has turned the intercommunal
talks into a
travesty, and it is by the creation of such fairs
accomplis as I have exposed that it is trying to implement its partitionist plans on Cyprus and the defacto
annexation to Turkey of the occupied area. No denials
on Ankara’s part, however vociferous they may be,
can conceal its real intentions, for its actions in Cyprus
speak louder than its words.
32. The stalemate in the negotiations seems to have
been inevitable, by reason of the respective attitudes
of the two sides towards the talks. The Greek Cypriot
side views the negotiations as a constructive dialogue
through which the way can be opened towards a just
and lasting solution of the problem. By good will and
a positive approach, opposing views can be reconciled
in the course of a dialogue and differences resolved.
Contrastingly different, however, has been the Turkish
approach to the talks. Turkey looks at the talks as
a suitable forum in which to allow time to pass
undisturbed, while it hastens to use that time to expel
the Greek Cypriots from the occupied area and to
coionize it in furtherance of its partitionist plans.

37. It is needless to stress the dimensions of the
agonizing drama and the ordeal of the families of the
missing persons who, for almost two years now, have
not known whether their loved ones are still alive or
have been killed. It is my fervent hope that Turkey
will at last show understanding
and decide to cooperate with the International
Committee of the Red
Cross and furnish the Secretary-General
with all the
necessary information,
as provided by the aforementioned resolution 3450 (XXX), thus putting an end
to the anguish of the parents and relatives of the missing
persons.
38. The picture which I have presented shows the
“new realities” -as Ankara calls them-in
Cyprus.
I have spoken the truth to the Council, and if anyone
doubts the accuracy of my statement, I am certain
that I would be vindicated if he were to read the
Secretary-General’s
report that is before us, which,
as The New York Times in its ‘edition of 9 June states
in an editorial, though clothed in diplomatic language...
makes grim reading.
’

33. Indicative
of Turkey’s attitude in the talks is
its stand towards the humanitarian agreement reached
in Vienna in August 1975, which was hailed at the
time as a major success. That agreement, as I have
already mentioned,
was fully implemented
by my
Government in so far as its undertakings were concerned. Turkey’s
position towards the agreement,
5

39. Thus, in paragraph 10 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral says:

on 3 June 1976, and in the Karpas region from
7,890 to 7,194. Altogether
1,401 Greek Cypriots
moved to the south in the last six months. The
present rate of evacuations to the south is averaging
some 20 persons a day. On the basis of information
available to UNFICYP,
there are no wholly Greek
Cypriot villages left in the Karpas, as either Turkish
Cypriots or Turkish nationals have been resettled in
varying numbers in each of them.”

“UNFICYP
continues to attempt to discharge its
functions with regard to the security, welfare, and
well-being of the Greek Cypriots living in the
Turkish-controlled
part of the Island, as it did for
Turkish Cypriots in the past. However, UNFICYP
access to that area remains restricted and has
become more so since my last report. As a result
it has only been possible to carry out humanitarian
work on a limited basis.”

40. I have cited those excerpts from the report
without making any comments as they eloquently
speak for themselves. They also confirm, I think,
my exposition of the situation in Cyprus.

I believe that this, as well as the following, conveys
the intended meaning clearly, if in understated simplicity. Paragraph 23 of the report reads as follows:

41. It is on account of the gravity of the situation
that persists in my country that I am appearing today
before this Council to seek its support for our struggle
for survival as an independent country. I am appealing
to the Council to take such appropriate action as is
warranted by the present circumstances.
It would
of course be inconceivable
to us that the Council
should confine itself only to the renewal of the mandate
of UNFICYP.
The issues raised by the expulsions,
the colonization,
the stalemate in the talks and the
missing persons are some of the specific aspects on
which the Council is called upon to take appropriate
and effective action. At the same time, the Council
must not overlook the wider issues dealt with in the
earlier General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, which should be effectively implemented.

“As a result of these restrictions”-which
are set
out in paragraph 22-“UNFICYP
has been unable to
contribute in any effective way to the welfare, wellbeing and security of the Greek Cypriots in the
north except for the supply of material items and
distribution
of social welfare benefits. There is a
continued outflow of these people to the south”.”
In paragraph 26 it is stated that:
“In the Turkish-controlled
areas UNCIVPOL
has no greater freedom of movement
than the
UNFICYP
military
contingents.. . Contacts with
[the] Greek Cypriots designed to obtain information
about their security and well-being [are] monitored
by the Turkish Cypriot authorities, usually Turkish
Cypriot police, who generally discourage such
inquiries.”

42. The positive response of the Council to our plea
is a vital necessity to the people of Cyprus, but I also
believe that for the Council, which is entrusted with
the maintenance of international
peace and security,
such a response is a compelling duty.

In paragraph 29 it is stated that
“UNCIVPOL
has continued to receive complaints
that Greek Cypriots in the north are being subjected
to pressure to move to the south and that their
property is subject to -confiscation.
The Greek
Cypriots complain that they are coerced into signing
applications to leave the region with warnings that
those who do not do so will be moved anyway,
but without their personal possessions... The agreed
procedure for screening applications
for transfer
does not appear to function effectively. UNFICYP
has no possibility of verifying whether people wish
to leave.”

43. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Turkey,

The next speaker is the
upon whom I now call.

44. Mr. TURKMEN
(Turkey):
Mr. President,
I should like to offer you my congratulations
on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of June.
45. At this stage of the discussion I will confine my
remarks to underlining three points.
46. First, as the Greek Cypriot
representative
presumed to speak on behalf of the so-called Govemment of Cyprus, I feel compelled to repeat our basic
position in this respect. At the present time, when
there are two separate administrations
representing
their respective national communities in Cyprus, that
claim is utterly irrelevant, devoid of any legal basis
and unrealistic. This situation will persist as long as
the Turkish and Greek communities cannot agree on a
provisional
or permanent solution that will enable
them to speak with one voice on external matters.

I shall now read from paragraph 30:
“Greek Cypriots in the north cannot leave the
environs of their own villages without permission
from the Turkish Cypriot authorities. . . . the number
of teachers continues to be inadequate.
. . . No
secondary schools are open in the region.”
And now, from paragraph 31:
“The Greek Cypriot population in the Kyrenia
area declined from 917 in December 1975 to 177

47. Secondly, the pernicious and false allegations
proffered by the Greek Cypriot representative
this
6

afternoon certainly call for an answer, but it is not
incumbent upon me to address myselfto his statement.
The representative of the Turkish Cypriot community
will, I am sure, do just that.

the maintenance of the Force. We are also grateful
to the representative
of the Secretary-General
in
Cyprus, Ambassador Perez de Cdllar,
and to the
Commander of the Force, Lieutenant-General
Prem
Chand, and to his officers and men, who are carrying
out their peaceful and humanitarian
task under the
most difficult conditions.

48. Last but not least, I must also say that I am
rather uncertain about the nature and scope of the
present discussion. At previous meetings of a similar
nature, the pattern followed was different. Consultations started at an early stage on a draft resolution
concerning
the extension
of the mandate
of
UNFICYP.
It was of course assumed that there would
be no modification
in the Council’s political concept
that .has underlain the presence of UNFICYP
on the
island since 1964. As the Council will realize, this is
a very delicate matter. But we do not know where we
stand now. Under these circumstances, as far as the
Government of Turkey is concerned, we cannot take
a position on any draft resolution which might be
presented before we see clearly the trend and the
outcome of the Council’s discussion.
49.

54. In considering
the report of the SecretaryGeneral, the Council, apart from renewing the mandate
of UNFICYP,
has followed the practice of addressing
itself to the wider implications
and aspects of the
Cyprus problem. This has been done so ably and so
convincingly
by the Foreign Minister
of Cyprus,
Mr. Christophides,
that I do not think it necessary
for me to be repetitious. I shall therefore proceed with
an examination of the Secretary-General’s
report and
revert to the matter later in order to make some
general observations.
55. During the debate in the Council on the same
item last December 13 [1863rd meeting], my delegation drew the Council’s attention to the very disturbing
indications contained in the Secretary-General’s
report
dated 8 ‘-December 1975 [S/21900] concerning the
restrictions imposed on the freedom of movement of
UNFICYP
in the occupied area of the Republic of
Cyprus, the violations of the agreement reached at the
third round of the Vienna talks held under the auspices
of the Secretary-General,
and the disrespect shown by
the occupying Power for the elementary human rights
of the inhabitants of the Greek Cypriot villages in the
north. We also pointed out that in the last six months
of the past year not only had there not been any
progress with regard to the question of the Greek
Cypriot refugees-refugees
in their own country-but
there had been a deterioration,
since their number
had increased by 1,000, bringing the total number of
refugees on 8 December 1975 to 183,000. I do not need
to recall here today that during that debate, the members of the Council voiced their concern at the lack of
application of the very important provisions of the
agreement reached at the third round of the intercommunal talks, and at the absence of any progress
towards the implementation
of General Assembly
resolutions 3212 (XXIX) and 3395 (XXX), as well as
of Security Council resolutions 365 (1974), 367 (1975)
and 370 (1975).

I have no further points to make at this stage.

50. The PRESIDENT:
of Greece.

I call upon the representative

51. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): Mr. President, it
gives me great pleasure to extend to you my warmest
and sincere congratulations
on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. Your
wide experience of United Nations matters, and particularly of the question on our agenda, your authority
and prestige and your high qualifications
assure us
that the debate on this important item will be concluded successfully. It is also gratifying to my delegation that you, Sir, represent a country which has the
friendliest of relations with Greece. Further, I am
particularly
thankful to you, Mr. President, and to
the members of the Council for having made it possible
for me to participate in the discussion.
52. The Council has before it the proposal of the
Secretary-General
for the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Force in Cyprus for a further
period of six months. That proposal, to which the
Government of Cyprus has agreed, is supported by my
Government.
We cannot but concur with the statement contained in paragraph 71 of the SecretaryGeneral’s
report that the continued
presence of
UNFICYP
in Cyprus is essential not only in order to
maintain the cease-fire called for in the previous
resolutions of the Council but also in order to facilitate
and promote the search for a peaceful settlement,
which is long overdue.

56. Six months later, the new report of the SecretaryGeneral makes grim reading indeed. Although I realize
that the members of the Council are already familiar
with the report, I consider it necessary, with your
permission, Mr. President, to draw the attention of the
Council to some of the report’s most striking points,
while avoiding, as far as possible, commenting
on
what is self-explanatory.

53. I avail myself of this opportunity to express on
behalf of the Greek Government profound appreciation
and gratitude to the States Members that have placed
their contingents at the service of the United Nations
and the service of peace, as well as to the Govemments that are making voluntary contributions
for

57.

I quote first from paragraph

10:

“UNFICYP
continues to attempt to discharge its
functions with regard to the security, welfare and
7

well-being of the Greek Cypriots living in the
Turkish-controlled part of the island, as it did for
Turkish Cypriots in the past. However, UNFICYP
accessto that area remains restricted and has become
more so since my last report. As a result it has only
been possible to carry out humanitarian work on a
limited basis.”

58. In this respect I believe it would be useful for
me to read froni an article published in’The New York
Times on 22 April last:
“The Turks have now stepped up their campaign
to expel the Greek Cypriots remaining in the north
and to create a purely Turkish ‘state. Only about
8,000 Greeks are left in the area, mostly in the remote
Karpas Peninsula, and their numbers are dwindling
daily.

Paragraph 22 reads:
“At the third round of the Vienna talks, it was
agreed that UNFICYP would have ‘free and
normal access to Greek Cypriot villages and habitations in the north’. UNFICYP freedom of movement
in the northern part of Cyprus is still restricted,...
Weekly visits are carried out by UNFICYP liaison
teams to the Greek Cypriot villages in the Kyrenia
area, and these are likewise accompanied by Turkish
Cypriot police, who are present during meetings with
the villagers.*’

“The Turkish tactic, diplomatic sources report;
is to call in the leaders of an ethnic Greek cornmunity and give them a choice: leave immediately
and take nothing with you, or sign an official request
to leave and take your belongings. Once the leaders
yield to this pressure, the rest usually follow, and
the Turks can say that everyone left voluntarily.
“The ethnic Turks were only 20 per cent of
Cyprus before the invasion, and afterward they
found themselves with far more land than they
could colonize. Accordingly, the Denktas administration has been encouraging families lie the
Kekliks to immigrate from Turkey and increase the
Turkish population.

I now quote paragraph 23:
“AS a result of these restrictions, UNFICYP has
been unable to contribute in any effective way to the
welfare, well-being and security of the Greek
Cypriots in the north except for the supply of
material items and distribution of social welfare
benefits. There is a continued outflow of these people
to the south.”

“Turkish Cypriot officials insist that the only
newcomers in the north are either Turkish Cypriots
who had left years ago, seasonal workers needed
for the harvest or technicians imported for specific
jobs. But interviews with Mr. Keklik and at least
halfa dozen other settlers belie that claim. Diplomats
estimate that 15,000 people from the mainland
are already here, and some groups of settlers are
clearly organized and encouraged in Turkey.

And this is from pa&graph 26:
“In the Turkish-controlled areas UNCIVPOL
has no greater freedom of movement than the
UNFICYP military contingents. .. . Contacts with
[the] Greek Cypriots designed to obtain information
about their security and well-being [are] monitored
by the Turkish Cypriot authorities, usually Turkish
Cypriot police, who generally discourage such
inquiries.”

59. I continue quoting from the Secretary-General’s
report. Paragraph 30 reads:
“Greek Cypriots in the north cannot leave the
environs of their own villages without permission
from the Turkish Cypriot authorities. . .. the number
of teachers continues to be inadequate. .. . No
secondary schools are open in the region, and as a
result a considerable number of students of
secondary-school age have moved to the south.”

Paragraph 29 reads:
“UNCIVPOL has continued to receive complaints
that Greek Cypriots in the north are being subjected
to pressure to move to the south and that their
property is subject to confiscation. The Greek
Cypriots complain that they are coerced into signing
applications to leave the region with wamings’that
those who do not do so will be moved anyway,
but without their personal possessions. Because of
the existing restrictions, UNCIVPOL has been able
to do little to investigate such complaints. The
Turkish Cypriot side maintains that all Greek
Cypriots moving to the south do so of their own
free will without any pressure and that complaints
are often made both to discredit the Turkish Cypriot
side and to secure displaced person benefits in the
south. The agreed procedure for screening applications for transfer does not appear to function
effectively. UNFICYP has no possibility of verifying
whether people wish to leave.”

60. The result of the deliberate action of the Turkish
authorities in the occupied area, as described in the
foregoing paragraphs I have cited, is given in paragraphs 31,32 and 36 of the Secretary-General’s report.
I quote first from paragraph 31:
“The Greek Cypriot population in the Kyrenia
area declined from 917 in December 1975 to 177 on
3 June 1976*-a mere 177-“and in the Karpas
region from 7,890 to 7,194. Altogether 1,401 .Greek
Cypriots moved to the south in the last six months.
The present rate of evacuations to the south is
averaging some 20 persons a day. On the basis of
information available to UNFICYP, there are no
a

. . . . ., -.- _

wholly Greek Cypriot villages left in the l&pas, as
either Turkish Cypriots or Turkish nationals”-and
I emphasize this- “have been resettled in varying
numbers in each of them. The Greek Cypriot
authorities have given an estimate of 44,000 emigrants from Turkey into the area of Cyprus under
Turkish control. The Turkish side has not given
any definite figures to UNFICYP, but maintains that
the majority of the Turkish nationals are either
experts or seasonal workers and are in the island.
only temporarily.”

sions of intemationartreaties like the fourth Geneva
Convention* regarding the treatment of the inhabitants
of occupied territories, and to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, but they are, I submit, flagrantly
contrary to the Charter and to everything the United
Nations stands for.
64. Coming back now to the more general aspects of
the Cyprus problem, we are once again bound to note
that. the situation in and around Cyprus, far from
improving, rather shows signs of aggravation. Indeed,
instead of the speedy,withdrawal of the foreign troops
from Cyprus and the cessation of foreign interference
in its affairs, as demanded by United Nations resolutions, we have to bear witness to the fact that, two
years after the two successive Turkish invasions of
Cyprus in July and August 1974, a substantial part,
namely, nearly 40 per cent of the territory of the nonaligned Republic of Cyprus, continues to be under
military occupation in the name of the minority community representing 18 per cent of the total population
of the island; and, further, that no serious indication
is given as regards the termination of this state of
affairs, which is contrary to General Assembly resolutions 3212 (XXIX) and 3395 (XXX), Security Council
resolutions 365 (1974), 367 (1975), 370 (1975) and 383
(1975), contrary‘to the provisions of the Charter, contrary to the provisions of resolution 2625 (XXV),
which eontains the Declaration on Principles of
International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States, contrary to the provisions
of resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 on
the Definition of aggression, and contrary to the
fundamental principle of the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force.

I now quote from paragraph 32:
“In the Famarmsta area. much merchandise and
other movable p;bperties are reported to have been
removed from business and other premises owned
by Greek Cypriots.”
Paragraph 36 reads, in part:
“On 30 April 1976, government statistics sho.wed
a total of 184,143 Greek Cypriots as displaced and
now living in the, south. This figure reflects an
increase of 1,143 persons since my report of 8 December 1975, and is again mainly due to the continuing transfer of Greek Cypriots from the north to
_the south.”
61. From a reading of the Secretary-General’s
report, it emerges clearly that the Security Council
and the international community are confronted with a
specific plan, carefully worked out and applied
systematically, a plan which, on the basis of the
evidence available, seems to be directed to the complete eradication of all traces of the Greek Cypriot
population in the north of Cyprus and to the colonization of that part of the island with “Turkish nationals’*,
despite the provision of paragraph 6 of resolution 3395
(XXX), urging all parties to refrain from unilateral
actions in contravention of resolution 3212 (XXIX),
including changes in the demographic structure of
Cyprus.

65. Further, instead of progress on the very important question of the refugees, who represent one
third of the island’s total population, we have to
register a continued deterioration, again despite the
provisions of the Charter and of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the principles and provisions
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

62. The homes and other private property of these
new refugees, as in the case of the previous ones,
are being usurped and the fruits of the work and the
toil of an indigenous population going back over
hundreds and thousands of years are simply being
taken from the hands of their rightful owners, who.
are being thrown out. Houses, factories, orchards
and huge investments in the tourist industry made in
an area representing, as everybody knows, 70 per cent
of the total wealth of the island are being confiscated
in order to be given to Turkish Cypriots or “Turkish
nationals”, as indicated in paragraph 31 of the Secretary-General’s report.

66. All those principles and provisions are flouted
in the case of Cyprus. We trust that the Council will
see to it that these. principles and provisions are
applied with the utmost urgency. It is of paramount
importance that the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus should be
respected and maintained.
67. As on past occasions, the section of the SecretaryGeneral’s report-section V-which deals with his
good offices is disappointing and worrying, as it makes
it obvious once again that after five rounds of intercommunal talks stretching over a period of one and
a half years, the negotiations have still to enter the
phase of substance. The reason is quite easy to
explain. Whenever the Greek Cypriot side tries to
discuss the substance, it is confronted with procedure;
and when it tries to tackle procedure, it is faced

63. The wholesale eradication of an entire indigenous
population and the confiscation of all its property
are contrary not only to specific provisions of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, to provi9

with “preconditions”
or with other preliminary
obstacles that frustrate the most assiduous efforts to
go forward.

report substantiates our fears. A full year later, not
only do we fail to register any progress but we are
also faced with the statement contained in paragraph 65
of the Secretary-General’s report:

68. I do not think that any excuse can be found for
this lack of progress. The General Assembly, in its
resolutions 3212 (XXIX) and 3395 (XXX), and the
Security Council, in its resolutions 365 (1974), 367
(1975), 370 (1975) and 383 (1975), have laid down the
framework for a just and peaceful solution of the
Cyprus problem. They have also entrusted the Secretary-General with undertaking a mission of good offices
in order to bring about, through meaningful and
constructive negotiations between the representatives
of the two communities to be conducted freely and
on an equal footing, an agreement based on their
fundamental and legitimate rights.

“The situation of Greek Cypriots in the north is
also a matter of serious concern, not only on purely
humanitarian grounds, but also because it increases
tension between the two communities and tends
adversely to affect the efforts towards a just and
lasting peace in Cyprus.”
It is equally eloquent that the Secretary-General has to
say in paragraph 70 that “agreements reached at
previous rounds should be respected and carried out”.
73. In conclusion, I wish to repeat that a just and
lasting solution of the Cyprus problem can be found
only through serious, sincere and meaningful negotiations, in conformity with the basic principles of the
Charter and with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions on Cyprus. The finding of such a
settlement has become more urgent than ever. For it
is only thus that the tension and the danger created
by the prolongation of the present state of affairs in
Cyprus can be eliminated.

69. In this regard, I wish to state that the Greek
Government, which has since the beginning of the
Cyprus crisis shown the greatest restraint, good will
and a spirit of conciliation in its desire to see the
problem solved peacefully, lends its full support to
the Secretary-General’s mission and will continue to do
so in the future, as it has done in the past.
70. I take this opportunity to declare that my Govemment is extremely grateful to the Secretary-General
for his untiring and painstaking efforts in seeking a
peaceful solution for Cyprus. We extend to him and to
his distinguished collaborators-the Under-Secretaries
General Mr. Guyer and’ Mr. Urquhart, and their
assistants~ur deepest appreciation and sincere
thanks..

74. The PRESIDENT: I should like to refer now to
the Council’s earlier decision to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Atalay. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to address the Council.
75. Mr. ATALAY: Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and, through you, all the members of the
Council for having given me the opportunity to speak
today in order to present to the Council the Turkish
Cypriot views on the current state of the Cyprus
problem.

71. ,We fully agree with the Secretary-General’s
statement in paragraph 70 of his report that, despite
all the difficulties, the best hope of achieving ajust and
.lasting settlement of the Cyprus problem is through
negotiations between the representatives of the two
communities. We welcome and support the SecretaryGeneral’s readiness, expressed in paragraph 69 of
his report, to continue, together with his Special
representative in Cyprus, his efforts to remove the
various obstacles in the way of a resumption of the
negotiating process. And we could not agree more with
him when he states in the same paragraph that,
before reconvening the talks, it is necessary to. have
reasonable assurances that they will be meaningful
and productive. This is indeed a crucial point.

76. At the very beginning, I should like to inform the
Council of a letter dated 9 June from Mr. Denktag,
addressed to you, Mr. President, in connexion with the
representation of Cyprus at this meeting:
[The speaker read out the text of the /ettePcoRtaiRed
in the annex to document S/12094.]
77. I should like also to express on behalf of the
Turkish Cypriot community our sincere admiration
and gratitude to the Secretary-General, to hisspecial
Representative in Cyprus, Ambassador Perez de
Cueliar; to the Force Commander, Lieutenant-General
Prem Chand; to the officers and the men of UNFICYP;
and to the members of the Secretariat. I should like
also to express our gratitude to the countries which
have contributed men and funds to UNFICYP.

72. May I be permitted to refer in this context to my
delegation’s statement before the Council on 13 June
1975 [183&h meeting]. We then asked, in exactly
the same terms, that the negotiations should be
conducted in good faith and that they should be
meaningful, and we drew the Council’s attention to the
necessity of not using the negotiating process as a
delaying tactic in order to perpetuate&its accomplis
and to create so-called “irreversible situations”.
I feel-and I am sure that the members of the Council share this view-that
the Secretary-General’s

78. I have listened carefully to the statement of
Mr. Christophides, the representative of the Greek
Cypriot administration. My community strongly
disagrees with practically everything he said. I should
10

like to address myself to his statement in detail at a
subsequent meeting if the Council would allow me to
speak. At this stage I will explain the views of the
Turkish Cypriot side.

spite of this clear and snecific agreement. however,
under pressure from Makarios in furtherance of his
object to create an artificial crisis, the Greek Cypriot
side denied the existence of the Vienna agreement
with a view to sabotaging the talks and submitted
“embargoed”
proposals 10 days after their deadline.
This led President Denktag to call upon the SecretaryGeneral to release the tape recordings made at the talks
and, faced with such an embarrassing situation, the
Greek Cypriots gave their proposals to the Turkish
side in accordance with the agreement reached in
Vienna.

79. As the Council meets to discuss the Cyprus
problem
for yet another time, many questions
immediately
come to mind. Why does the Cyprus
problem still remain unresolved? What is a realistic
solution for the Cyprus problem? Do the Greek
Cypriots in fact sincerely desire the establishment of
an independent Cyprus State based on the equality of
the two communities,
in which the Greek Cypriots
will not again have the opportunity to reimpose themselves on the Turkish Cypriot community?
In the
course of my speech I shall try to answer these and
other questions in order to enlighten the members
of the Council about the true state of affairs regarding
the Cyprus problem.

83. Apparently,
however, the Greek Cypriot side
was determined not to cease its efforts to create a
deadlock in the intercommunal
talks, and thereby to
undermine
peace talks. Mr. Glafcos Clerides was
made to resign following an artificial crisis created
in relation to the handing over of the proposals. In
this way, the withdrawal of the only moderate Greek
Cypriot
leader and the leading Greek Cypriot
negotiator in the intercommunal
talks for the past nine
years was secured. This constituted another blow to
the successful continuation
of the intercommunal
talks. It was later announced that Mr. Clerides would
be replaced by Mr. Tassos Papadopoulos.
The Greek
Cypriot side in various ways prevented the fulfilment
of the Brussels agreement and the undertakings
at
Vienna. It attempted to undermine the intercommunal
talks by withdrawing the Greek Cypriot negotiator of
long standing, Mr. Clerides, and continued to employ
malicious tactics in pursuance of its aim to create a
crisis. Through these means, the Greek Cypriot side
tried to make the world believe that Cyprus was
heading for a crisis.

80. Since the last meeting of the Council on the
situation in Cyprus, the most significant event contributing to the peaceful settlement of the Cyprus
problem has been the Brussels agreement signed by
Turkey and Greece on 12 December 1975. As a result
of that agreement,
the intercommunal
talks were
reactivated in Vienna on 17 February 1976. The sincere
belief and desire of the Turkish side at the time was
that a political settlement acceptable to all the parties
involved could be found through the procedures
agreed upon in Brussels and through the invaluable
contributions
of the Secretary-General.
However, the
good will and determination
of the Turkish side alone
is not sufficient for reaching a settlement, unless the
Greek side reciprocates in a similar manner.
it seems that the Greek side is not
81. Unfortunately,
sincere in its desire to reach a peaceful and lasting
solution for Cyprus. All its efforts during the past few
months have been aimed at undermining the Brussels
agreement and the Vienna agreement, and at postponing their implementation
through the creation of
an artificial crisis. The purpose is to force the intercommunal
talks into a deadlock and to shift the
responsibility
for this on to the Turkish side. Why?
In order to mislead world public opinion into believing
that the Cyprus problem is an issue of international
urgency which treatens world peace, and thus to gain
support in order to further their own ends. This will
be more apparent if we briefly examine the policy
pursued by the Greek Cypriots in relation to the
implementation
of the aforesaid agreements.

84. This time the Greek Cypriot side tried to exploit
the name of the Secretary-General.
The part of its
proposals relating to the territorial
aspects of the
problem was presented as though it had been suggested
by the Secretary-General.
The Greek Cypriots have
been propagating this view, both through their press
and through their contacts with foreign diplomats,
since the fifth round of the Vienna talks. The object
of these manceuvres was to force us into a position
where we would appear to be bargaining over the
territorial question with Mr. Waldheim,
bringing all
the moral pressure of the United Nations to bear
upon us and giving the impression that we were the
party which was being intransigent.
Obviously one
cannot accept this position.
Principles
which are
based on untruth cannot provide a basis for negotiations. As to the exploitation of Mr. Waldheim’s name,
*riot only was it improper, but, if allowed to continue,
it would also completely
destroy the SecretaryGeneral’s function at the talks. As is well known, the
Greek Cypriot allegation was officially refuted by the
United Nations Information
Centre in Athens on
instructions from United Nations Headquarters,
and
then in New York on 13 April 1976. In spite of
Mr. Waldheim’s
specific call to the Greek Cypriot
administration
not to implicate him in its proposals,

82. At the fifth round of the intercommunal
talks,
an exchange of proposals for a Cyprus settlement by
the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots was agreed
upon within the framework of the Brussels agreement. Under the Brussels agreement,
the Greek
Cypriot side was to submit proposals to the Turkish
Cypriot side on all aspects of the Cyprus problem,
including the territorial issue, and the Turkish Cypriot
side was to hand over its reply within 10 days. In
11

the Greek Cypriot side has not refrained from abusing
the position of Mr. Waldheim for its own purposes.
Is this good faith? Is it compatible with a desire to
achieve a peaceful solution?
85. This latest incident proves beyond a doubt that
the Makarios administration does not want a realistic
and peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem. As a
whole, the Greek Cypriot proposals lack vision and
are far from the reality in Cyprus. They do not take
into account the events of the years between 1963
and 1974, during which time the Turkish Cypriots
were subjected to armed attacks, oppression and
every kind of discrimination. They completely ignore
the past and try to present the Cyprus problem as
having started in 1974.
86. The Greeks cannot accept the reality that they will
never again be able to impose their will on their
Turkish Cypriot co-partners in Cyprus whom they
have been trying to destroy for 12 years. The Turkish
Cypriots are now gathered in one zone and are
determined to preserve this situation so that they can
no longer be treated as mere hostages, to be eliminated
at will.
87. It is worth noting here that the following resolution of the Greek Cypriot House of Representatives
which was passed unanimously on 26 June 1967 is
still in force:

tion to this, the Turks have the right to their share of
State lands, which amounts to an additional 25 per cent.
However, this property, like the Turkish population,
was scattered in small pockets throughout Cyprus.
The distribution of property and population in this
manner facilitated the activities of the Greek Cypriots
in oppressing the Turkish Cypriots in order eventually
to eliminate them from Cyprus. What has materialized
in Cyprus today is no more than the concentration of
Turkish lands for the Security of property and the
bringing together of the Turkish population for the
security of life.
90. The real area of the territory under Turkish
control today is 32.8 per cent. In trying to show that
the territory under Turkish control constitutes 40 per
cent of the Island, however, Greek propaganda is
including in this percentage areas which are no man’s
land or the operational field of the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force. In short, contrary to what the
Greek-Cypriot administration alleges today, the Turks
do not have in their hands any Greek immovable
property for which compensation has not been paid.
The Turkish Cypriots who were transferred from the
south in 1975and those who were forced to leave their
villages in 1963 abandoned more land to the Greeks
than the amount of Greek land at present under
Turkish Cypriot control.
91. The population ratio of Cyprus is another aspect
of the Cyprus problem which is frequently brought
up by the Greeks. The present population ratio of the
island has been brought about through deliberate
Greek policies and through the oppression of the
Turkish Cypriot community for many years.

“Interpreting the age-long aspirations of the Greek
Cypriots, the House declares that despite every
adverse circumstance, it will not suspend the struggle
being conducted with the support of all Greeks
until this struggle ends in successthrough the union
of the whole and undivided Cyprus with the motherland, without any intermediary stage.”

92. In any case, the population ratio of the island at
a given time is not relevant in discussing a constitutional settlement of the Cyprus problem. After all,
at one time the Turks of Cyprus were in the majority.
Indeed, at present, many Turks who had left the
island as a result of years of Greek oppression are
now returning not only from Turkey but also from
Britain, Australia and other countries. The criterion,
as in most federal republics, is not the population
ratio but the principle of equal representation of the
two communities which will make up the two States
at the central government level. The present population
ratio of Cyprus is an irrelevancy brought in by the
Greek Cypriots to disguise their true aims.

In view of this clear and unequivocal statement, is
it really possible for the Turks to believe that the Greeks
have given up their ideals and now believe in an
independent Cyprus?
88. However, the real anxiety of the Turkish community does not only concern the objective that is
expressed in the aforementioned resolution. It concerns the fact that it has for no less than 25 years
experienced countless incidents reflecting such an aim
in its economic, social and political life. Unfortunately,
there has been no positive change in the Greek Cypriot
attitude today.

93. Why are the Greek Cypriots still not accepting
the reality? Unfortunately, at the root of this is the
recognition Makarios receives as Head of State. The
world community, having condoned the fait accompli
created in 1963, and having recognized the Greek
Cypriot administration as the legitimate Government
of Cyprus, led Makarios to believe that he could
achieve his goal through a series of fairs accomplis
and that no one would be able to hinder him in any
way. Thus his arrogance increased. The support given
Makarios today will create the same result and will

89. As to the Greek Cypriot proposals in relation
to land, apart from the fact that they exploit the name
of Mr. Waldheim, they do not reflect the true distribution of immovable property in Cyprus. A detailed
discussion on this aspect of the Cyprus problem will
take place subsequently in accordance with the fifth
round of the Vienna talks. Suffice it to say here that,
contrary to Greek propaganda today, the Turks own
32.8 per cent of all private land in Cyprus. In addi12
,.

serve no uurnose other than continuation of his intransigence. If, however, the world really does want a
peaceful and lasting solution for Cyprus, it must place
its weight and support behind the cause which is right.
In other words, it must support the establishment of
a biregional federation in Cyprus on the basis of the
equality of the two communities.
It must also give
equal recognition to the Turkish Cypriot community
in all international
forums. If Makarios is made to
realize that Cyprus is not a Greek island, that will
facilitate
the peaceful settlement
of the Cyprus
problem.

involved, directly or indirectly,
in any activity
endangering the peace and security of the region.
“5. The two national communities shah be fully
free to observe and promote their respective religions, cultures and traditions
in a democratic
manner. Religion shall be kept strictly outside ‘the
sphere of the federal State.
“6. All kinds of hostile activities of the two
communities against each other in the international
arena shall be strictly prohibited,
while internally
every effort shall be made to enhance the climate of
peace, reconciliation
and co-operation between the
two communities.”
[S/I 1770, annex.]

94. Concerning Turkish Cypriot efforts for a settlement, to begin with, on 18 July 1975 the Turkish side
made a very constructive proposal for the establishment of a transitional joint Government. It was hoped
by the Turkish side that establishment
of such a
Government
would serve the common interests of
both communities
and would without further delay
ensure a degree of co-operation
between the two
national communities.
That desire was expressed in
our proposal as follows:

Unfortunately,
however, this constructive proposal
was not accepted by the Greek Cypriot side, no doubt
because it would have made a reahstic settlement
of the problem more probable and that would not have
served their ulterior aims. It would have also put an
end to the unconstitutional
monopoly of the Greek
Cypriot administration
in the foreign affairs of the
country, and would have stifled their smear campaign
against the Turkish side.

“The peaceful co-existence of the two national
communities, who shall have equal rights and powers
in every respect, living side by side in close cooperation
within one federal State, necessarily
requires, as a first step, the creation of an atmosphere
of confidence and mutual trust, which would serve
not only the well-being and prosperity of the Turkish
Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities
but also
the enhancement of peace in the region. With these
objectives in mind, and without prejudice to the
final political
settlement,
the establishment
of a
transitional joint federal Government,
and to this
effect, a joint declaration
by the leaders of the
two national communities, incorporating their formal
agreement on the following basic principles, will
pave the way, as early as possible, for a just and
lasting political settlement.
“The transitional joint federal Government
undertake
to comply with the following
principles:

95. In spite of this Greek intransigence and lack of
good faith, in recent months the Turkish side has
expended every effort for the achievement of a just
and lasting solution for the Cyprus problem, and our
latest proposals reflect our desire for the establishment
of an independent Cyprus State which would guarantee
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the island as
well as the security of life and property of the two
constituent communities.
96. At this point, it would be appropriate to state
our proposals, together with the reasons underlying
them, and to allow the members to judge our sincerity
and good faith.
97. The Greek side has been accusing us of being
intransigent. In fact, while it is not clear what the
Greeks desire for Cyprus, the Turkish Cypriot policy
is clear. We stand for an independent,
non-aligned
and sovereign Republic of Cyprus based on a biregional federation and on the equality of the two
national communities. The events and bitter experience
of the past 20 years, together with the reality which
exists in Cyprus today, make imperative the establishment of a bi-regional federation, and this solution
is the only practical, and realistic one left open for
the establishment
of peaceful co-existence between
the two communities
in Cyprus.

shah
basic

“1. The Republic of Cyprus, which was originally founded on the basis of the partnership of the
two national communities,
shall be an independent,
territorially
integral and bi-regional federal State.
The two national communities shall have equai rights
and powers in all spheres and in every respect.
“2. Under no circumstances
shah Cyprus, in
whole or in part, be united with any other State in
any form whatsoever.

98. On this question of the need for a bi-regional
federation I cannot do better than summarize the points
made in this connexion by the Turkish Cypriot members of the expert committee set up on 28 April 1975,
at the first round of Vienna’intercommunal
talks on
Cyprus, to examine the constitutional
aspects of the
Cyprus problem.

“3. The Federal Republic of Cyprus, following
a policy of non-alignment,
shah take its place along
with the non-aligned States.
“4. All necessary measures shall be taken to
prevent the island of Cyprus from becoming
13

community
to risk yet another dangerous. experiment. The minimum
form of government
which
can effectively guarantee full security of life and
property to* the Turkish Cypriots is a. bi-regional
federation in which the two communities
would
administer their own regions in peace and security.”

“With
the establishment
of an independent
Republic of Cyprus on 16 August 1960, the experiment of functional Federation (based on autonomy
for the two national communities
in communal
affairs and partnership in the administration
of
governmental affairs), as provided under the Zurich
and London agreements was tried until December
1963 and proved to be totally inadequate as far as
the security of life and property of the Turkish
Cypriots was concerned. The armed onslaught of
the Greek Cypriots on the Turkish community
in
December 1963 forced 24,000 Turkish Cypcots to
move * from their homes to safer areas, thus
establishing what came to be known as the Turkish
Cypriot enclaves or regions ail over Cyprus.

99. In fact the basis for such a settlement already
exists, and a just and lasting solution for the Cyprus
problem could be reached were it not for Greek.
intransigency
and denial of agreements
already
reached during the intercommunal
talks held freely
and under the auspices of the Secretary-General.
100. The agreements reached in principle can be
summarized as follows: first, a bizonai federation;
secondly, a central government
with limited
but
delineated powers; thirdly, participation
of the two
communities
in the central government on the basis
of equality. Unfortunately,
however, in furtherarice
of Greek Cypriot aims to undermine the intercommunai talks, the above-mentioned
agreements have
been denied and no attempt has been made to impiement them.

“During the period between December 1963 and
July 1974, the existence of such a multiregional
administration,
whereby the Turkish Cypriots had
their own enclaves or regions which they administered themselves, also proved to be inadequate.
The bitter experiences of this experiment and the
various events during this period-the
highlights of
which were the attacks on the Turkish sector of
Nicosia in 1963, on the Kokkina (Erenkijy) area in
1964, and on Kophinou
(Gegitkale)
and Ayios
Theodaros in November
1967, and the ensuing
massacres of inhabitants of whole villages and the
discovery of the victims in mass graves, for example
in Ayios Vasilios in 1964; Aioa, and Maratha
(Murataga), SBndailaris, Tokhni, and so forth, in
July-August
1974-proved
the inadequacy
and
dangers of this experiment. In all instances, armed
attack, wilful murder, mass killings were perpetrated
by the armed elements
of the Greek-Cypriot
administration,
who described themselves as the
‘Security Forces of the State’. It will thus be seen
that a multiregional
or cantonal system is totally
unworkable in Cyprus and would leave the inhabi-.
tants of the Turkish Cypriot cantons as virtual
hostages at the whim and mercy of the Greeks and
the Greek Cypriots.

101. We have seen that a bi-regional federation is
essential for the protection of an independent Cyprus
State, and it is imperative for the security of the
life, land and property of the two communities.
102. As to the question of refugees and the withdrawal
of the Turkish armed forces, this is a matter which
has been made the subject of Greek propaganda. Ever
since 20 July 1974 the Greek Cypriot side has approached the problem in its typical way and has
demanded the settlement of the refugee problem and
the withdrawal of Turkish troops as a precondition
to the solution of the Cyprus problem. The answer
of the Turkish side to this has been to the effect that
a political solution should come first. Once an agreement in this respect had been reached, the question
of refugees and of Turkish troops could be. discussed
within the framework of the political solution. The
argument that Makarios would accept a bi-regional
solution on condition that the 200,000 refugees returned
to their homes is purely Greek propaganda aimed at
misleading
world public opinion. Incidentally,
the
Greeks have exaggerated the number of Greek Cypriots
who left the Turkish areas. As admitted in their own
documents, the true figure is around 90,000.

“The past experiments have been very costly in
human lives and property to the Turkish Cypriots,
and it is an indisputable fact that since the EOKA
terrorist campaign started in 1955, nearly 30,000
Turkish Cypriots have been refugees three times
over. Furthermore, a mass movement of populations
has now taken place, with the Turkish Cypriots
living in the north and the Greek Cypriots living in
the south. This concentration
of populations into
two regions makes a multiregional
or cantonal
solution impracticable.
The main consideration
of
the Turkish Cypriot side is to achieve a political
settlement which will ensure the security of life and
property of the Turkish Cypriots and enable them to
coexist, side by side and in peace and security,
with the Greek Cypriots.

103. It is obvious to anyone who is familiar with the
social structure of Cyprus that this pretondition
merely demonstrates the Greek side’s bad faith. In
insisting on the return of the Greek displaced persons
to the Turkish areas today, although the problem has
been effectively solved through the voluntary exchange
of populations
under the third Vienna tigreement
[S/11789, annex.], of August 1975, they halve two
objectives in mind: first, the breaking up of .Turkish
lands and of the Turkish population in order-to weaken
the Turkish community and thereby eliminate it from

“In the light of the foregoing, it would be wrong,
unfair and unrealistic to expect the Turkish Cypriot
14

The original French text of the Brussels
verbal reads as follows:

being an obstacle to-enosis;
and, secondly, the
establishment of important bases, hideouts and support
for Greek Cypriot guerrillas during the coming phase
of the conflict created by the Greek Cypriot leadership’s call for .a “long-term
struggle*‘.

proces-

“The two Ministers
meeting at Brussels on
12 December 1975 have agreed on the following:

104. In order for an agreement to be reached in
Cyprus, we invite the Greek Cypriot administration
to surrender its traditional
objectives and adopt a
realistic approach to the Cyprus problem. That is the
only way in which they could contribute
to the
establishment
of a just and lasting settlement of the
Cyprus problem.

“ 1. To ask the Secretary-General
of the United
Nations to appeal to the representatives of the two
communities
to continue their talks without prior
conditions with a view to arriving at a package
deal on an agenda containing the following subjects:
territorial
issues, federal structure, powers of a
central Government.

105. I wish to reiterate once more that the Turkish
Cypriot side believes that the only way in which a
peaceful solution can be reached is through the intercommunal talks, conducted in good faith and with a
sincere desire for the establishment of an independent
Federal Cyprus Republic
based on a bi-regional
structure and on the equality of the two communities.

“2. Details of these subjects to be examined by
two committees. If necessary, experts to be invited
from Greece and Turkey to take part in the work
of the sub-committees
to the extent that would be
required.
“3. The two Ministers would encourage the
representatives of the two communities
to respond
positively to the appeal of the Secretary-General and
accept the earliest possible date for the first meeting
under him.

106. The Turkish side expects a reciprocal response
to its goodwill and realisitc proposals. If that is not
forthcoming,
the responsibility
for prolonging
the
Cyprus problem will fall on the Greek side, which
still refuses to accept the present realities in Cyprus.

“4. Until the talks were completed all the parties
concerned would avoid revealing the content of the
points on which there might be provisional agreement, since that would be contrary to the principle
of a package agreement. The parties would also
abstain from statements which could jeopardize the
progress already made. Therefore each party would
be reserved the right to deny statements or leakages which would be contrary to the present
agreement.‘**

107. In conclusion, we hope that the Greek side will
see the realities and realize that the dissemination
of false propaganda accusations against the Turkish
side with a view to deceiving world public opinion,
as well as their call for a long struggle, can in no way
help to bring about a peaceful solution to the Cyprus
problem.
108. We, as the Turkish side, continue to believe
that the intercommunal
talks held within the framework of the Brussels agreement is the only way to find
a solution to the Cyprus problem, and we continue
to wait to receive reasonable and realistic proposals
from the Greek side.

112. If I understood him correctly, Mr. Atalay said
that the Greek Cypriot side has not respected the
Brussels agreement, which provided that the Greek
Cypriot side should submit its territorial
proposals
10 days before the Turkish side and so on. Nothing
of the sort is to be found in the text that I have
just read. I leave it to the Council to pass judgement
on this.

109, We hope that the parties concerned will show
equal readiness and good faith so that a peaceful, just
and lasting settlement in Cyprus may be attained
without further delay.
110. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Greece.

113. And while I am addressing the Council, I feel
that the opportunity
should not be lost to make
absolutely clear what the exact situation is. I wish to
make the following absolutely clear.

I now call on the representa-

114. This agreement is of a purely procedural nature,
since it suggests a negotiating method, namely, the
package-deal approach. I need not tell the members of
the Council what a package-deal negotiation is; we
all know that it is an intensive, concentrated negotiation
encompassing various aspects on which an integrated
solution must be found. And that is exactly the meaning
of the agreement.

111. Mr. PAPOULIAS
(Greece): I am glad that
Mr. Atalay, speaking as he said, for the Turkish side,
referred to the prods-verbal
signed at Brussels on
12 December 1975 by the Foreign Ministers of Greece
and Turkey. That gives me the opportunity
to read
out, with your permission, Mr. President, the entire
text of the pro&%-verbal-which
has already been
made ;public at the request of my Government-in
order to put an end to misinterpretations
propagated
by Turkish sources.

* Quoted

15

in French

by the speaker.

115. The agreement provides in paragraph 2 that the
‘details-1 emphasize “details”-4
the three aspects
of the Cyprus problem could be examined by two
committees. It is consistent with elementary logic that
an agreed basis must first be reached through the
process of the package deal before any “details” can
be dealt with in the committees. This has been categorically confinned by the communique issued at the
conclusion of the fifth round of the intercommunal
talks in Vienna, which says:

out the text of the Brussels agreement and I will not,
of course, quarrel with him .about .what that text says.
I have ‘an Englishtext and it is the same as the French
text. There is nothing in this text which says that the
Greek Cypriot side would first submit its proposals,
but that was our understanding. at the discussions
between the two Ministers in Brussels.
121. At any rate I think that, whether or not that
agreement existed, it has been overtaken by what
happened in Vienna during the f&th round of intercommunal talks. There it was clearly decided that the
Greek Cypriots would submit their proposals first and
that 10 days later the Turkish Cypriots would
submit their own proposals. This is what created
a procedural wrangle in Nicosia when the two negotiators returned, and this was the cause of Mr. Clerides’
resignation. If we have correctly understood what
happened during the upheaval, Mr. Clerides made a
statement to the press saying that he had withheld
that information from his leader; ,and, when he had
to admit that that was true, he was forced to resign.
So whether or not this agreement.existsin the Brussels
text is irrelevant because it existed in Vienna.

“The representatives of the two communities will
meet again under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral in Vienna in May with a view to establishing
a common basis prior to referring the matter to
mixed committees in Cyprus.” [S/11993 of24 February 1976, ann.ex.]

It would be absurd and contradictory to maintain
the opposite of what the communique states.
116. The Brussels agreement sought to encourage
the representatives of the two communities to resume,
under the auspices of the Secretary-General, the
intercommunal talks which had reached an impasse. It
is absolutely clear as it stands in the Brussels
agreement.

122. Mr. PAPOULIAS (Greece): I thank the representative of Turkey for what he has said; and, indeed,
my point is that we should not mix different things.
Whatever happened in Vienna must be quoted in the
context of Vienna. We cannot refer in a. responsible
manner to the Brussels or other agreements for no
reason at all. I think one should be careful in these
matters and I was therefore justified in putting in the
right context what happened in Vienna and what is
stated in the Brussels agreement.

117. In view of all that, we fail to grasp how that
agreement could be linked to any matter of substance
or any other matter lying outside it. Therefore, we
reject any tendentious misinterpretations of the
Brussels agreement.
118. And, since the Turkish side has touched upon
the subject, I feel justified in pointing out how little
it has respected the provision stating that the representatives of the two communities should continue
their talks without preconditions, As can be seen from
annex VI to the Secretary-General’s report, the letter
dated 25 May 1976 from the representative of the
Turkish Cypriot community to the Special Representative of Secretary-General contains in its paragraph 3 (a)
to (e) nothing but enormous preconditions.

123. Mr. CHRISTOPHIDES (Cyprus): I should like
to say, on behalf of my Government, that we. attach
great importance to what was agreed in Vienna and
that we are very much prepared to. stick to the agreement. However, the point is that we have submitted
our concrete proposals but, unfortunately; the Turkish
side has failed so far to submit its concrete proposals.

119. The PRESIDENT: I now call on those representatives who have asked to speak in exercise of the
right of reply.

The meeting

rose at 7.30 p.m.

120. Mr: TtiRKMEN (Turkey): I should.like to reply
very briefly to the representative of Greece. He read

_...

Note

---~

I United Nations, Treury Series, voI. 75, p, 287.

16

‘.‘.

.: .. i.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

LBS PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Genive.
KAK

IIOJIYYHTb

%is~anwa

smax
aarue~

Opraii~~~aqkiu

El3jCfAHHB

OPrAHH

O~%~AUH~HH~IX

3A42iK

Hat&l.

II aretlxmax
BO mex pafio~ax
KWRX(HOY Hai-a3nHe
wnw nnninre
Cexcum
no nponaxe
waaanuR,
Hbm-Fiop~

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

OWhEANHEHHhIX

HAUHR

HauaR
~ornno
rcynarb
a roinmttbrx
Mark~wpa.
H~BOAHT~
enpasnn
06 H~A~HHXX
e
no anpecy:
Oprann3aqux
06-benmietrahix
wnw X-hiesa.

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoms
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

83.60801-September

1984-2.200
