S/PV.8017

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8017th meeting

Wednesday, 2 August 2017, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Lisuchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts
Preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-24083 (E)
*1724083*

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

links with organized criminal networks. Preventing
weapons from falling into the hands of terrorists thus
presents complex challenges requiring integrated,
multifaceted criminal-justice responses.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts
Preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the following briefers to participate
in this meeting: Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
Mr. Jehangir Khan, Officer in Charge of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Weixiong
Chen, Deputy Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate; and
Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations.
Mr. Fedotov is joining us via video-teleconference
from Vienna.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/659, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Egypt.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.
Mr. Fedotov: Allow me to begin by commending
the presidency of Egypt for holding a meeting on this
very important and timely topic.
As the Security Council has recognized on several
occasions, preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons, including conventional arms as well as
weapons of mass destruction, is essential to countering
terrorism. Terrorists obtain weapons by many means,
in all parts of the world, facilitated by access to poorly
secured stockpiles; weak border management; the use
of online platforms, including hidden marketplaces;
and diversion linked to poor transfer controls. Illicit
weapons trafficking is often associated with other
forms of organized crime.
Furthermore, the Security Council has highlighted
the growing threat to international peace and security
posed by the nexus of organized crime and terrorism,
with terrorist groups benefiting from crime and from
2/23

02/08/2017

The United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) is entrusted with promoting the
implementation of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, including
its Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition. UNODC also supports the
implementation of the international instruments against
terrorism, the conventions on corruption and drugs,
and United Nations standards and norms on crime
prevention and criminal justice.
Seven of the nineteen international legal instruments
related to counter-terrorism address the criminalization
of conducts by non-State actors regarding chemical,
biological and nuclear weapons, as well as nuclear and
other radioactive material. UNODC also works closely
with the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts to prevent the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors.
We support the implementation of the Firearms
Protocol to prevent and combat the illicit manufacturing
and diversion of and trafficking in firearms and
ammunition, and to enhance States’ capacities to go
after criminal organizations engaged in the illicit
firearms business and related forms of transnational
organized crime. This includes enhancing national
policies and legislation as well as firearms management
and collection and destruction activities; technical
assistance tools and capacity-building; and promoting
and facilitating international cooperation and
information exchange.
Through our Global Firearms Programme, UNODC
is working in key parts of the world, including the
Maghreb and the Sahel as well as the Western Balkans,
to strengthen the fight against illicit trafficking in
firearms and its links to terrorism. The Office also took
part in a briefing of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
on this topic in May, and we are in discussions with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to
explore synergies for joint action.
However, many challenges remain in preventing,
detecting, investigating and successfully prosecuting
illicit trafficking in weapons, including inadequate
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

regulatory environments and data collection; lack
of specialized skills and equipment; and lack of
coordination within and among countries and regions.
Looking ahead, we need to further strengthen crossborder partnerships and operational responses, promote
the involvement of diverse stakeholders, including the
private sector, and step up tailored assistance to address
gaps in capacity.
UNODC remains fully engaged in providing
comprehensive support through our integrated country,
regional and global programmes and network of field
offices, in coordination with our United Nations
partners and other partners, including INTERPOL. Our
Global Container Control Programme with the World
Customs Organization in particular is helping to detect
and stop illicit trade within the global supply chain at
sea and air ports.
We are supporting Governments in their efforts
to curb corruption and money-laundering as well as
combat cybercrime and the exploitation of the Internet
for terrorist purposes, all of which represent critical
elements of an integrated response aimed at preventing
and disrupting terrorism and organized crime.
We look forward to working closely with the new
Office for Counter-Terrorism, recently established by
the Secretary-General, to ensure that our work is as
efficient and effective as possible and better coordinated
through the United Nations system.
UNODC welcomes the draft resolution to be
adopted today by the Council (S/2017/659) and will take
it as important guidance to further advance our efforts
to respond to this threat.
The President (spoke
Mr. Fedotov for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Khan.
Mr. Khan: I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having organized today’s meeting. I
would also like to express my gratitude for the excellent
leadership shown by the Arab Republic of Egypt of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. I am sincerely grateful
also to Assistant Secretary-General Jean-Paul Laborde,
who has just left the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), for his very effective
stewardship of CTED, with which the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism enjoys an excellent

S/PV. 8017

relationship. We look forward to working closely with
his successor.
As this marks the first occasion on which the Office
is briefing the Security Council since it was established
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 71/291, allow
me to thank all 15 members of the Council for their
strong support for this very first United Nations reform
initiative instituted by the Secretary-General. As the
Council is aware, the Secretary-General has appointed
a highly experienced and very distinguished diplomat,
His Excellency Ambassador Vladimir Voronkov, as
the Under-Secretary-General-designate of the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and we look
forward to working under his leadership. Two weeks
ago Under-Secretary-General Voronkov met with the
President of the Security Council and agreed to work
closely on countering terrorism.
In proposing the establishment of the Office, the
Secretary-General expects that we should strengthen
our coordination efforts, in particular by promoting
the “All-of-UN” approach to countering terrorism.
The Security Council-mandated bodies, specifically
the CTED; the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team concerning the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant/Al-Qaida; and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) Expert Group will need to play a key role if
we are to be successful in supporting Member States
in implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy in a balanced manner.
The spectre of terrorists acquiring lethal
technologies and new weapons, including weapons of
mass destruction, poses a serious threat to international
peace and security. For that reason, we welcome the
consideration of today’s draft resolution (S/2017/659) on
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons, and we
wish to congratulate the President for putting forward
that initiative. It goes to the heart of the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to make prevention the core mission
of the United Nations.
If we are to survey the threat, according to
recent assessments made by Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) entities, the Office
for Disarmament Affairs (ODA) and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team concerning
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Al-Qaida,
the illicit manufacture and uncontrolled flow of arms,
including their parts and ammunition, contribute

17-240833/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

significantly to terrorism and armed violence. The
diversion of weapons from Government stockpiles,
either through theft, pilferage or capture of depots,
constitutes an important source of supply of weapons
to terrorist groups and other non-State actors.
In addition, terrorist organizations and foreign
terrorist fighters rely on legal and illegal supply chains
to procure parts, including for improvised explosive
devices (IEDs). The illicit online trade in weapons
through the use of the dark Web on the internet is
particularly worrisome. Over the years, terrorists
have also improved their capabilities to design and
manufacture IEDs out of commercially available
dual-use components. Our focus, therefore, must not
only be on preventing the illicit trade in arms, but
also on ensuring that terrorist organizations cannot
acquire essential components through legal or illegal
commercial channels.
While the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) has experienced challenges in acquiring highquality equipment for weaponry because of sustained
military pressure and shrinking income sources, they
maintain some in-house ability to manufacture rocket
launchers and IEDs on a very large scale. ISIL is also
using commercially available drones in a variety of
ways, from filming propaganda videos to observing
targets to drop small-scale ammunitions.
In terms of the United Nations response, a number
of United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force entities — including, as we have just heard
from Under-Secretary-General Yury Fedotov, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC),
the Counter-Terrosirm Executive Directorate, ODA and
INTERPOL, all of which are members of CTITF — are
implementing valuable programmes to address that
threat. As we also heard from Under-Secretary-General
Fedotov, UNODC is working to address illicit arms
trafficking, the association between terrorism and
different forms of organized crime and the need to
strengthen cross-border cooperation, and soon my
colleague from INTERPOL and CTED will address
members of the Council in regard to that same issue.
Other United Nations entities are also working in
that field. For example, in the Central African Republic,
Cote d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mali and Somalia the United Nations Mine Action
Service works in partnership with national authorities
to provide training and equipment to mark, register
4/23

02/08/2017

and store weapons; build or refurbish armouries; and
help clear and destroy explosive remnants of war,
including IEDs. That prevents the potential recovery
and reuse of those weapons by terrorists groups. The
two constituent bodies of the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism — the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Office and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre — also help address
that threat through the 12 inter-agency working groups
and targeted capacity-building support of CTITF.
I would like to mention three specific areas through
which the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorim is
making a contribution.
First, effective border control, especially of large,
unmonitored spaces, is critical to preventing the flow
of arms to terrorist groups. To help law enforcement
and border control agencies prioritize, institute and
implement effective measures, the CTITF Working
Group on Border Management and Law Enforcement
related to Counter-Terrorism spearheads a number
of capacity-building projects, including the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre’s Border Security
Initiative, which was implemented with the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum.
That project, which developed a number of best
practices, will contribute in its next phase to stronger
border controls through capacity-building exercises
aimed at reducing the risk of arms trafficking across
borders in the Sahel region and the Horn of Africa.
The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism has
also launched its Integrated Assistance for CounterTerrorism (I-ACT) initiative in key regions and countries
where the flow of arms represents a key challenge. The
I-ACT for the Group of Five for the Sahel (G5 Sahel),
as mandated by Security Council presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/24, and the Mali and Nigeria I-ACTS are
based on a mapping of capacity-building needs and,
subsequently, the delivery of tailored capacity-building
assistance against the four pillars of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In the case of the
I-ACT for the G5 Sahel, which includes Mali, border
management and the prevention of trafficking of arms
will be a key component.
Secondly, in the context of addressing the foreign
terrorist fighters threat, United Nations CounterTerrorism Centre and the Office of Disarmament
Affairs are implementing a project, co-funded by
Switzerland, which is aimed at helping States in the
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Lake Chad basin region address the illicit proliferation
and diversion of small arms, light weapons and
ammunition to non-State armed groups, including
terrorist groups. Additional trainings through the
Office for Disarmament Affairs would help national
authorities develop capacities to identify and interdict
arms flows to foreign terrorist fighters.
The
United
Nations
Counter-Terrorism
Centre-ODA project that I just mentioned is part of
the Security Council-mandated capacity-building
implementation plan for countering the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters that the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force has developed. Taking an
“All-of-UN” approach, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
has developed the Plan, which currently includes 50
mutually reinforcing capacity-building projects that
address the entire life cycle of the foreign terrorist
fighters, including radicalizing, travelling, financing,
returning, disarming, prosecuting, rehabilitating and
reintegrating. The 13 United Nations CTITF agencies
participate in the plan, and the total of the project
budget is $107 million over five years. Contributions
and pledges currently add up to $44 million, or 41 per
cent of the total, and we encourage more Member States
to contribute to that Plan.
Thirdly, the CTITF is active on addressing the
threat of terrorists acquiring and using weapons of
mass destruction. The recent use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups in certain regions shows that such
threat is not simply theoretical. The implementation of
the obligations under resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325
(2016) are vital to preventing non-State actors from
acquiring and using nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons. An effective response to a weapons of mass
destruction attack is also crucial.
Through the specialized CTITF Working Group,
United Nations agencies and international organizations
are working to improve their coordination mechanisms
in emergency response to a chemical or biological
weapons attack. That project has completed an analysis
of existing United Nations coordination mechanisms
and made recommendations for improvement, and also
organized a simulation exercise that brought together
16 United Nations agencies to test their coordination
in a hypothetical weapons of mass destruction terrorist
attack situation.
To conclude, General Assembly resolution 70/291,
adopted at the fifth review of the United Nations Global

S/PV. 8017

Counter- Terrorism Strategy, notes that member States
should work together to:
“eliminate the supply of weapons, including small
arms and light weapons, to terrorists, as well as
to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade
in said weapons, including their diversion, to
terrorists” (resolution 70/291, para. 61).
The existing international legal framework against the
flow of weapons to terrorists provides clear guidelines
for all States in that regard.
Today’s draft resolution is another step in the right
direction. We at the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism through the Inter-Agency Working Groups of
CTITF and United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre’s
capacity-building assistance, will actively support
its implementation, working closely with member
States and all relevant CTITF entities. As called for
by the Secretary-General in his report (A/71/858),
we are committed to stepping up our United Nations
assistance to member States, and forging a new agenda
for multi-lateral cooperation, including in countering
the flow of weapons to terrorists.
Mr. President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Khan
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Weixiong Chen.
Mr. Weixiong Chen (spoke in Chinese): Today,
the Security Council discusses the issue on preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons with a view to
adopting a draft resolution on that topic, which is both
significant and necessary.
(spoke in English)
In many of its resolutions, the Council has stressed
the importance of preventing terrorists’ access to
weapons. The current draft resolution, once adopted,
will add further tasks to the mandate of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
in this area. Under the policy guidance of the CounterTerrorism Committee, CTED is required to monitor,
facilitate and promote the implementation of the
aforementioned resolutions by Member States and
to support the policy development of the Committee
and the Council and their efforts in defining the
international counter-terrorism agenda.
We are proud to support the policy responses of
the Committee and the Council on the broad range
of counter-terrorism issues through our assessment

17-240835/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

visits, our analyses and our identification of trends
and challenges, gaps and good practices. Our analysis
has reviewed a wide range of concerns with respect to
terrorist access to weapons, including poor stockpiling
management and shortcomings in monitoring the
protection, control, sale, brokerage, export and imports
of small arms and light weapons; looting of military
arsenals; transnational organized crime; weak border
controls; activated and deactivated weapons; and the
international arms trade and trafficking via the Internet,
in particular via the Dark Web markets.
Even though Member States have achieved
significant progress in addressing these issues, further
efforts are needed, including in the following areas.
First, reviewing and strengthening national
legislation on countering the supply and trafficking of
weapons to terrorists; second, strengthening national
control regimes for the possession, use and transfer of
weapons; third, ensuring that weapons held by defence
and security forces are properly stored and controlled;
fourth, preventing the flow of weapons to conflictaffected regions and conflict zones; fifth, strengthening
professional and expert training, including through
the provision of modern technology and equipment;
sixth, effectively implementing arms embargoes,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions; and seventh, strengthening and expanding
cooperation and partnership with United Nations
entities, international and regional organizations and
civil society.
The country visit remains a critical tool for
CTED. It enables us to assess Member States’ overall
national counter-terrorism efforts and their specific
achievements, strengths, weaknesses and technical
assistance needs and to identify and promote good
practices. We will continue to make optimum use of this
vital tool, including within the framework of post-visit
information-sharing and in facilitating the delivery of
technical assistance with our implementing agencies.
Cooperation with other United Nations entities and
international and regional organizations is essential to
CTED’s work. In that regard, I would note that CTED
is Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force Working Group on Border Management and Law
Enforcement Relating to Counter-Terrorism, and works
closely with the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to resolution 1526 (2014)
and 2253 (2015), concerning Islamic State in Iraq and
6/23

02/08/2017

the Levant (Da’esh); the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs; the United Nations Mine Action
Service; the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime;
INTERPOL; the World Customs Organization and
many other international and regional organizations.
CTED has also contributed to a number of
initiatives, including the development of International
Small Arms Control Standards, the INTERPOL Illicit
Arms Records and Tracing Management System.
Moreover, the CTED and INTERPOL recently signed
a formal cooperation agreement that will enable us to
deepen our cooperation in denying terrorists’ access to
weapons. It is also essential to raise Member States’
awareness of this topic and promote related international
good practices. In this regard, the Committee, with
the support of CTED, has arranged a series of related
thematic and regional briefings. CTED will continue
to pay increased attention to new and emerging threats
and trends, and strengthen its efforts to assist Member
States to address new risks deriving from international
arms trafficking via the Internet and across borders.
Just last week, Mr. President, under your leadership
and stewardship as Chair of the Committee, CTED
finalized the updated version of the Technical Guide
to the Implementation of Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) , 1624 (2005), 2178 (2014) and other relevant
Council resolutions and decisions. The Technical Guide
serves as a comprehensive and unique reference tool,
both for CTED and for Member States, in our joint
efforts to counter a broad range of terrorist threats,
including access to weapons.
Preventing and eliminating the supply of weapons
to terrorists is a complex task, but rest assured that
CTED will continue to strengthen its engagement
with the United Nations entities and international and
regional organizations, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, to assist Member States
in denying terrorists access to weapons.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. Weixiong Chen for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Roux.
Mr. Roux (spoke in French): I deliver this briefing
on behalf of our Secretary-General, Mr. Jürgen Stock.
(spoke in English)
It is a great privilege to address the Security
Council once again. I would like to thank the Egyptian
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

presidency for convening this meeting and for their
recognition of the role of the INTERPOL in this
framework.
Preventing foreign terrorist fighters from accessing
weapons is of utmost importance and is one of the
five action streams in INTERPOL’s Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. We have been reminded time and
again that no country can claim itself immune from the
threat. Yet this also means that we can all be part of the
effort to stop their movement and break the supply. It
is vital to mobilize international cooperation, not only
across regions, but also across action domains ranging
from international and domestic legislation to police
work in the field. I therefore welcome Egypt’s initiative
to bring this issue to the forefront of discussions at the
United Nations, and I look forward to the outcomes of
today’s meeting.
Although neither weapons nor their use by
terrorists are new phenomena, today’s threat landscape
is one of unprecedented complexity. Convergence is the
keyword — convergence between organized crime and
terrorism; between old and new technologies; between
military and law enforcement. We see firearms used in
conflict zones reappear on the streets of major cities;
legal commercial products turned into components for
improvised explosive devices; and guns manufactured
decades ago found reactivated and for sale in the
marketplaces of the Dark Web. In parallel, foreign
terrorist fighters may be exploiting the tactics and
knowledge learned from the battlefield; the contacts
and supply chains of organized crime groups they often
used to belong to; and technology allowing the creation
of modular firearms and 3D printing to access and use
weapons.

S/PV. 8017

(FTF) from acquiring weapons and how international
policing can assist them.
The first step involves tracing the weapon back to
its source. That is where every single gun turns from
being a threat into an asset for the purpose of police
investigations. The gun might turn out to be part of
an arsenal discovered by the military in a conflict
zone. It might be found at the crime scene of an armed
robbery or a murder. It might be recovered on a suspect
or in the trunk of a car. Traditionally, investigations
would end at that point, with the seizure of a firearm.
INTERPOL suggests that the recovery of a weapon
is just the beginning. Until proven otherwise, a gun
used in the commission of a crime must be considered
as part of a larger scheme, not an isolated piece of
evidence. INTERPOL has developed a firearms
recovery protocol, which has been made available to all
member countries and provides a guide to obtaining the
necessary intelligence and investigative leads to trace
the source of the supply.

The challenge may seem daunting. Where can we
start in tackling these threats?

The questions for any investigator are simple
but fundamental. First, who has had contact with the
firearm? To answer that question, the identifying data
obtained from the gun’s exterior — the make, model,
calibre, and serial number — should be checked so as
to find its status and transaction history. INTERPOL’s
Illicit Arms Record and Tracing Management System
(iARMS) can be used to search and trace lost, stolen,
smuggled or trafficked firearms internationally. For
instance, the iARMS platform was used to issue trace
requests in the aftermath of the Charlie Hebdo terrorist
attacks. More recently, INTERPOL-coordinated
operations in the Balkans and Eastern Europe have
shown how international tracing can become a
multiplier, thereby leading to new weapon recoveries
and arrests. In parallel, latent fingerprints and DNA
can also be examined, where possible, through using
INTERPOL’s forensic databases, as well.

There are many crucial actions that the international
community can undertake with the support and
expertise of the United Nations. Standardizing enduser export controls, ensuring secure stockpile
management and strengthening and implementing
strong national legislation are all essential steps. Yet
like the Secretary General of the world’s largest law
enforcement organization, and as a police officer
myself, I must look at weapons trafficking from a
narrower but equally pivotal focus on what frontline
officers can do to prevent foreign terrorist fighters

The next question is — in which crimes has the
gun been used? The ballistics data from inside the
gun can be used to link crimes, guns and suspects,
whether through domestic ballistic comparison or
across borders. In such cases, the INTERPOL Ballistic
Information Network provides a means by which to
conduct international searches to determine if the same
gun was used in multiple crimes and crime scenes
across different countries. The intelligence generated
can help track a gun used in a crime to a trafficker and
cut off a supply of firearms. Every hit in the system

17-240837/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

and every subsequent link count. That is how key
individuals can be identified, new trafficking routes
detected and responses designed.
Secondly, we are focused on the weapons. We
should never forget about the individuals. They are
the ones driving the demand and ultimately putting
those commodities to use. Preventing foreign terrorist
fighters’ access to weapons also builds on preventing
their mobility across borders and achieving positive
identification in the field. In that regard, I must
emphasize once again the need to strengthen and
integrate border management in compliance with
resolution 2178 (2014). Since its adoption, we have
witnessed FTF-related information sharing through
INTERPOL channels increase dramatically. That
momentum can be seized by maximizing the use
of INTERPOL’s first-line screening tools for travel
documents and nominals at all borders in members’
respective jurisdictions so as to set up a tripwire and an
early warning system against terrorist mobility.
The same applies to known weapons traffickers
who may be moving abroad to coordinate shipments
and manage their operations, whether upstream towards
the source, or downstream for distribution. If flagged
through INTERPOL channels, any random search or
border control may lead to the detection, identification
and apprehension of such high-value players. In a
nutshell, strong borders and improved coordination are
the first defence in both FTF interdiction and preventing
the illegal, cross-border movement of weapons.
The capabilities, which I have described, hold
enormous potential in assisting law enforcement
officers to prevent terrorist access to weapons. Yet in
order to be unleashed, that requires proactive action.
The databases must be populated, the trace requests sent
and responded to, and the access to secure information
system extended to border control points and other key
frontline locations. I would respectfully ask each of
the delegations represented here to reach out to their
respective capitals and national security services and
inquire whether that potential is being maximized at
a time of unprecedented threats. INTERPOL stands
ready to assist all member countries represented here
today in that endeavour.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Roux
for his briefing.
8/23

02/08/2017

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2370 (2017).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Egypt.
First of all, I would like to express my appreciation
to all those who participated in a constructive and
positive manner in the negotiations that led to the
adoption today of the important resolution 2370
(2017), especially as it is the first resolution of its
kind to address in detail the problemterrorists from
acquiring weapons. The importance of this issue made
the Egyptian chairmanship of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee eager to organize a briefing on the subject
within the framework of the CTC in May 2017, with
the participation of all United Nations Members and
the relevant organizations. Based on the conclusions of
that briefing, the Egyptian Mission was able to develop
the first version of the resolution that was just adopted,
withEgypt’s commitment to taking into account
the opinions and recommendations of every State,
including those that are not members of the Security
Council, while designing policies on counter-terrorism
under its auspices.
Arming terrorists and terrorist groups is an
extremely serious issue. I would even say that it involves
a crime that is no less horrible than the terrorist act in
and of itself. Providing terrorists with weapons means
directly supplying them with the means that they will
use to kill, destroy and terrorize populations, including
women and children. It is therefore necessary for the
international community, represented by the United
Nations, to face up to this issue in earnest and decisively,
and hold to account all of those who supply weapons to
terrorists and terrorist groups. In that regard, resolution
2370 (2017), just adopted, contains very important
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

provisions at the national and international levels.
Indeed, the resolution reaffirms the commitment of
all States to preventing the provision of weapons to
terrorists and, in that respect, it emphasizesthe need to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
The resolution stipulates that the Council will
address cases of failure to implement its resolutions.
Furthermore, it reiterates the need to prevent and avoid
the smuggling of arms to terrorists in conflict zones. It
reaffirms the importance of strengthening cooperation
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons via the
Internet or social networks.
The resolution stresses the importance of
international judicial cooperation and law enforcement
to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons. The
resolution requests that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate, as well as the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Al-Qaida, each within its
respective areas of competence, to give the necessary
priority and focus to the issue of preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons.
We take this opportunity to restate what we have
often said in the past regarding the need for the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions, in
particular those on counter-terrorism. We reiterate the
need for the Security Council to hold those States that
do not comply with the relevant resolutions accountable.
All Council members should work to develop the
political will within the Council to ensure that rogue
States are held accountable when they expressly violate
its resolutions.
In the past as now, Egypt has suffered, directly and
indirectly, at the hands of certain States that support,
arm and finance terrorists. That is what has led Egypt,
in addition to its ongoing counter-terrorism efforts, to
present the comprehensive and multidimensional vision
of the counter-terrorism issue that was laid out in the
statement delivered by President Al Sisi at the Riyadh
Summit in May. Egypt also stresses the need for all
States to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, which request the international community
and individual States to fight terrorism and the regimes
that support it by all means compatible with the Charter
of the United Nations and international law.
In conclusion, I can assure Council members that
Egypt will remain committed to being at the vanguard

S/PV. 8017

of international efforts to fight and defeat terrorism,
while respecting international law, human rights and
the rule of law.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing my thanks to Ambassador Liu
Jieyi and his team for a very successful presidency last
month, and to welcome Ambassador Nebenzia, our new
Russian colleague, to the Security Council.
I should like to wish you, Sir, all the very best for
the month ahead as President of the Security Council.
You have got us off to a flying start with the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2370 (2017) today, which the
United Kingdom is very pleased to support. I hope
that you have started the month as you mean to go on,
because there is a lot to do together and we need to
maintain the unity and activism of this morning as we
grapple wth the challenges of the month ahead. There
is no greater challenge than the unrelenting scourge of
terrorism. It is a threat that we all face and that we must
all unite to defeat.
Through the resolution adopted today, we have
committed to taking practical steps to do just that,
first, by stopping terrorists’ deadly use of explosive
devices, and secondly by stopping their illegal supply
of small arms and light weapons. We need only look to
Mosul — to its ruined buildings and ruined lives — to see
that these weapons and explosives are crucial enablers
of the brutality of groups like Da’esh. Over three
years, Da’esh used small arms and light weapons and
explosive devices to impose its sick ideology on the
people of Mosul, systematically persecuting anyone
who dared to stand in its way. Three years on, thanks to
the bravery of the Iraqi security forces, Da’esh has now
been defeated in Mosul. But not content with years of
brutality, Da’esh has left behind a bitter, bloody legacy
for those returning home — a city littered with booby
traps and other improvised explosive devices (IEDs).
We must make no mistake — the indiscriminate
use of these devices goes against the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law and the basic tenets
of human decency. That is why the United Kingdom
is committed to developing practical approaches that
reduce the use and availability of improvised explosive

17-240839/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

devices. It is why we have committed to spending
$129 million over the next three years to tackle the
problem of IEDs, explosive remnants of war and land
mines. And it is why we are committed to developing an
effective and informed network across the international
community that will help track key components and
prevent the manufacturer of these devices. In parallel,
we need to do more to combat the illicit trafficking
and, crucially, the diversion of small arms and light
weapons. It is not enough just to investigate and dispose
of illicit weapons; we must prevent the moment when a
legal weapon becomes diverted to illegal use.
The Arms Trade Treaty remains the most important
instrument at our disposal to do that. It is a robust,
effective, legally binding treaty, and one that took years
to agree. We must use it to its fullest extent, drawing
on its transparent and consistent standards to regulate
the global arms trade. I therefore strongly urge all
States to join the Arms Trade Treaty. The Council has
already made a call on the international community to
consider signing and ratifying that vital instrument,
captured in the most comprehensive resolution adopted
on small arms and light weapons — resolution 2220
(2015). I deeply regret that we were unable today to
repeat that call unanimously, but we may rest assured
that the Arms Trade Treaty will remain central to the
United Kingdom’s approach to preventing irresponsible
trafficking in arms.
Before I cede the floor, I think it is important to
recognize that the words in resolution 2370 (2017)
are only as good as their implementation outside the
Chamber. As an example, it is simply not good enough
to express our support for arms embargoes mandated
by the Security Council in the resolution if we are
unwilling to make them a reality in areas of genuine
need around the world. If we look at South Sudan,
last year the Council had a real chance to take steps
to lessen the carnage caused by the uncontrolled flow
of weapons there, and yet when we voted to impose an
arms embargo we failed.
The United Kingdom maintains that it is long
past time for us to return to that issue, and when we
do I hope that we will channel some of the fervour
for arms embargoes that we found in the resolution
adopted today.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to begin, Mr. President, by
congratulating you at the outset of the Egyptian
10/23

02/08/2017

presidency and thanking the Chinese delegation once
again for its capable leadership of the Security Council’s
work in July. I am also grateful for the words of support
taddressed to me and to my colleagues. I have already
had the opportunity to assure my colleagues that I
have come here with the hope and intention of working
constructively with them with the aim of helping to
solve the problems facing the international community.
It so happens that the first official meetings of
both the General Assembly and the Security Council
that I have had the opportunity to participate in as
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
have been devoted to the issue of combating terrorism.
For our country, the topic is an absolute priority for the
forum of the United Nations, where we must all work
diligently to unite the international community’s efforts
to confront that universal evil.
We are grateful to Egypt for organizing today’s
meeting and to today’s briefers for their substantive
contributions to our discussion. We would like to
highlight the activities of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in proposing and
providing specialized technical assistance. We firmly
believe that the United Nations system’s newly created
Office for Counter-Terrorism will enable us to expand
their work’s impact, and the efforts that have been
undertaken through INTERPOL and other specialized
organizations are significant in that regard.
My delegation supported the Council’s adoption
today of resolution 2370 (2017), on the issue of weapons
falling into terrorists’ hands. As the resolution notes,
States should work to suppress any kind of support
to terrorists, including commercial, economic and
financial ties. In laying out these provisions, the
Security Council also urges all States to intensify their
efforts to secure their borders. We hope that message
will be heard. Despite the international community’s
efforts, the massive flow of arms to terrorists from
outside continues. The fight against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the other terrorist
organizations in Syria and Iraq has gone on almost
as long as the Second World War, and in all that time,
the militants have never experienced any disruption
in their supply of arms and ammunition, including
the most up-to-date types, and they continue to use
these weapons. Only today the Russian Embassy in
Damascus was again shelled from terrorist groups’
positions. Even with the effective offensive currently
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

S/PV. 8017

under way, ISIL’s resources, though reduced, are still
unacceptably high. They can be enabled only through
a large-scale, systematic, reliable supply of arms to
terrorists that continues even now and would not be
possible without the connivance, if not the assistance,
of State organizations.

resolutions that could significantly reduce the risk of
small arms and light weapons falling into the hands of
terrorist organizations. We note that in adopting today’s
resolution, the Council has acknowledged the need for
improving legislation in these areas, but any specifics
have gone by the board.

The solution to the problem that we have
consistently proposed for years is an initiative that
would impose a comprehensive trade and economic
embargo on territories controlled by ISIL, with the
goal of banning the import and export of all goods to or
from ISIL-controlled territories and imposing financial
restrictions and strengthening border security in Syria
and Iraq’s neighbours, because the information that
we have shows that their border controls have been
ineffective. Unfortunately, our proposals, which could
significantly strengthen the impact of the resolution
we have adopted today, have once again met with
stubborn resistance from various delegations. Their
unwillingness to go down the road of tightening
controls on the circulation of arms in the region plays
into the hands of international terrorism. We continue
to be puzzled as to why this is the case and whose
interests it serves. We are wasting an opportunity to
make an effective joint decision. More than that, we
are wasting time. The terrorists are exploiting this
situation, preserving their combat potential and clearly
assuming that some of their sponsors, including State
structures, will continue to support them.

We all know that where there are military conflicts
of this type, private companies can do only what States
allowed them to do. Russia has sufficient information
from trustworthy sources to confirm the fact that
there are States that condone such activity and that a
number of countries’ interested agencies, including
special services, are frequently involved in supplying
arms to terrorists. If necessary, we are ready to share
particulars of that data. We consider such a state of
affairs unacceptable and we will continue to take steps
aimed at using the international community’s joint
efforts to deal with it.

Of course, international arms dealers such as, for
example, private companies, significantly enhanced
their activities on a background of the crises that
have erupted in the Middle East and North Africa and
that feed the wanton greed of the world’s notorious
arms lords. In their pursuit of profits or political
goals, suppliers frequently prefer to turn a blind eye
to whatever the destination and purpose of the batch
of arms they are exporting may be or whose hands it
may ultimately end up in. The numerous middlemen
operating in the market sometimes fail to exercise the
appropriate responsibilityonsibility. States that have
accumulated excessive stockpiles of small arms and
light weapons are not always as careful as they should
be with their supplies. The production of weapons
under expired licences, or without a licence from the
countries that own the relevant technology, continues
to be a serious problem. With a view to solving these
problems, we have repeatedly proposed strengthening
the concrete national measures in Security Council

In conclusion, we would once again like to affirm
Russia’s willingness to cooperate multilaterally
with the United Nations counter-terrorism entities,
including on the problem of arms supplies, and we urge
all delegations to work actively to that end.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Egypt’s
presidency of the Council for the month of August,
and on starting it off in a very good way, especially
for your negotiations on something that draw attention
to an important issue such as this one, for which we
thank you.
We know that terrorists have many ways to get their
hands on dangerous weapons. They divert legal arms
transfers, take advantage of poorly secured stockpiles,
seize weapons on the battlefield and get them through
criminal networks. The Council’s adoption today
of resolution 2370 (2017) is meant to address the
many ways in which terrorists acquire arms. It calls
on Member States to do more to strengthen export
controls and assist other countries in destroying excess
weapons. It highlights the importance of enhancing
the physical security of weapons and stockpiles and
of establishing tracing programmes for them. It trains
a spotlight on the murderous potential of improvised
explosive devices (IEDs). It encourages cooperation
between the public and private sectors in preventing the
transfer of IEDs, drones and light weapons to terrorist
organizations. Most importantly, it calls attention to
the obligation of all nations, particularly those that

17-2408311/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

profess concerns about weapons falling into terrorists’
hands, to enforce United Nations arms embargoes. The
Security Council has been clear in prohibiting arms
transfers to Yemen, Somalia and other places. And yet
we know that weapons continue to flow across borders
in open violation of the Council’s resolutions. For some
Member States, this is an issue of extreme hypocrisy.
For all of us, it is an unacceptable stain on the Council’s
authority that must be removed.
It is true that in recent months we have made great
progress against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and Al-Qaida. We are pleased that regional
partners have taken steps to improve their ability to
cut ISIS off from financial and material support. But
it is not merely some members’ failure to take action
that is enabling weapons to find their way to terrorists.
One country stands out for its deliberate and systematic
contributions of arms, training and funding to terrorist
groups. One country uses its support to terrorist proxies
as a way to conduct its foreign policy and compensate
for its own weakness. That country is Iran. The United
States first designated Iran a State sponsor of terrorism
in 1984. Its training, funding and arming of terrorists
has continued unabated to this day. Terrorist proxies
are doing the Iranian regime’s will in Iraq and Syria.
Iran also supports Hamas and Bahraini terrorist groups.
Through its partner Hizbullah, Iran is engaged in
preparing for war in Lebanon. It is building an arsenal
of weapons and battle-hardened troops.
We applaud the message at the heart of today’s
resolution that says that the international community
must work together and do more to prevent weapons
from falling into the hands of terrorists. But I encourage
the Council to be aware that weapons do not always just
“fall” into the hands of terrorists. Too often, they are
pushed. That is the threat that we face today in Iran and
it is a threat that no amount of technical cooperation or
security upgrades will diminish. As long as we allow
the Iranian regime to violate the Council’s prohibitions
with impunity, Iran will be a source of weapons to
terrorist groups that will only grow in volume and
destructive capability. The United States will continue
to raise the issue of Iraninan non-compliance with
international obligations at every opportunity.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Egypt on assuming the presidency
of the Council for the month of August. It has laid out
a very comprehensive coverage of key items on our
agenda. Likewise, I offer our most sincere appreciation
12/23

02/08/2017

to the Chinese presidency for its very capable and
outstanding stewardship of the Council in July.
I also congratulate and welcome Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzia as the new Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation and look forward to
working with his delegation to take the work of the
Council forward.
Our delegation offers its condolences to Afghanistan
for the most recent terrorist attack in Herat province
and, like others, we condemn the attack in the strongest
terms. Our thoughts are with the families of the victims
and we wish a speedy recovery to those injured in
the attack.
The delegation of Kazakhstan welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2370 (2017) on preventing
terrorists from acquiring weapons, which was put forth
by Egypt. The resolution will significantly enhance our
effectiveness in countering the illicit arms flow and
monitoring the arms embargo. It will also contribute
to the efforts of the United Nations in the framework
of the Arms Trade Treaty and implementing resolution
2220 (2015) on the illicit transfer and misuse of small
arms and light weapons.
We are convinced that the only effective way
to prevent weapons from falling into the hands
of terrorists and terrorist groups is to create and
effectively implement relevant norms at the national,
regional and international levels. The international
community needs to expand its cooperation and
interactions in order to include a more rapid and timely
exchange of information providing, if necessary, full
support to carry out activities to identify and prevent
the acquisition of arms or suppress the intentions
of terrorists to illegally acquire weapons. That
collaboration should be at the regional and global levels.
It should involve the mechanisms of international and
regional organizations, primarily the United Nations
system, including sanctions committees.
The United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate and the Monitoring Team of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida,and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, along with other sanctions committees, play
an important role. In addition, it is necessary to take
measures to disclose and eliminate sources of the
financing of terrorist groups and their accomplices.
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Particular attention should be paid to strengthening
national expert control mechanisms.
When exporting weapons and dual-use technologies,
mandatory verification of end-user certificates should
be carried out in strict compliance with sanctions
regimes for the supply of weapons. Despite the fact that
resolution 2370 (2017) updated provisions related to
strengthening control over and preventing conventional
weapons from falling into the hands of terrorists, it is
appropriate to highlight the efforts and aspirations of
terrorist groups to obtain weapons of mass destruction.
Therefore, it is necessary to raise levels of security in
order to protect facilities containing nuclear, chemical
and biological materials, as well as their components
and manufacturing technologies. It is necessary
to strengthen control and determine appropriate
conditions for personnel who are allowed to work with
them. Kazakhstan pays special attention to the physical
protection of nuclear facilities and infrastructure, as
well as other facilities that have abundant potential
to draw criminal and terrorist groups interested in
acquiring nuclear and other materials for creating
dirty bombs.
Kazakhstan is a committed member of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, which was
launched by the United States of America and the
Russian Federation in order to strengthen the interaction
of the international community in preventing nuclear
materials from falling into the hands of terrorists.
As part of the global fight against the illicit trade in
conventional arms and their transfer and use for terrorist
purposes, we believe that the following important tools
should be used.
First, we must improve domestic procedures
for issuing permits for the transfer of conventional
weapons. We must also improve the reporting of all
States. That includes harmonizing legislation among
countries of the region, helping countries in passing
national legislation and with their ability to take action,
strengthening control over the targeted use, transfer and
supply of conventional weapons, as well as ensuring
liability provided for by national laws for violations.
We must improve customs mechanisms and legislation
and strengthen control over borders in order to prevent
trafficking across countries. That can be done through
the training of specialists and providing equipment.
It is also necessary to support all forms of capacitybuilding between States through bilateral cooperation,
North-South cooperation, South-South cooperation

S/PV. 8017

and trilateral cooperation. Therefore, Kazakhstan
stands ready to join the multilateral effort to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons that imperil peace
and security.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me join others in
congratulating Egypt on assuming the presidency for
the month of August. We wish Egypt all the best.
I would also like to thank the Chinese delegation
for an impressively effective presidency in July.
I would also like to take the opportunity to
welcome our new colleague, Ambassador Vassily
Nebenzia as the new Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation.
I would like to thank Egypt for organizing today’s
briefing. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable presentations.
International terrorism is clearly one of the greatest
threats to international peace and security. The fight
against terrorism requires greater cooperation across
national borders and across policy areas. In that regard,
we thank Egypt for introducing resolution 2370 (2017),
which was just adopted. A coordinated response is
necessary in order to eliminate the supply of weapons
to terrorists and to prevent the illicit trade of weapons.
The relevant national law enforcement agencies need
to cooperate and share information in order to combat
illicit firearms trafficking, as well as to ensure adequate
marking and tracing procedures for weapons. The full
implementation of existing multilateral agreements,
such as the Arms Trade Treaty; the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects; the International Instrument to Enable
States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable
Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons; and
the United Nations Firearms Protocol are also essential
in preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons.
Moreover, Security Council arms embargos must be
fully respected and properly implemented, in accordance
with relevant resolutions and legal instruments.
Today, we would have liked to see the Council
urge all Member States to accede to the Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT) . The ATT is the first legally binding
instrument for the regulation of the international arms
trade. In order to achieve the effective control of arms
flows, it is important that all arms-producing countries
accede to the Treaty. Illegal arms are usually start off

17-2408313/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

as legally produced and traded weapons. However,
their irresponsible export can cause as much damage
as and lead to illegal flows. Furthermore, it is crucial
that importing countries join the ATT, as inadequate
control leads to the diversion of arms to the illegal
market. Transit countries should also join, as they risk
becoming unwitting links in the physical shipment of
arms to conflict areas.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is also a very important
resolution in that context. It aims to stop non-State
actors, notably terrorists, from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery. Resolution
2370 (2017) constitutes an important complement
to resolution 1540 (2004), since it encompasses
conventional arms and the illicit flows of small arms
and light weapons, as well as explosive elements for the
manufacture of improvised explosive devises.
In conclusion, let me underline that all counterterrorism measures must be carried out in accordance
with international law, including international human
rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law, as
reiterated in numerous resolutions. Human rights
and fundamental freedoms, online as well as offline,
and open societies are critical for fostering resilience
against terrorism. Member States working together,
based on these agreed norms and standards, is the only
and most effective way to counter the great threat of
international terrorism. Our hope is that resolution 2370
(2017), which we have just adopted, and this meeting
will contribute to those efforts.
Mr. Llorenty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, allow me to echo
the words of gratitude and congratulations directed to
Ambassador Liu Jieyi for the excellent work carried
out during China’s presidency of the Security Council
in July. I also congratulate you, Mr. President, and
your team on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council and assure you of our support and my
delegation’s readiness to cooperate with you. We, too,
welcome the new Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, Mr. Vasilly Nebenzia.
I wish also to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive
Director of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime; Mr. Jehangir Khan, Officer in Charge
of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism;
Mr. Weixiong Chen, Deputy Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
14/23

02/08/2017

and Mr. Emmanuel Roux, Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations.
I wish also to thank the Egyptian presidency for
having submitted to the Council resolution 2370
(2017), which we deem particularly important given
the current context and the global challenges that we
are facing. We congratulate Egypt on the work it did
to ensure the unanimous adoption of the resolution,
which is a clear reflection of the spirit of cooperation
that we must maintain in order to confront the scourge
of terrorism. We express our support for the ongoing
efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
as well as the recently created United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia, in line with its
policies aimed at peace, categorically condemns all
acts of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as
criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation
and wherever and by whomsoever committed, as this
is one of the most serious threats to international
peace and security. That is why we stress the urgency
of implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Bolivia is Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which
is charged with promoting efforts to strengthen the
exchange of information and knowledge between
United Nations entities and international organizations,
with the specific purpose of ensuring that States,
inter alia, refrain from supplying any kind of support
to non-State actors attempting to develop, acquire,
manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use, in this
case, nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
delivery systems. The Committee therefore seeks to
promote international cooperation, and the resolution
that we have just adopted is, as has been noted, a fitting
complement to the Committee’s mandate.
My country wishes also to underscore the content
of resolution 2370 (2017), which stresses the need for
inter-State cooperation aimed at preventing any kind
of active or passive support for entities or individuals
involved in terrorist acts. We reaffirm the need for States
to combat this human scourge by all peaceful means set
out in the Charter of the United Nations and stress that
measures to prevent it must be in line with the obligations
incumbent upon us by under international law and the
relevant international conventions and protocols, in
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

particular human rights conventions, refugee law and
international humanitarian law. However, we believe
that such cooperation and technical assistance should
be provided at the request of States and should not be
viewed as another element of interference or political
exploitation, and should be specifically aimed at
building national capacities.
Bolivia believes that the international community’s
responsibility to combat this global problem must be
based on a common but differentiated approach in
which weapons-producing countries must acknowledge
their own responsibility, which differs from that of
those countries that suffer the consequences of the
broad availability of weapons that undermine peace
and threaten the lives of people living on the territories
affected as a result of weapons being obtained by those
who intend to carry out terrorist acts.
We deplore the fact that some international treaties
do not address the structural causes of this issue.
Weapons manufacturing is focused on profit and
promotes human suffering. Bolivia rejects war and
along with it the entire industry that funds it.
Today we must focus on preventing the sale of
weapons to those intending to commit terrorist acts.
To that end Bolivia, in the context of the preventive
measures that it has taken, enacted in 2013 a law
regulating firearms, munitions, explosives and other
related materials. The goal of the law is to ensure
peaceful coexistence and safeguard the lives of the
people and prevent, combat and punish crimes related
to the illicit traffic of firearms as well as crimes against
the security and defence of the State and civilian
security by regulating the manufacture, import, export,
storage and commercialization of firearms, munitions,
explosives and other materials.
In this context, we believe that in the context of
preventive measures we should focus in particular
on the financial mechanisms that make it possible to
launder the profits of the illegal arms trade, including
so-called tax havens.
Terrorism today, both locally and globally, is the
major challenge that we are facing, and it is for that
reason that we call on the Security Council to unite
its efforts to combat this scourge through greater
international cooperation, with full respect for
international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8017

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2370 (2017), adopted
today, as a substantial step forward in the international
community’s commitment to combat the scourge
of terrorism. It is a very good way, Sir, to start your
presidency, on which we congratulate you and wish
you all the best. We wish also to thank Ambassador
Liu Jieyi and his team for their remarkable presidency
in July. If I may say so, it is good to have among us
so important a colleague and one with the name of
one of the main characters of Giacomo Puccini’s
Turandot, which is one of the best operas ever written,
so I congratulate Ambassador Liu Jieyi. I also warmly
welcome Ambassador Nebenzia; we are ready to work
together as usual.
I should like also to take this opportunity to thank
our four briefers from New York and Vienna for their
important contributions to our discussion.
Illegal trafficking in weapons is a threat to peace
and security in every region of the world. Every day we
see the consequences of the ease with which individual
criminals and organized groups, including terrorist
groups, obtain and make use of such tools. The illicit
transfer and misuse of small arms and light weapons
contribute to instability and security and continue to
undermine the effectiveness of States’ development
efforts. According to the World Bank, illicit trafficking
in weapons represents one of the most profitable
activities of organized criminal groups. The revenue
generated through this illegal market is equal to 20 per
cent of the legal arms trade.
Weapons may fall into the hands of terrorists because
of poor stockpile security and weak border control. The
activities of foreign terrorist fighters further increase
the probability that weapons and ammunition will cross
borders. In recent years the international community
has also been confronted with the threat posed by
the increasing use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), particularly by non-State armed groups and
rogue individuals. Such IED attacks deliberately target
concentrations of civilians so as to achieve maximum
lethality, terror and social disruption.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has used
IEDs since its inception. However, despite sustained
military pressure, the group has been able to develop a
capacity to assemble such devices on an industrial scale
and, as current Chair of the Mine Action Support Group,
we have seen the proliferation of these instruments and

17-2408315/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

the creativity shown in that respect. Terrorists’ access to
small arms and light weapons has also been facilitated
by the spread of an online marketplace. The illegal sale
of arms on the dark Web presents challenges for law
enforcement agencies and national Governments. The
anonymity enabled by that platform makes preventing
illegal trade and linking it to specific individuals
extremely difficult.
Last May, the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate held an open briefing aimed at analysing and
discussing emerging threats, trends and developments
relating to preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons and to identifying gaps in Member States’
efforts to address those issues. During the briefings,
the experts underlined, inter alia, links between
organized crime and terrorism in illicit trafficking,
including trafficking in weapons, as well as the need
for an integrated approach.
In resolution 2322 (2016), the Security Council
stated that it counts on States to continue sharing
information on individuals and entities implicated in
terrorist activity, in particular their supply of weapons
and certain material support. INTERPOL highlighted
a tool that enables information exchange and enhanced
cooperation among law-enforcement agencies with
regard to the international movement of illicit firearms
and licit firearms that have been involved in committing
a crime.
Italy has actively participated with the European
Union in elaborating ways to curb the destabilizing
accumulation and misuse of small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, and we will continue
to offer our cooperation to interested States, in
particular on the role of up-to-date technologies and
on best practices in physical security and stockpile
management, in addition to the marking and tracing
of weapons.
However, it is important to recall the need to
guarantee a clear-cut separation between the legal
manufacturing and marketing of arms as opposed to their
illegal versions, which hamper the authorities’ control
and contribute, among other things, to financing and
participation in criminal and terrorist groups. In that
regard, the Arms Trade Treaty represents a balanced,
broad-based text, resulting from a comprehensive and
inclusive negotiation process in which the views of all
Member States have been reflected. That instrument has
the potential to significantly contribute to international
16/23

02/08/2017

peace and security by regulating the international trade
in conventional arms, making it more responsible and
transparent and eradicating illicit trafficking.
In conclusion, Italy looks forward to working
together with partners and relevant stakeholders
towards a stronger outcome in the next 2018 Small
Arms and Light Weapons Review Conference, which
should present an opportunity to reinforce our common
action aimed at preventing terrorists from accessing
those types of weapons.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency for the month of August, and I
assure you of our fullest cooperation and support in
the effective discharge of your responsibilities. I also
wish to express appreciation to you for organizing
this briefing on preventing terrorists from acquiring
weapons. We are grateful to all the speakers for their
informative briefings. Ethiopia commends Egypt
for its leadership in facilitating the negotiation on
resolution 2370 (2017) and welcomes its unanimous
adoption. I would also like to express, more formally,
my appreciation to Ambassador Liu Jieyi and China
for their very successful presidency last month. I
would also like to say how pleased we are to welcome
the Russian Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzya.
Access by terrorists to weapons, both conventional
weapons and small arms and light weapons, poses a
serious threat to the maintenance of peace and security,
particularly in the context of countries affected by
conflict. We endorse all that the President said when
speaking in his national capacity. The proliferation
of weapons that end up in the hands of terrorists has
increased, mainly owing to transnational organized
crime, poor border management, illicit arms-trafficking,
including using the Internet, and gaps in export control
and end-user verification. That, in turn, continues to
pose a significant challenge to the implementation of
the mandates of peacekeeping missions, the provision of
humanitarian assistance and the protection of civilians.
The threat posed by improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), particularly in the context of asymmetrical
warfare, continues to lead to enormous challenges.
For instance, in Somalia, IEDs are an increasingly
mortal component of the al-Shabab arsenal as they
become larger and more sophisticated, inflicting
loss of life on civilians and peacekeepers. They also
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

continue to threaten the operations of humanitarian
organizations, as well as the safety, security and
livelihoods of internally displaced persons returning to
their homes. That is mainly associated with the illicit
flow of explosive elements in dual-use items that could
be used for the manufacture of IEDs, and with gaps in
controlling and regulating their use.
Those growing threats, resulting mainly from the
increased supply of weapons, require all Member States
to adopt a comprehensive approach that would integrate
and coordinate their measures at the national, regional
and international levels, as appropriate, and enhance
their cooperation. The cross-border and international
nature of the challenge also requires all of us to adopt
a multilateral response, complimenting measures
taken at the national level by Member States within
their jurisdictions.
It is also critical for Member States to address some
of the challenges in the context of broader disarmament
discussions. It is in that context that we recognize
the importance of various measures incorporated in
resolution 2370 (2017), which we adopted today, aimed
at eliminating the supply of weapons to terrorists within
the framework of resolution 1373 (2001).
Resolution 1373 (2001) imposes a Chapter VII legal
obligation on all Member States to refrain from providing
any form of support, active or passive, to entities or
persons involved in terrorist acts, which includes the
elimination of the supply of weapons to terrorists. It
requires Member States to take concrete measures to
refrain from providing any form of support, which may
include financing, training or harbouring terrorists.
It also requires Member States to prevent terrorists
from acquiring conventional weapons and small arms
and light weapons. It is therefore important for the
Council to take into account the multi-faceted aspects
of direct or indirect support to terrorists and adopt a
broader outlook when addressing the issue of the access
to weapons by terrorists as called for by resolution 2370
(2017). In that regard, I would like to underline the
critical role that the various sanctions committees can
and should play in ensuring the proper implementation
of relevant arms embargoes and in eliminating the
supply of weapons to terrorists.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our firm
commitment to the fight against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations and by expressing our readiness to
work with all the relevant actors in the implementation

S/PV. 8017

of the important resolution 2370 (2017) to prevent and
eliminate the supply of weapons to terrorists.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of August. We are confident that under
your and your team’s guidance the Council will be very
effective in its work during the month. China will fully
cooperate with the presidency. I thank members of the
Council for their expressions of appreciation to China
during our presidency of the Council last month. We
thank members of the Council for their cooperation.
I welcome the new Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, Ambassador Vassily Nebenzia, to
the United Nations.
China appreciates the Egyptian initiative in
convening this meeting, and thanks the briefers:
Executive Directors Fedotov and Khan, Acting
Executive Director of Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate Chen, and INTERPOL Special
Representative Roux.
China welcomes the unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 2370 (2017), and we thank
Egypt for the important efforts it has made in that
connection. We hope that the resolution will further
facilitate the strengthening of cooperation and taking
comprehensive measures within the international
community aimed at cutting off the channels that
enable terrorist organizations to acquire weapons,
thereby safeguarding regional and international peace
and security:
First, the international community must use
uniform standards in combating terrorism so as to plug
loopholes that may make weapons available to terrorist
organizations. The various Security Council resolutions
clearly stipulate that all States shall refrain from
providing any form of support, including weapons, to
entities and persons involved in terrorist acts. All States
should fully and strictly implement the relevant Council
resolutions, giving particular effect to the provisions
on the arms embargo and the monitoring mechanism.
Only through Council-defined uniform standards and
comprehensive and effective measures can we cut off
the pathways through which terrorist organizations
acquire weapons. We must plug all loopholes that allow
the transfer of weapons between terrorist organizations
or give them opportunities to undertake terrorist acts.

17-2408317/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Secondly, Member States should play their
appropriate role by assuming their primary
responsibility to prevent terrorist organizations from
acquiring weapons. All countries must, within their
jurisdiction, exercise enhanced control and supervision
over weapons production, storage and transportation,
and their transfer. Countries must suppress any illicit
arms trade, trafficking and smuggling, which supply
weapons to terrorist organizations. Countries should
also continuously improve their legislation, regulations
and administrative processes so as to establish an
international institutional framework that is guaranteed
to prevent terrorist organizations from acquiring
weapons from arms-trafficking criminal networks.
Thirdly, Member States should step up
international and regional counter-terrorist cooperation
forming synergies and interconnectivities aimed at
preventing terrorist organizations from acquiring
weapons. Countries should enhance the sharing and
exchange of information pertaining to the ways and
means by which terrorist organizations buy weapons.
We must draw on one another’s good practices and
experience in combating illegal trafficking and the
transfer and production of weapons and improvised
explosive devices.
The United Nations counter-terrorism entities
should focus on the new trends and characteristics
identified in counter-terrorism efforts, and the
Organization should fully play its role as a coordinator
in multilateral counter-terrorism efforts. Moreover,
at the request of Member States, those entities should
provide technical support in order to build up their
capacity in that regard.
It is imperative to step up efforts and cooperation
in blocking the use of the Internet and social media by
terrorists in acquiring weapons and funds.
China participates actively in many multilateral
mechanisms, including the United Nations, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum. The 17th meeting
of the heads of State of the SCO was recently held in
Kazakhstan. At that summit, the SCO Convention on
Countering Extremism was signed. China called for
enhancing the regional counter-terrorism mechanism
and offered once again to host the SCO online counterterrorism exercise.
That shows that China and other relevant countries
are making efforts to enhance regional counter-terrorism
18/23

02/08/2017

initiatives. China looks forward to the translation of the
outcome of this meeting today into new measures to
strengthen international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Mr. Lisuchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to join others in congratulating Egypt on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of July. I thank the delegation of Egypt for
convening today’s meeting and also thank the briefers
for their insightful inputs for our discussion.
So far this year we have witnessed a rather effective
international campaign aimed at dismantling the core
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the Middle
East and at weakening its presence in other parts of
the world, mainly through resolute military efforts
on the ground. However, that could not have been
achieved without depriving terrorists of their sources of
financing and especially weapons supplies. Significant
progress on that track has been made in Iraq, Syria and
in certain parts of Africa.
Today, the persistence of the terrorist threat makes
it imperative to strengthen existing mechanisms for the
sake of prohibiting the acquisition, production, storage,
transfer and use of weapons by terrorist groups. In that
context, we consider today’s resolution 2370 (2017),
which introduces a multifaceted approach linking
two dimensions, namely, counter-terrorism and arms
control, to be an important step in that direction.
Although today’s resolution focuses mainly on
small arms and light weapons as a primary tool used by
terrorists in various regions of the world, there are also
alarming signs that even more sophisticated weapons
are within the reach of determined terrorist groups.
To prevent them from acquiring such weapons, strict
measures must be implemented at the national level
to strengthen export and border controls, in particular
regulations on the transfer of weapons and other
sensitive military equipment or matériel, and to bolster
financial intelligence cooperation.
That relates, inter alia, to ensuring the protection
and security of national stockpiles; addressing illicit
brokering activities; the thorough checking of endusers’ backgrounds; tracing trade routes for weapons
and identifying countries known as transshipment
points for terrorist organizations; enhancing border
security; and tracking suspicious money transfers.
In that regard, we consider the United Nations
Programme of Action on Small Arms and Light
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Weapons, the International Tracing Instrument and
the Arms Trade Treaty as important tools that can
significantly contribute to that process and pave the
way for resolving the problem of illicit trafficking in
weapons in all its aspects, reduce the scale of terrorist
violence and subsequently end the spread of this
scourge worldwide.
The international regime that seeks to curb arms
supplies to terrorists runs into a problem when States
that are supposed to uphold that regime turn out to
be in breach of their international obligations and
commitments in that regard. One of the most telling
cases of our times is the continuing flooding of the
occupied territories in eastern Ukraine with all kinds
of weapon systems, all coming from the neighbouring
State. Over 400 battle tanks, 840 armoured personnel
vehicles, 200 multiple-launch rocket systems, 730
artillery systems and 400 air-defence units have been
provided to terrorist organizations operating there.
Those deadly supplies have been used to conduct
devastating terrorist attacks, including, for example,
the downing of Malaysian Airlines flight MH-17.
The rhetorical question is, how did the terrorist
organizations in Ukraine get weapons that surpass the
armament stocks of many European States, or why do
the terrorists not run out of munitions?
Today, we adopted a document that clearly
defines the scope of States’ obligations with regard
to eliminating the supply of weapons to terrorists.
Having unanimously backed today’s Security Council
resolution, all countries around this table undertook
to respect the obligation not to support and supply
terrorists with weapons. We expect that all countries,
first and foremost, those that voted for today’s
resolution, will remain faithful to both the letter and
spirit of the relevant norms of international law.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the
importance of bringing to justice those who knowingly
engage in providing terrorists with weapons, funds and
other types of assets. The suppliers of weapons and
other sponsors and masterminds of terrorist activities
should bear no lesser responsibility than those who
perpetrate crimes on the ground.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the holding of this
Security Council meeting on preventing terrorists
from acquiring weapons, which is being held at the
very beginning of the Egyptian presidency and which

S/PV. 8017

we hope will be constructive. I can assure you, Sir,
of the full support of the Senegalese delegation in the
discharge of your important task.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
our briefers today for the quality of their briefings,
which reaffirm our conviction of the imperative need
to prevent terrorists from acquiring all weapons at all
costs, including conventional weapons, weapons of
mass destruction and cyberweapons. I would, in that
connection, like to thank Mr. Yury Fedotov, Mr. Jehangir
Khan, Mr. Weixiong Chen and Mr. Emmanuel Roux.
After having procured and transferred the funds
necessary for financing their activities and having
implemented an efficient communications strategy,
including through the dark Net, and recruited and
trained combatants to carry out operations, terrorist
groups need to acquire the weapons and the technical
and logistical means to execute their cynical plans.
It was with that in mind that the Security Council,
which is responsible for providing the international
community with the means needed to prevent and,
where relevant, eliminate those multiple threats,
adopted several resolutions, including resolutions
1373 (2001) and 2195 (2014) on financing terrorist
activities, resolution 2178 (2014) on the recruitment of
foreign terrorist fighters, and resolution 2354 (2017) on
a comprehensive international framework to counterterrorism narratives, as well as travel bans that affect
a number of terrorist groups. It is for those reasons
that Senegal voted in favour of resolution 2370 (2017),
which we have just unanimously adopted, with the
hope that it can provide one of the missing pieces in
the framework for preventing terrorism. Accordingly, I
would like once again to thank the Egyptian delegation
for having initially proposed it.
In that resolution, the Security Council reaffirms
its decision to prohibit all forms of support, whether
active or passive, for entities or individuals involved in
terrorist acts, including by eliminating every possible
means of supplying such support to terrorists. The
resolution calls on Member States to take the necessary
legal measures against anyone who deliberately
provides arms to terrorists and to ensure the secure
management of small arms and light weapons, improve
their traceability and strengthen capacities in the legal
sphere, as well as in the technical area of border control.
In the same vein, in calling on Member States to fully
implement the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and

17-2408319/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, the resolution pays
particular attention to improvised explosive devices, as
well as other non-conventional weapons. Accordingly,
we welcome the attention accorded to arms embargoes
in the resolution as an important means of controlling
the influx of arma.
The Senegalese delegation is, however, of the
opinion that the resolution just adopted would have
gained in scope had it integrated the obligation
incumbent on Member States to prevent the direct or
indirect delivery, the sale, and the transfer of weapons to
terrorists originating in their territories or with regard
to terrorism carried out by their citizens. Although it is
not included in the text of the resolution, that obligation
warrants the full attention of the Security Council at
a time when we are intensifying our efforts to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons. My country therefore
regrets the resolution’s failure to mention disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in
countries and regions affected by conflict, while, even
according to the fifth report of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international
peace and security and the range of United Nations
efforts in support of Member States in countering
that threat (S/2017/467), the return of foreign terrorist
fighters to their country of origin or their immigration
to other countries represents one of the most pressing
challenges facing the international community.
Given the growing number of conflicts
throughout world, especially in Africa, we fear that
terrorist groups and other combatants could use
poorly executed disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes to their advantage so as to
draw demobilized troops into their ranks, which is a
possibility that could also aggravate the problem of
porous borders. That is why in his 2006 report, entitled
“Uniting against terrorism: recommendations for a
global counter-terrorism strategy”, the SecretaryGeneral warned,
“In order to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons in conflict zones, it is critical to establish
more stringent control over small arms and
ammunition and to put in place more effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes” (A/60/825, para. 46).
That speaks to the scale of the challenge to be overcome,
which demands that the international community and,
in particular the Security Council, take a holistic and
20/23

02/08/2017

integrated approach to ensuring consistency in the
collective action of the Organization.
With the adoption of increasingly complex
resolutions,
which
are
therefore
becoming
increasingly difficult to implement, we will never be
able to emphasize enough the importance of better
coordinating and pooling the work of all the components
of the international community. In that regard, the
establishment of the new Office of Counter-Terrorism is
particularly important, with its five primary functions,
including steering actions carried out through the
various anti-terrorism mandates delivered by the
General Assembly and reinforcing the coordination and
consistency of the activities of the 38 United Nations
bodies and external entities that constitute the special
team to combat terrorism, which is responsible for
the balanced implementation of the four pillars of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
In conclusion, the Senegalese delegation would
like to draw members’ attention to the importance of
constructively disseminating and making accessible
what is required in the fight against terrorism through
the holding of seminars and regional workshops that
provide information and training for the benefit of
Member States, in particular the most disadvantaged
Member States, namely, a manual of best practices on
support and guidance for victims of terrorism. The
series of regional meetings that the important Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), currently chaired most ably by Bolivia,
has continued to hold worldwide is also focused on such
awareness-raising and training.
To conclude, my delegation would like, once again,
to state that further efforts are necessary to finalize the
drawing up and adoption of an international convention
on counter-terrorism. The draft of that convention has
been negotiated for decades within the United Nations,
and its adoption is due.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, let me express my congratulations to Egypt for
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of August. At the same time, we would like to thank
the Chinese delegation for its excellent stewardship of
the Council during the month of July. We also would
like to extend our welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzya.
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

We appreciate the briefings delivered by today’s
distinguished briefers. We also thank the delegation
of Egypt for the negotiation of the text of resolution
2370 (2017), which we adopted today. The resolution
is of great relevance, because of the serious threat
to international peace and security posed by the
acquisition and use of weapons by terrorist groups and
their links to transnational crime.
We understand that it is the primary responsibility
of States to adopt national standards aimed at
strengthening controls over the possession and use of
arms, as well as at controlling their export, import and
transit, so as to prevent and combat illicit trafficking.
We also consider that there is a shared responsibility on
the part of all States to deal with such a global problem,
whose resolution necessitates that we all cooperate.
The development of national, bilateral, regional and
international strategies forms an essential element in
such necessary collective work. However, there is also
a differentiated responsibility of States, since the very
root of the problem lies in the production of and trade
in arms. Consequently, the first responsibility lies with
the States that carry out such activities. In that regard,
I think it is worth remembering what the Uruguayan
Foreign Minister, Rodolfo Nin Novoa, expressed on
25 May in his address to the Council, which recalled that
the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
had pointed out that the five permanent members of the
Security Council provided 75 per cent of the volume of
total arms exports from 2011 to 2015 (see S/PV.7951).
As we have said on other occasions, Uruguay is a
country committed to the fight against terrorism and
disarmament. Uruguay is a party to 16 international
instruments against terrorism and has signed and
ratified existing regional and international treaties on
disarmament and non-proliferation. At the national
level, Uruguay has a law on the possession and
marketing of and trafficking in firearms, ammunition,
explosives and other related materials. Among other
things, that law refers to the international trafficking in
such weapons. It criminalizes trade in those arms from
or through Uruguay’s national territory to any other
State without obtaining the prior authorization of all
the States concerned.
At the sub-regional level, within the Common
Southern Market (MERCOSUR), there are legal
instruments in that domain, as well as a working
group on firearms. The members of MERCOSUR and

S/PV. 8017

associated States participate in that group. Its objectives
include establishing convergent regional security
policies in order to facilitate information exchange
and cooperation.
At the regional level, the Organization of
American States has also adopted key documents,
such as the Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials,
the Bogota Declaration and the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean.
At the international level, Uruguay is a party to
the Arms Trade Treaty, which is currently the main
instrument for the international regulation of the arms
trade. For the sake of universalization, all States should
accede to the Treaty. We also recognize the importance
of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.
The problem of illicit trafficking in arms and their
acquisition by terrorist groups and members of organized
crime requires collective approaches and efforts. To
that end, international cooperation and the provision
of assistance should be strengthened, with special
emphasis on building national capacities. Without those
elements, the complex links between illicit trafficking
in arms, terrorists and other transnational criminals
can hardly be dismantled. It is necessary to increase
cooperation among States in order to identify the routes
and mechanisms of the circulation of arms, as well as
to strengthen border controls. Uruguay reaffirms its
commitment and cooperation in that task.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): First of all, I would like
to congratulate the Egyptian delegation for assuming
the presidency of the Council for the month of August.
We would also like to thank China for its excellent
stewardship of the Council throughout July. We also
would like to extend our welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation, Ambassador
Vassily Nebenzya. Japan looks forward to working
with him.
We are witnessing an ever larger number of terrorist
attacks around the world. Access to weapons increases
the number of civilian casualties. Resolution 2370
(2017), which we have adopted today, calls upon Member
States to enhance measures to prevent terrorists from
acquiring weapons. As the resolution prescribes, it is

17-2408321/23

S/PV.8017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

important not only to strengthen our own capabilities,
but also to support efforts in other countries.
Allow me to provide a few examples that may be
useful. Japan has been supporting capacity-building in
Asia, as well as in the Middle East and Africa. We are
working with the World Customs Organization (WCO),
the International Criminal Police Organization,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
other organizations to help South and South-East
Asia enhance their ability to counter improvised
explosive devices (IEDs), as well as small arms and
light weapons. In March, Japan provided $3.5 million
to the WCO to help customs authorities in South and
South-East Asia, as well as the Pacific Islands. Those
funds will help them, at their land and sea borders,
strengthen their investigative capabilities against the
illicit trafficking in precursors to IEDs. We have also
provided $1.5 million to prevent the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons through air cargo and
postal services. In relation to today’s resolution, we
emphasize that the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT), which
seeks to counter the illicit trade in conventional arms,
provides an effective means of preventing terrorists from
acquiring weapons. Japan was one of the co-authors of
the resolution that led to the establishment of the ATT
(General Assembly resolution 67/234B). We believe
strongly in its implementation and universalization.
While the ATT was not incorporated in today’s Council
resolution, we call upon countries who have not yet
done so, particularly major arms-trade States, to ratify
the ATT as soon as possible.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, allow me to extend our welcome to the new
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
Ambassador Vassily Nebenzya. We would also like
to thank China for the remarkable way in which it
conducted itself during its presidency of the Council in
July. I would also like to thank Egypt for assuming the
presidency for the month of August. We thank Egypt
for having organized today’s important meeting and
for having taken the initiative to put forth resolution
2370 (2017), which tries to tackle the problem of
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons. Lastly,
I would also like to thank the representatives of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, INTERPOL and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their
informative briefings.
22/23

02/08/2017

Current events constantly remind us of the
urgency and severity of the problem of the illicit arms
trade, which, besides constituting a serious threat to
international peace and security, fuels terrorist groups
and provides them with the means to act that they need.
France has had to confront it directly in the form of the
terrorist attacks that have been occurred on its territory
in the past few years, several of which were committed
with small arms obtained through illicit transnational
trade, and many other countries have been similarly
affected. Beyond that, we are dealing with threats to the
stability and development of many entire regions — the
Sahel and the Middle East, to mention only two — as
well as the viability of national reconciliation processes
and people’s full exercise of their human rights.
There are two types of such materials that have
turned out to be particularly sensitive because they are
well suited to the commission of terrorist acts — small
arms and light weapons and improvised explosive
devices (IEDs). Resolution 2370 (2017), which we have
just adopted unanimously, emphasizes them. France
is taking special action regarding these weapons at
various levels. The first is in the framework of the
United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, whose third
Review Conference, which France will chair, will be
held in New York in 2018. The Programme of Action
is an appropriate framework for guiding our collective
action that has already resulted in significant progress
whereby many States have improved their smallarms legislation, assistance programmes have been
established and regional organizations are taking
better account of the problem. Despite those advances,
however, many challenges remain. The Review
Conference will provide an essential opportunity
for making concrete progress in the fight against the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, including
by ramping up the mobilization of all stakeholders in
the security, arms control and development sectors,
and by exploiting all the potential synergies between
existing instruments.
We are also working within the framework of
the Arms Trade Treaty to improve regulation of the
legitimate arms trade, and also through the Palermo
Convention — under which France has begun its
process of acceding to the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition — as well as
17-24083

02/08/2017

Threats to international peace and security caused by terrorist acts

through the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the European Union and bilateral cooperation.
With regard to IEDs in particular, France has also been
very active in the General Assembly and in the context
of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons,
as well as through bilateral cooperation.
It is in the interests of all States Members of the
United Nations to promote comprehensive mobilization
on the political and administrative fronts, and of all
civil-society stakeholders, with a view to combating
the spread of small arms and light weapons in as many
States as possible. That commitment is essential if we
are to do as much as we can to prevent terrorist groups
and individuals from acquiring the means for violent
action. We should work on a number of different kinds
of action on trafficking, both upstream of it — in order
to prevent the distribution of weapons in the first
place — and downstream, so as to interrupt existing
flows. Such measures include developing adequate
national legislation, reducing illicit stocks in circulation
through collection and destruction campaigns,
improving the security and physical management of

S/PV. 8017

arms and ammunition stocks and strengthening police
and customs controls. Importantly, resolution 2370
(2017) encourages States to redouble their efforts in
this area. At the international level, it is crucial to
ensure that countries accede to and ratify the principal
related international instruments, and France urges all
countries to accede to the Arms Trade Treaty as soon
as possible.
I would like to conclude, Mr. President, by thanking
you once again for giving us the opportunity to have this
enriching and complex exchange on an issue that is a
big priority for my country. France will continue to play
its full part in the international community’s efforts to
prevent terrorists from acquiring their means of attack.
That means, among other things, that we must continue
to be absolutely determined in the fight against every
kind of traffic that is fueling terrorist groups, whether
in weapons, narcotics or human beings.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

17-2408323/23
