IV.

----

2. Decides to expand the membership of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space from fortyeight to a maximum of fifty-three;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
after consultation with the regional groups, to appoint
no more than five new members of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.

50th plenary meeting
3 November 1980
*

* *
The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the
Secretary-General" that, in accordance with section //, paragraph 3, of
the above resolution, he had named SPAIN, the SYRIAN ARAD REPUBLIC,
the UPPER VOL TA, URUGUAY and V1ET NAM as additional members of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, and that he hada/so
appointed GREECE as a member of the Committee to fil/ the vacancy
caused by the withdrawal ofTuRKEY.
As a result ofthe above appointments, the Committee is composed of
the following Member States: ALBANIA, ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA,
AUSTRIA, 8ELGIUM, BENIN, 8RAZIL, BULGARIA, CANADA, CHAD,
CHILE, CHINA, COLOMBIA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, ECUADOR, EGYPT,
FRANCE, ÜERMAN ÜEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GERMANY, FEDERAL
REPUBLIC OF, ÜREECE, HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONESIA, IRAN, )RAQ,
ITALY, JAPAN, KENYA, LEBANON, MEXICO, MONGOLIA, MüROCCO,
NETHERLANDS, NIGER, NIGERIA, PAKISTAN, PHILIPPINES, POLAND,
ROMANIA, SIERRA LEONE, SPAIN, SUDAN, SWEDEN, SYRIAN ARAD
REPUBLIC, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, UNITED KINGDOM
OF GREAT 8RITAIN AND NORTHERN IREoLAND, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
CAMEROON, UNITED STATESOF AMERICA, ÜPPER VOLTA, URUGUAY,
VENEZUELA, VIETNAM and YUGOSLAVIA.

35/121.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peace-keeping operations in all their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, 2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249 (S-V) of
23 May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967, 2451
(XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2670 (XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 2965
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, 3091 (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3239 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974, 3457
(XXX) of 10 December 1975, 31/105 of 15 December
1976, 32/106 of 15 December 1977, 33/114 of 18 December 1978 and 34/53 of 23 November 1979,
Reafjirming once again the fundamental importance
of the maintenance of international peace and security
by the United Nations as set out in the Charter of the
United Nations,
Having examined the report of the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations, 17
Noting with regret the difficulties being experienced by
the Special Committee in carrying out its mandate,
Emphasizing again that only by a greater demonstration of political will and conciliation can progress be
achieved,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations;
2. Repeats its invitations to Member States to report
and to provide information on experience gained in
peace-keeping operations;
1
•
11

A/35/791.
A/35/532.

89

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee
--

3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a further compilation of the replies submitted in accordance
with paragraph 2 above;
4. Urges again the Special Committee, in accordance
with its mandate, to renew its efforts to work towards
the completion of agreed guidelines which will govern
the conduct of peace-keeping operations of the United
Nations in accordance with the Charter of the United
N ations and to devote further attention to specific questions related to the practical implementation of peacekeeping operations;
5. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations
in ali their aspects".

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

35/ 122.

Report of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of
the Population of the Occupied Territories
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3092 A (XXVIII) of 7 December 1973, 3240 8 (XXIX) of 29 N ovember 1974,
3525 8 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, 31/106 8 of 16 December 1976, 32/91 A of 13 December 1977, 33/113 A
of 18 December 1978 and 34/90 8 of 12 December 1979,
Considering that the promotion of respect for the
obligations arising from the Charter of the United
Nations and other instruments and rules of international law is among the basic purposes and principies of
the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 18
Noting that Israel and those Arab States whose
territories have been occupied by Israel since June 1967
are parties to that Convention,
Taking into account that States parties to that Convention undertake, in accordance with article I thereof,
not only to respect but also to ensure respect for the
Convention in ali circumstances,
l. Reafjirms that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, is applicable to Palestinian and other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including
Jerusalem;

2. Strongly deplores the failure of Israel to acknowledge the applicability of that Convention to the territories it has occupied since 1967:
3. Ca/Is again upon Israel to acknowledge and to
comply with the provisions of that Convention in
Palestinian and other Arab territories it has occupied
since 1967, including Jerusalem;
4. Urges once more ali States parties to that Convention to exert ali efforts in order to ensure respect for
and compliance with its provisions in Palestinian and
'" United Nations, Treatr Series, vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

90

other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/5 of 28 October 1977,
33/113 B of 18 December 1978 and 34/90 C of 12 December 1979,

Expressing grave anxiety and concern at the present serious situation in the occupied Arab territories as a
result of the continued Israelí occupation and the measures and actions taken by the Government of Israel, as
the occupying Power, and designed to change the legal
status, geographical nature and demographic composition of those territories,
Considering that the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection ofCivilian Persons in Time ofWar, of 12
August 1949, 18 is applicable to ali the Arab territories
occupied since 5 June 1967,
1. Determines that ali such measures and actions
taken by Israel in the Palestinian and other Arab
territories occupied since 1967 have no legal validity and
constitute a serious obstruction of efforts aimed at
achieving a just and lasting peace in the Middle East:
2. Strongly deplores the persistence of Israel in
carrying out such measures, in particular the establishment of settlements in the Palestinian and other occupied Arab territories;
3. Ca/Is again upon Israel to comply strictly with its
international obligations in accordance with the principies of international law and the provisions of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949:
4. Calls once more upon the Government of Israel, as
the occupying Power, to desist forthwith from taking
any action which would result in changing the legal
status, geographical nature or demographic composition of the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem;
5. Urges ali States parties to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War to respect and to exert ali efforts in order
to ensure respect for and compliance with its provisions
in ali the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including Jerusalem.

the Commission on Human Rights and other United
Nations organs concerned and by the specialized agencies,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
to lnvestigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human
Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories 2º
which contains, inter afia, public statements made by
leaders of the Government of Israel,
1. Commends the Special Committee to Investigate
Israelí Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories for its efforts in performing the task assigned to it by the General Assembly
and for its thoroughness and impartiality;
2. Deplores the continued refusal by Israel to allow
the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;

3. Ca/Is again upon Israel to allow the Special Committee access to the occupied territories;
4. Deplores the continued and persistent violation
by Israel of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 A ugust
1949, and other applicable international instruments,
and condemns in particular those violations which that
Convention designates as "grave breaches" thereof;

5.

Condemns the following Israelí policies and prac-

tices:

The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter

(a) Annexation of parts of the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem:
(b) Establishment of new Israelí settlements and expansion of the existing settlements on prívate and publíe Arab lands, and transfer of an alíen population thereto:
(e) Evacuation, deportation, expulsion, displacement and transfer of Arab inhabitants of the occupied
territories and denial of their right to return;
(d) Confiscation and expropriation of prívate and
public Arab property in the occupied territories and ali
other transactions for the acquisition of land involving
the Israelí authorities, institutions or nationals on the
one hand and the inhabitants or institutions of the occupied territories on the other;
(e) Destruction and demolition of Arab houses;
(j) Mass arrests, administrative detention and illtreatment of the Arab population;
(g) Jll-treatment and torture of persons under detention:
(h) Pillaging of archaeological and cultural property;
(i) lnterference with religious freedoms and practices as well as family rights and customs;
U) Illegal exploitation of the natural wealth, resources and population of the occupied territories;

of the United Nations as well as the principies and provisions of the U ni versal Declaration of Human Rights, 14
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 18 as well as of other
relevant conventions and regulations,
Reca/ling ali its resolutions on the subject, in particular
resolutions 32/91 B an~ C of 13 December 1977, 33/113 C
of 18 December 1978 and 34 /90 A of 12 December
1979, as well as those adopted by the Security CounciL

6. Reaffirms that ali measures taken by Israel to
change the physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure or status of the occupied territories, or any part thereof, including Jerusalem, are
null and void, and that lsrael's policy of settling parts of
its population and new immigrants in the occupied territories constitutes a flagrant violation of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time or War and of relevant United Nations
resolutions:

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

e

" Resolution 217 A (111 ).

"' See ;\ l'i/42'-

IV.

91

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

7. Demands that Israel desist forthwith from the
policies and practices referred to in paragraphs 5 and 6
above;
8. Reiterates its ca/1 upon ali States, in particular
those States parties to the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, in
accordance with article 1 of that Convention, and upon
international organizations and the specialized agencies
not to recognize any changes carried out by Israel in the
occupied territories and to avoid actions, including
those in the field of aid, which might be used by Israel in
its pursuit of the policies of annexation and colonization or any of the other policies and practices referred to
in the present resolution;
9. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of the Israelí occupation, to continue
to investigate Israeli policies and practices in the Arab
territories occupied by Israel since 1967, to consult, as
appropriate, with the International Committee of the
Red Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of the
welfare and human rights of the population of the occupied territories and to report to the Secretary-General
as soon as possible and whenever the need arises
thereafter;
JO. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
investigate the treatment of civilians in detention in the
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967;
11. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To provide ali necessary facilities to the Special
Committee, including those required for its visits to the
occupied territories, with a view to investigating the
Israelí policies and practices referred to in the present
resolution;
(b) To continue to make available additional staff as
may be necessary to assist the Special Committee in the
performance of its tasks;
(e) To ensure the widest circulation of the reports of
the Special Committee, and of information regarding its
actívitíes and findíngs, by ali means available through
the Department of Publíc Information of the Secretariat and, where necessary, to reprint those reports of
the Special Commíttee which are no longer avaílable;
(d) To report to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session on the tasks entrusted to him in the present
paragraph;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
íts thirty-sixth sessíon the item entitled "Report of the
Specíal Commíttee to Investigate Israeli Practíces Affecting the Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territoríes".

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
D

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing Security Council resolutions 468 ( 1980) of
8 May 1980 and 469 ( 1980) of 20 May 1980,
Deep/y concerned at the expulsíon by the Israelí
mílitary occupatíon authorities of the Mayors of
Hebron and Halhul and of the Sharia Judge of Hebron,
Grave/y concerned at the imprisonment by the Israelí
military occupation authorities of the Mayors of
Hebron and Halhul,
Recalling the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War of 12 A ugust

1949, 1K in particular article 1 and the first paragraph of
article 49, which read as follows:

"Article 1
"The Hígh Contracting Parties undertake to
respect and to ensure respect for the present Convention in ali circumstances."

"Article 49
"Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as
deportatíons of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the occupying Power or to
that of any other country. occupied or not, are prohibited, regardless of their motive .... ",

Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protectíon of Civilían Persons in
Time of War to Palestinian and other Arab terrítories
occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
1. Ca/Is upon the Government of Israel, as the occupying Power, to rescind the illegal measures taken by
the Israelí military occupation authorities in expelling
and imprisoning the Mayors of Hebron and Halhul and
in expelling the Sharia Judge of Hebron and to facilitate the immediate return of the expelled Palestinian
leaders so that they can resume the functions for which
they were elected and appointed;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly as soon as possible on the implementation of the present resolution.
92nd p/enary meeting
11 December 1980
E

The General Assembly,
Grave/y concerned at reports indicating the intention
of the Israeli authorities to enact legislation embodying
changes in the character and status of the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan Heights,
Deeply concerned that the Arab territories occupied
since 1967 have been under continued illegal Israeli occupation,
Recal/ing its previous resolutions, in particular resolutions 3414 (XXX) of 5 December 1975, 31/61 of9 December 1976, 32/20 of 25 November 1977, 33/28 and
33 /29 of 7 December 1978 and 34 /70 of 6 December
1979, in which it, inter afia, called upon Israel to put an
end to its illegal occupation of the Arab territories and
to withdraw from ali those territories,
Reafjirming that the acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible under the Charter of the United Nations
and that ali territories thus occupied by Israel must be
returned,
Reca//ing the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection ofCivilian Persons in Time of War of 1949, 18
1. Condemns the persistence of Israel in changing the
physical character, demographic composition, institutional structure and legal status of the Syrian Arab
Golan Heights;
2. Strong/y condemns the refusal by Israel, the occupying Power, to comply with relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council;
3. Determines that ali legislative and administrative
measures and actions which might be taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, that purport to alter the character
and legal status of the Syrian Arah Golan Heights are

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

92

null and void, constitute a flagrant violation of international law and the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War and have
no legal effect;
4. Ca/Is upon Member States not to recognize such
legislative and administrative measures and actions;
5. Ca/Is upon Israel, the occupying Power, to desist
from enacting such legislation.

92nd p/enary meeting
11 December 1980
F

The General Assemb/y,
Bearing in mind the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949, 18
Recalling Security Council resolutions 468 ( 1980) of
8 May 1980 and 469 ( 1980) of 20 May 1980,
Deeply shocked by the most recent atrocities committed by Israel, the occupying Power, against educational institutions in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Taking cognizance of the recent repeated expulsion by
Israel, the occupying Power, of the Mayors of Hebron
and Halhul,
Condemning the rejection of Israel to accept and carry
out the above-mentioned decisions of the Security
Council,
l. Reafjirms the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949, to the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied by Israel, including
Jerusalem;
2. Condemns lsraeli policies and practices against
Palestinian students and faculty in schools, universities
and other educational institutions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, especially the policy of opening
tire on defenceless students, causing many casualties;
3. Condemns the systematic Israeli campaign of
repression against universities in the occupied Palestinian territories, restricting and impeding academic
activities of Palestinian universities by subjecting
selection of courses, textbooks and educational programmes, admission of students and appointment of
faculty members to the control and supervision of the
military occupation authorities, in clear contravention
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War;
4. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and rescind ali actions and measures
agalnst ali educational institutions and ensure the
freedom of these institutions;
5. Requests the Security Council to convene urgently
in order to take the necessary measures, in accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, to ensure that the Government of Israel, the
occupying Power, rescinds the illegal measures taken
against the Palestinian mayors and the Sharia Judge
Tamimi, and to facilitate their immediate return so that
they can resume the functions for which they were
elected.
92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

35 / 123.

Question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses. Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da
India

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled "Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India", together with the report of the
Secretary-General on the subject, 21
Recal/ing its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, in rarticular the provisions concerning the preservation o the
national unity and the territorial integrity of a country
at the time of its attainment of independence,
Recalling further the Declaration on Principies of lnternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, contained in its resolution 2625
(XXV) of 24 October ·l 970, and also the relevant provisions of the Charter concerning the peaceful settlement
of disputes,
Bearing in mind the various decisions taken by the
Organization of African Unity and by the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries on the question of the Malagasy
islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas
da India,
Noting with regret that the negotiations envisaged in
its resolution 34/91 of 12 December 1979 have not been
initiated,
Taking into account the resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity.
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of the Malagasy islands of Glorieuses,
Juan de Nova, Europa and Bassas da India;
2.

Takes note also of resolution CM /Res.784

(XXXV) on the same question, adopted by the Council

of Ministers of the Organization of A frican Unity at its
thirty-fifth ordinary session, held at Freetown from 18
to 28 June 1980; 22
3. Reaffirms its resolution 34/91 of 12 December
1979;
4. Invites the Government of France to initiate with
the Government of Madagascar, as a matter of urgency, the negotiations provided for in resolution 34 /91,
with a view to settling the question in accordance with
the purposes and principies of the Charter of the United
Nations;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the
implementation of the present resolution and to report
t~ereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth sess10n;
6. Decides to in elude in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session the item entitled "Question of the
Malagasy islands of Glorieuses, Juan de Nova, Europa
and Bassas da India".

92nd plenary meeting
11 December J980
--

_,, A/35/480.
-'' See A/J5/46J and Corr. l. annex l.
