316th

United Nations

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEMBLY

Saturday, 2 December 1950, at 3 p.m.

FIFTH SESSION
Flushing Meadow, New York

Official Records'
CONTENTS

Page

Fonner Italian .colonies: (d) report of the United Nations Commission for
Eritrea and (e) report of the Interim Committee of the General Assembly
on the report of the United Nations Commission for Eritrea: repo~ of
th~ Ad Hoc ~olitical Committee (A/1561 and Add.1) and the Fifth Corn... .,~
mlttee (A/1574) (concluded)
53~
Postponement of the consideration of the question of the admission of new
Members to the United Nations •••...••.•.........••••••••••.••••. 547
Report of the Trusteeship Council: report of the Fourth Committee (A/1546) 547
Former Italian colonies: (c) draft trusteeship agreement for the Territory of
Somaliland under Italian administration: reports of the Fourth Committee
(A/1550) and the Fifth Committee (A/1573) ........•
550
0000

••

Place of meeting of the sixth session of the General Assembly .••.••

00

0

••

0

•••

••••••

,

552

President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZA:M; (Iran).

F()rmer Italian colonies: (d) report of the United
Nations Commission for Eritrea and (e) report
of the Interim Committee of the General Assembly on the report of the United Nations Commission for Eritrea: reports of the Ad Hoc
Political Committee (AjI561 and Add.I) and
the Fifth Committee (AjI574) (concluded)
[Agenda item 21]
1. The PRESIDENT (translated jrrom French): We
shall continue to hear the representatives who wish to
explain their votes on the Eritrean question.
2. Mr. ICHASO (Cuba) (franslated from Spanish):
I should like very briefly to explain why the Cuban
delegation very firmly maintains the position that it
took in the Ad Hoc Political Committee on the question
of Eritrea.
3. My delegation considers that in such delicate and
complex problems as those affecting a people's future,
the resolutions which are adopted should not be peremptory in character but should take the form of recommendations.
4. We cannot conceive of federation between an independent State and a non...independent State. We understand by an agreement of federation an instrument in
which each party is fully conscious of its feelings, its

ideas and its convictions. We are ardent defenders of
the principle of the self-determination of peoples..We
also consider that the United Nations should assist all
colonial territories to obtain their independence sooner
or later, as circumstances may require.
S. The draft resoluti"napproved by . the Ad Hoc
Political Committee, which provides for federation,
closes all roads to Eritrean inaependence,. whereas the
proposal for independence presented by the delegation
of Pakistan, which we supported, does not close the
road to federation, but simply 16:i.ves that matter to the
free determination of the Eritrean people.
6. A particular political systein must not be imposed
on a people, even a former colonial people. They must
be given the opportunity to choose freely, by a vote,
the system they consider most appropriate to their traditions,ideology, requirements and interests.
7. I feel that to give independence to Libya and Somaliland and not to give the same treatment.to Eritrea
constitutes ·an act of discrimil1ation in the solution of
the problem of the former Italian colonies. We are not
convinced t~y the argwn"ent th,M Eritrea is econo~cally
under-developed.. If Erltrea 1S not prepared for lnde.pendence, the logical procedure Vlould be for the United
Nations to prepare it for indepttlldence by means of the
Trusteeship System provided for in the Charter, and

539

General Auembly-Fifth Seseion-Plenal'y Meetlnp

._------_.of

-------------------:..._--------.-;:.---~---,

we should not dare to attempt federation, which is the

most advanced form of political structure and therefora

the one least suitable for ~(n e\:onomically unde.rdeveloped people.
8. Notwithstanding the fact that we favour ErJ.trean
independence, w.e shall vote again~.t the draft resolutions of the Soviet Union lAll570] and ~?oland
[A/1564 ana Corr.l] because they go far beyond our
goal and are rather political, propagandist and demagogic in character. We f~~el that the wise'3t P!'QDOSal was
that submitted by the Pa\kistan delegation; that is why
we voted for it in the Committee.
9. Our desire is to promote conditions conducive to
freedom in north-east Africa, not to spread chaos. Vie
hope that we are mistaken in this case. and that the
plan for federation will work out well and will bring
prosperity to the people of Eritrea and peace to that
part of the world. But we do not wish to assume responsibility for the consequences of the fact that we are
closing the road to independence for a country where
a great number of the inhabitants have that legitimate
aspiration.
10. Mr. VAVRICKA (Czechoslovakia) (wanslatcd
from. French) : The Czechoslovak delegation's approach
to the question of the future of Eritrea and its people
is llased on the view that all peoples have a right to
freedom and independence. To deprive the people of
Eritrea of that right is not only a flagrant violation of
the Charter but discrimination against a country struggling for its freedom.
11. The question of Eritrean independence is, in
reality, only part of a much larger problem. The process
of liquidating the colonial system is continuing suc(~ssfully throughout the world and finds expression in
file struggle for national liberation. Oppressed peoples
are rebelling against colonial e..~ploitation and insistently demanding freedom and independence, which are
the fundamental conditions for econow..ic development
and the achievement of a higher standard of living. The
Czechoslovak delegation believes that one of the principal duties of the United Nations is to help oppressed
peoples to obtain the right to se1f-determination, as well
as freedom and independence.
12.. The draft resolution approved by the ~d Hoc
Political Committee is contrary to the SI )irit and letter
of the Charter, and presents a false and tu"1;ust solution.
It deprives the people of Eritrea of the fundamental and
inalienable right freely to decide their own future. It
imposes on them a solution which is not in accordance
with the national interests of Eritrea and which is
opposed by the majority of the population.
. 13. The General Assembly has no right to deny the
people of Eritrea the independence for which so many
Eritrean fighters for freedom ha"le risked their lives.
The federation with Ethiopia proposed in the draft resolution is a violatiNl of the Charter, wh1ch admits of no
other solutions thqn independence 01· trusteeship in
territories which do not yet enjoy self-govCl"r'u-nent. But
is it really federation that ha.c; been proposed as a solution in the case of Eritrea? Have two sovereign States
adopted this form of government 'freely and without
having been subjected to pressure?
14. The federal form of government which would thus
be imposed on Eritrea is not based on the free: spon-

taneous and democratic expression
the will of t'fD
sovereigt! States. It is merely a mask for the annexati~n
of little Eritrea by a larger and more populous State.
15. Paragraph 5 of the draft resolution gives a clear
indication of the way the interests of the people of
Eritrea will be protected. It says this, for instance:
"The citizens of Eritrea shall participate in the
executhl'e and judicial branches, and shall be represented in the legislative branch of the federal government in accordance with law and in the proportion
that the population pf Eritrea bears to the population
of the feficration."
16. What influence can the representaHves of the
people of Eritrea - a country of only one million inb.abltants - bave in legisla.tive bodies where the representatives of Ethiopia will speak for 16 million in..
habitants? How will the Eritrean people's right to free
developmehtbe . saf~guarded in such a federation and
undor such cO:'1ditions?
17. The gr,ant of independence to Eritrea is the onl)'
solution of tt~~ problem which is in confonnity with the
letter and s~idt. · of the Charter. That is why my delegation wlU'n~y supports the USSR draft resolution
[A/1570], which proposes that Eritrea should be
granted immediate independence, that the British occupation troops shoould be withdrawn within three months,
and that Ethiopia should be guaranteed access to the
sea, a measure required by its economic interests. This
draft is in accordance with the national interests of the
people of Eritrea, and with the principles of the Charter
which guarantee the right of all peoples to selfdetermination.
18. For substantially the same reasons, my delegation
will vote for the Polish draft resolution [A/1564 and
Corr.1] if the draft resolution submitted by the Soviet
Union is not adopted.
19. The Czechoslovak delegation will never be a party
to intrigues against the freedom of peoples. The Czechoslovak people have experienced occupation by nazi
Germany and can well appreciate what it means to lose
freedom and national independence. They therefore sup.
port the legitimate struggle of any nation for its freedom and independence.
20. The draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly by the Ad Hoc Political Committee would
deprive the ~~eople of Eritrea of their freedom. ~ontrary
to the fundamental purposes of the Charter, It would
Jeny the people of Eritrea the right to self-determination and impose on them a federation with Ethiopia
which the great majo:"it..cr oppose. Instead of'maintainIng
peace in that nart of t!he world, the resolution would
foster civil war and discord. Instead of assisting an
oppressed and exploited p'eople to achieve freedom and
independence, it would attempt to cover up the annexa"
tion of a small State by a larger State.
21. The Czechoslovak delegation categorically refuses
to be a 'party to such a flagrant injustice to the people
of Eritrea, an injustice committed for the sake of
colonial Powers and other interested States. For the
reasons I have stated, my delegation will vote for the
USSR draft resolution.
22. Mr. GARCIA BAUER (Guatemala) (translated
from Spanish): My country took part in the work of

.·r

316th Meeting-2 December 1950

the United Nations CommIssion for Erltrea~ which
examined the col1dit~ons prevailing in that territory on
the spot. After a careful study of conditions in the areaJ
and after visiting the neighbouring countries, including
Ethiopia and Egypt, the Commission came to the COn"
elusion that Eritrea was capable of Qecoming an independent State within a given time.
23. Accordingly, the Guatemalan delegation, together
with the Pakistan delegation, submitt!od a draft resolution, the te."(t of which accompanies the report of the
United Nations Commission for Eritrea, providing that
Eritrea should become independent at the end of a tenyear period of trusteeship.
24. Various political and economic considerations led
us to this conclusion.. As we pointed out during the
debates in the United Nations Commission for Etitrea,
in the Interim Committee,l and in the Ad H Of: Political
Commi~ee! we are convinced that the majority of the
population of Eritrea favour independence. Moreover
we submitted statistics, and our own experience, as well
as the results of our investigations into the economic
conditions of the territory, prove that Eritrea could be..
come economically independent in a relatively short
time.
25. In the circumstances, therefore, the Guatemalan
delegation wishes to endorse the idea of independence
for Eritrea within a specified time. We cannot, however, support immediate independence for the territory because we are convinced that immediate in..
dependence would result in chaos. For that reason, we
shall vote against the USSR draft resolution, as we did
in the Ad Hoc Political Committee. We shall also vote
against the part of the Soviet Union draft relating to
the cession of some Eritrean territory to Ethiopia, be..
cause we are convinced that access to the sea through
the port of Assab would not satisfy the requirements of
Ethiopia and that the cession of that part of the ter..
ritory would be contrary to the wishes of the popula..
tion concerned.
26. In view of these considerations, we shall also
vote against the Polish draft resolution, which embodies the same stipulations as the USSR draft resolu..
tion. However, we shall support the first paragraph
of the Polish draft, whicli envisages the grant of in..
dependence to Eritrea at the end of three years. We
feel that such a provision can be carried onto
27. We cannot support the proposal for' a so-called
federation approved by the Ad Hoc Political Committee. We advanced sufficient reasons, in that Committee, to show that such federation would not be a
true federation, and that, in view of the serious ine..
quality between Erltrea and Ethiopia, it would, in
practice, be impossible to establish a federation as
that term is understood in law.
28. After the Ad Hoc Political Committee had ap~
proved this plan for so-called federation, we were ad..
vised of the position tak~n on the question by the
Eritrean Independence Bloc. The letter addressed by
the representative of the Independence Bloc to the
President of the General Assembly stated, among other ,
See documents AIAC.18/SR.39 to A/AC.18/SR.45 inclusive.
2 See Offic;al Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session,
Ad Hoc Political Committee, 37th to 40th and 48th to 56th
1

meetings inclusive.

541

things, that tne Independence Bloc felt it necessary
to reiterate that '(he Ad H DC Political Committee's
decision to approve the plan for federation was con...
trary to the wishes of the people, who were confident
of their maturity and their right to complete inde..
pendence.
29. During our travels in Eritrea, we were able to see
how important were the parties which fonn the Independence Bloc, and that experi -nce convinced us that
the great majority of the population oppose the idea
of federatiOh which the Ad Hoc Political Committee
~proved.
.
30. Nor can my delegation agree that this plan for so..
called federation recommended by the Ad Hac
Political Committee can. be considered a compromise
solution, or a well-balanced solution, as it has been
called; but it is not up to us to reply to that argument. Time will answer those who .make that assertion.
31. In accordance with the views I have just ex..
pressed, the delegation of Guatemala will vote against
the draft resolution submitted by the Ad H DC Political
Committee.
32. Mr. CASTRO (El Salvador) (translated from
Spanish) ; I wish to make a short statement, on behalf
of my delegation, simply to explain the vote it proposes
to cast.
33. The delegation of El Salvador has the greatest
friendship for the peoples of Eritrea and Ethiopia.
Ethiopia is a nation which has suffered the tragedy
of a long occupation, and its aspirations deserve our
respect. We have the greatest sympathy for the aspirations of Ethiopia, which has taken an active part in
the 'PJork of the United Nations.
34. The compromise solution submitted by the Ad
Hoc PoliH~1 Committee takes account of the question
of minorit!es,which is, of course, a matter of the great..
est importance in .settling this problem. El Salvador
apprecw.tes the efforts which have been made to solve
the prtJblems of established minorities in Eritrea.
35. All for its position On the draft resolution submitted hy the Ad H ()c Political Committee, the delegation of El Salvador wishes to say that the instructions
it has rec:eived from its government, which are based
on the uaditional policy of El Salvador, namely, respect
for the right of self..det~rmination of peoples, make it
impossible for it to vote in favour of that draft, which
predetermines the future political structure of Eritrea
and provides for a federation between Eritrea and
Ethiopia. It is clear .that it has been impossible to
consult the people of Eritrea in order to firid out their
wishes; it is true that a commission visited the country, but that is not the way to solve a problem affect..
ing the entire population. To determine whether the
people of Eritrea really wanted federation there would
have had to be a plebiscite, and a plebiscite was not
held. The delegation of El Salvador feels that the
opinion of the whole population of Eritrea has not
really been sought. Therefore, when a particular political structure is decided for Eritrea, be it federation
or confederation, monarchy or republic, we consider
that the. United Nations is attemp~ng to so~ve a prob..
lem which only the people of ,Entrea themselves can
properly solve.

542

Gen.eral Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenal'y Meetings

36. For that reason, we very much regret. that we
«:annot SUJ )port the draft resolution approved by the
Ad H QC Political Committee.
~~7. My delegation agrees with the draft resolutions
submitted by the Soviet Union and Poland only in so
far as they envisage political independence for Eritrea.
They go much further, however, and have other aspects
which we do not accept and are unable, therefore, to
support.
38.. ¥r. SKO~OBOGATY (Byelorussian Soviet
Soclabst Republic) (translated from R'l-essian): The
delegation of the Byelorussian SSR also considers it
necessary to explain its vote.
39. The discussion in the Ad Hoc Political Committee of the question of the fate of the former Italian
colony of Eritrea has revealed the existence of two
different points of view-two different trends-among
delegations. Some delegations take the view that Eritrea
shuuld be granted independence and its people given an
opportunity of deciding their own fate; others oppose
the grant of independence to Eritrea and are attempt..
ing to th1tUSt upon the Eritrea n people a form of
government which has nothing in common with that
people's wishes and desires.
40. The draft resolutions on the question of Eritrea
which. have been submitted for the General Assembly's
consideration also reflect those two points of view.
4.1. The ?raft resolution submitted by fourteen delegations, which was approved by the Ad Hoc Political
Committee and submitted for the General Assembly's
consideration, proposes that Eritrea should be federated
with Ethiopia; it thereby precludes the grant of independence to Eritrea and imposes on the Eritrean
people a particular policy favoured by certain Members of the United Nations. Such a decision on the
. fate of a country with a population of over a million
ca:nnot be r~garded :,-S just. Nor is. it in conformity
With the United Nations Charter wh1(~h recognizes the
right of all peoples to national independence and selfdetermination.
42.. Unless Eritr~a. is officially granted independence
an~ un1~ss the Entrean people are allowed to express
theIr WIll by free and democratic processes, a federa..
tion between Eritrea and Ethiopia cannot be regarded
as a voluntary association. If the United Nations is
prepared to envisage the possibility of such a solution
of the q!1est~on of the fate of ~ritrea, it must begin
by granting mdependence to ErItrea and by giving its
people an opportunity of choosing between federation
with E~hiopia and the creation of an independent, selfgovernmg State. That would be the only democratic
and equitable decision for the United Nations to take'
it . wouldenabl~ the Eritrean people to express thei;
wtll freely and Independently.
43. In proposing to Eritrea that it should enter into
a federation with Ethiopia, '(he draft resolution-even
in.that part of· the draft which deals with the condi..
~ons of such a fed~r~t~on-again disregards the prinC1~le of self-determmatton. The people of Eritrea are
bemg offered federal status, the terms of which have
been worked out without their participation. In other
words, certain conditions are being imposed upon them
regardless of whether those conditIons meet their
demands and wishes. It is obvious that such an apu

proach to a solution of the {ltoblem is entirely unjust
and contra~ to the basic prmciples of democracy and
s~lf-determination of peoples by which the United Na..
tions should be guided in solving such problems. If
the people of Eritrc-a wish to enter a federation, they
alone have the right to lay down the conditions of such a
federation; no one else can or should impose their will
upon them.
,
44. It is thus easy to see that this draft resolution
has nothing in common with the interests of the Eritrean people. It r;erves the purpose only of those who
fear that the est8.blishment of an independent Eritrea
will be a precedent for other colonial peoples and who
are pursumg specific economic, military and strategic
ends on the continent of Africa.
45. The people of Eritrea, who have lan~uished for
decades under the yoke of colonial oppreSSIon, expect
a very.different decision from the United Nations. They
hope for a just decision on their fate. They see that
many peoples as small as or even smaller than themselves
have national independence and statehood and decide
their own fate. The people of Eritrea naturally aspire
to do likewise. It is theduty of the United Nations to
help them to attain independence, since any decision
which is contrary to the interests of that people might
~reate ~ source of serious danger to peace and security
In Africa.
46. The delegation of the Byelort!ssian SSR con..
siders that the only just and equitable solution of the
Eritrean problem is to grant Eritrea national independence. It cannot therefore concur in the proposals
contained in the draft resolution submitted by the Ad
Hoc Politic;ll Committee and will vote against it.
47. A practical solution of the problem is provided
in the USSR draft resolution [A/1570] J which pro..
poses that Eritrea should be granted independencf.
That draft resolution proposes that Eritrea should be
granted independence immediately. Such a decision
would give great satisfaction to the people of Eritrea.
48. That draft resolution also proposes the withdrawal of the British occupation forces .within three
months of the day on which the decision is adopted by
the General Assembly. That condition is essential, since
Eritrea cannot be regarded as independent while for..
eign occupation forces are in the country.
49. The draft resolution of the Soviet Union also offer~ an equitable solution of the problem of Ethiopia's
c1auns for an outlet to the sea. It proposes that Ethiopia
should be ceded that part of the territory of Eritrea
which is necessary to secure Ethiopia's access to the sea
through the port of Assab.
50. Such a solution of the Eritrean problem would
preclude any possibility of internal disturbances in
Eritrea, since the people, having acquired their indep,endence, would have every opportunity of deciding
the.Ir own future as they themsefves ~aw fit. Any justifi- .
catIon or pretext for mterventIon In the domestic af..
fairs of Eritrea by other States would thus be removed
and the peac~ and security of the nations would thereby
be strengthened. The delegation of the Byelofussian
SSR will therefote vote with pleasure for the draft
resolution submitted by the USSR.
51. If ~hat draft resolution fails to obtain the necessary majority in the General Assembly, we shall sup-

•
~rt

316th Meeting-2 December 1950

the draft resolution of Poland [A/1564 an-a

Corr.1] under the terms of which the Eritrean peo-

ple would attain independence after a transitional
period. The Polish draft resolution proposes that
Eritrea should be granted independence after three
years, during which period Eritrea would be governed
by a council of six members, one from Ethiopia, two
from the Arab countries, and three from the population of Eritrea, two of whom would represent the indigenous population and one the European. If such
a period of prepat:ation for the attainment of independence by Eritrea is considered necessary, the draft resolution of Poland provides the most satisfactory form
of administration during that period. .The delegation
of the Byelorussian SSR will therefore also vote for
that draft resolution.
52. Mr. AMMOUN (Lebanon) (translated from
French): My delegation made a number of reservations when the draft resolution proposing the establishment of a federation between Ethiopia and Eritrea
was under consideration in the Committee. It nevertheless voted for the draft because the results of the inquiry conducted on the spot by the United Nations convinced it that the federal solution corresponded to the
wishes of the populations concerned, would best promote their interests and welfare and would consequently contribute to the realization of the principle
of self-determination of peoples.
53. Today, my delegation will vote for the draft
resolution, its conviction strengthened by the significant words spoken this morning [315th meeting] on
behalf of his government by Mr. Aklilou, in his capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and representative
of Ethiopia in the General Assembly. My delegation
associates itself with others in commending Ethiopia
for that statement. It regards that statement not only as
a Qolitical programme which gives us a complete assurance as to the spirit in which the resolution to ~e
adopted by General Assembly will be carried into effect,
but also as an act of faith by a statesman worthy of the
name and by a government which has given so many
proofs of its devotion to the cause of justice and freedom
-in other. words, an act of faith in the noblest principles and ideals of the United Nations Charter.
54. In voting for the draft resolution before us, I
greet the new federal State on behalf of my governmez;t, in the conviction (hat, as the representative of
Ethiopia said in this Assembly, it will follow the tradition of a country which has been illustrious since the
earliest t1mes.
55. Mr. Tsune-chi YU (China): My delegation will
vote in favour of the fourteen-Power draft resolution
which was approved by the Ad Hoc Political Committee and submitted by that Committee to the Assembly.
~6. The attitude of my government regarding the
whole question of the final disposal of the former
Italian colonies has been constantly and consistently
guided by the principles and provisions of the Charter
of the Ul1ited Nations, especially by the spirit of international harmonization, international conciliation, international co-operation and international justice, which
find expressions in the four paragraphs of Article 1. of
Chapter I of that doc:ument. In all the discussions tat

548

this and the last sessions of the General Assembly, my
delegation has repeatedly emphasized that independence, self-determination, the l"veHare of the inhabitants
and peace and security should be borne in mind and
accorded the fullest consideration by the repres<:ntatives
in the Assembly.
57. It behoves 11S to confess that the problem Qf
searching for an equitable solution to the problem of
Eritrea was difficult. We had to weigh "Various principles, and their application did not appear, at times, to be
very easy, either because of lack of definite Information or because of the apparently conflicting results ensuing from the strict and simultaneous application of
all those principles.
58. The Ad Hoc Political Committee, however,
should be congratulated on the logical proposal it has
made. Although the draft resolution before us is not
based purely and absolutely on the principles of in- .
dependence and self-determination-ehiefly because the
necessary facts and figures could not be ascertained
and agreed upon by the Chairman and the members
of the Commission for Eritrea-the very fundamental
principle of harmonization, that is, the principle that
the United Nations should serve as a centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations, is eloquently upheld. It is. true that the draft resolution is
the result of a compromise, as some have mentioned,
but it is not one of appeasement; it is the handiwork
of those who have striven to uphold the spirit of the
Charter rather than a result made possible by intimidation, threats or coercion from any party.
59. Furthermore, my delegation is happy to support
the draft resolution because it meets a particular consideration of which we should not lose sight. My
delegation maintains-fis it has always maintained-·
that any solution of this knotty problem of Eritrea
must be based not only on the observance of the
principles which I have just enumerated, but also on
their acceptance by the two major parties vitally concerned, nanlely, democratic Italy and Ethiopia-for
which my country has the deepest sympathy and with
which we maintain the best of relations. The fact that
the draft resolution before· the Assembly is acceptable
to both these countries is an additional consideration
leading my deleg;ation to vote for it.
60. Despite these observations, however, my delegation does not feel that the prov.isions of the draft resolution are by any means entirely adequate or absolutely
perfect. For instance, it would be more satisfactoryand probably a great number of representatives would
be happier-if the Eritrean people, through their
elected assembly, were given an opportunity to choose
their own form of government and their own destiny,
after, say, five or ten years. The chances are that the
Eritrean people would probably choose to continue the
federation with Ethiopia. If, however, they should want
to be united with Ethiopia or to be independent, they
should be allowed to make that choice. The fact that
there is no such provision in the draft resolution is
responsible for the regrettable circumstance that some
members of the Assembly cannot support it. But the
absence ?f s!!ch a provision cannot deter my =!~egatiOll
from voting 111 favour of the draft resolution.

544

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Pler.tary Meetings

61. l\..Ly delegation will vote against the draft resoluQ
tions submitted by the Soviet UnioD and Poland for a
reason which seems obvious to my delegation. The
sponsors do not aim at true independence ior the
Eritrean people; their real aim seems to be the creation of chaos in East Africa, as they have amply demonstrated to the world !?y what they are attempting to
do in my country and Korea.
62. As the Assembly is about to vote on the draft
resolutions before it, I wish to voice my cielegation's
satisfaction with and appreciation of the conciliatory
remarks made by the Foreign Minister of Ethiopia
this morning [315th meeting]. I am sure that we
should have heard similar words of conciliation and
co-operation from the Foreign Minister of democratic
Italy, had he been with us today. In the light of such
assurances, my delegation-and I am sure all the other
delegations to this Assembly--ean rest at ease that the
government of the new federated State, which has the
blessing of the United Nations, will enjoy internal tranquillity and prosperity, that all its inhabitants will
enjoy equality, and that the new and greater Ethiopi~n
State wi1l~ as a !esult of its membership of the United
Nations, contribute its part towards the building up uf
peace and security, not only in the eastern part'mapf
Africa, but also in the whole world.
..
63. Mr. GETMANETZ (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic (translated from Russian): The delegation
of the Ukrainian SSR is one of those which, basing
their position on the principles of the United Nations
Charter concerning the self-determination of kleoples,
and taking into account the interests of indIgenous
populations, have always urged that independence
should be granted to the peoples of all the former
Italian colonies, namely, Libya, Somaliland and Eritrea.
64. Those peoples' right to national self-determination is a natural and inalienable one. That means that
each nation must freely decide its own fate without
any interference from other nations in its internal
political, economic and cultural life.
65. Only the representatives of the colonial Powers
are against the self-determination of the peoples of dependent territories; they are trying by all possible
means to perpetuate the present status of those oppressed countries in order to continue their exploitation and plundering.
66. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR believes that
the Eritrean people should be guaranteed the exercise
of the right to self-determination on the same basis as
the people of Libya, who are soon to establish their
independent State. This demand is based first of all
on the fact that the people of Eritrea indisputably form
a nation with all the characteristics of a nation. They
constitute a well established and stable society of people based on a common language, culture, economic
life and mental outlook, which are reflected in a common culture.
67. During the discussion of the question of Eritrea
in the Ad Hoc Political Committee, the representatives
of certain countries made statements in support of selfdetermination and independence for Eritrea, but during the voting on various draft resolutions-those submitted by the USSR, Poland, Pakistan and Iraq-it
became evident that they in fact supported and pursued
a policy of colonial oppression.

•

68. By voting in the Ad Hoc Political Committee for
the forced federation of Eritrea with Ethiopia and
thereby depriving Eritrea of independence, the representatives of Haiti, Liberia, Burma, the Philippines and
, various other countries showed that they were the instruments of the colonizers in their struggle against
the national liberation movement of oppressed peoples
in the colonies.
69. The Soviet representatives and the repl'esenta~ives of the peoples .qemocracies! in their statements
In the Ad H QC Political CommIttee, resolutely supported the granting of immediate independence to
Eritrea. They also called for the withdrawal of British
occupation troops frc-m Eritrea within three months
and the cession to Ethiopia of that part of the territory
whica Ethiopia requires in order to have access to the
sea through the port of Assab.
70. The voting in the Committee showed that, as a
result of a private understanding between the delegations of the colonial Powers and the delegation of the
United States, and of the direct pressure exerted by
those delegations on other members of the Committee)
they succeeded once again in violating the principles of
the Charter and in foisting u!Jon the Committee a draft
resolution which did not correspond to the interests
of the Eritrean people or satisfy their aspirations to
independence.
71. The fourteen-Power draft resolution on the socalled federation between Ethiopia and Eritrea which
has now been submitted to the General Assembly,
represents only the interests of the colonial Powers and
is directed against the Eritrean people. This draft
uses the authority of the United Nations to cloak the
imperialist designs of the colonial Powers on Eritrea
and deludes international public opinion.
72. It is very significant that this extremely long draft
resolution does not so much as mention the right
of the Eritrean people to self-determination, a right
which is proclaimed as one of the basic principles of
the Charter of the United Nations.
73. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR believes
that the draft resolution on Eritrea submitted by the
Ad H DC Political Committee is both unsatisfactory and
unacceptable because it does not ensure Eritrea the independence to which that country is certainly entitled.
74. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR-a country
where national oppression and its causes have long been
abolished and where no national discrimination is
possible-urges that independence should be granted
to Eritrea immediately and that the national and
politicai oppression of that country by the colonizers,
in whatever form it may assume, should be brought to
a stop forthwith.
75. Consequently the delegation of the Ukrainian SSR
supports the USSR draft resolution [A/1570] on the
Eritrean que.tion and will vote for it.
76. Mr. AL-JAMALI (Iraq): Last year, when the
sub-committee which studied the future of the former
Italian colonies was discussing the future of Eritrea,
three solutions· were suggested-independence, annexation or partition. My delegation had the honour at that
time to state there was a fourth solution-federation

S16th Meeting-2 December 1950
with Ethiopia.' My delegation is a believer ill the principle of federation, but we had hoped that that federation would come into existence by the decision of the
people of Eritrea and the people of Ethiopia themselves, because we are great .upholders of the principle
of the self-determination of peoples. With that idea in
mind, my delegation submitted a draft resolution to the
Ad Hoc Political Committee proposing the formation of
a national assembly which would decide whether Eritrea
was to be independent or whether it was to federate
with Ethiopia. Unfortunately, the proposal of my
delegation was not accepted, and the overwhelming
majority of the Committee decided otherwise.
77. As I have said, we do not stand against the idea
of federation. We believe that federation is the best
solution for the future of Eritrea, but we had hoped
that that federation would be based on self-determination, and we had hoped also that the terms of that
federation would be explicitly based on the principle
of equality between Eritrea and Ethiopia. Here again,
unfortunately, we could not obtain any amendment to
the draft resolution which we have before us today.
We are faced here with a new situation. So far as my
delegation is concerned, we are glad to be able to go
with the majority now, for reasons which I shall
explain.
78. To begin with, my delegation has received assurances from the Ethiopian delegation, assurances
which were publicly recorded here tc-rlay, that there
will be equal treatment for all the inhabi\i.ants of Eritrea
and that the Moslems will have equal participation,
as well as the Italians and other people, without
discrimination.
79. In addition, my delegation has had a meeting
with the leader of the Moslem League, which was
oppossd to the project of federation. Fortunat'ely, the
leader of tl1e Moslem League assured me that: he had
reached full agreement with the Ethiopian. delegation and that the arrangements which are to be made
will be fully ~jatisfactory to the opposition in Eritrea. I
have also received a telegram from Addis Ababa assuring me 'that the Arab and Moslem communities
there are happy about the federation.
80. Ir. view of all these considerations, my delegation takes pleasure in declaring its change of attitude,
along with some other Arab delegations, from one of
opposition to one of support. We believe that now that
the destiny of Eritrea is being decided and the United
Nations is passing jud@1ent, we should offer it our
whole-hearted support. We should support it by a
strong vote, because that will contribute to the harmony
and good relationship between the peoples of Eritrea
and Ethiopia.
81. I wish to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation of the statement we heard this morning
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia. We
hope that those words will be put into deeds. My delegation desires to express its best wishes for the future
prosperity, progress and harmony between the peoples
of Ethiopia and Eritrea.
82. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We have concluded the explanations of vote. We shall
8 Ibid.,

Fourth Session, First Committee, AnncJ:J document

A/C.1/522. See also document A/C.1/SC.17/L.16.

now proceed to the vote on the various draft resolutions•.
83. In the first place, I shall put to <the vote the draft
resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee [A/1561]. A roll-call vote has been requested.
84. Mr. BARTOS (Yugoslavia) (translated from
French): I asked the Secretariat that a separate vote
should be taken on the following parts of the
draft resolution:
The first recital (for at the time the treaty was
being drawn up in Paris, the Yugoslav delegation
voiced its o~position to the provision of the treaty mentioned in thIS recital) ;
Paragraph 6 (d) of the operative part (we ask that .
a separate vote should be taken on each of the two
parts, for in the second W~ find a throw-back to the
colonial period;
Paragraph 7 (a) of the operative part (we ask that
a separate vote should be taken 011 each of the two sentences of this sub-para!graph because here too, in t~e
second sentence, we find a throw-back to the colonud
period).
85. We shall vote in £favour of the remainder of the
draft resolution, which we consider to be a constructive
document. The right of peoples to self-determination
does not necessarily mean that they should be separated. The Yugoslav delegation has come to the conclusion that the people of Eritrea are in favour of un~ '':l
with the Ethiopian people.
86. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The Yugoslav representative has asked for a separate
vote on certain parts; he has not requested a separate
vote on each paragraph. Furthermore, a roll-call vote
has been requested. Would the representative who
asked for that roll-call vote agree that it should be
taken only on the draft resolution as a whole, or does
he ask for a roll-call vote on each paragraph?
87. Mr. PEREZ CISNEROS (Cuba) (translated
from French) : A vote by roll-call on the draft resolution as a whole would satisfy me.
88. The PRESIDENT ( trtJ,nslated from French):
I put to the vote the first re;cital of the draft resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee
[A/1561].
The first recital was adopted by 48 votes to 2, with

7 abstentions.

89. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put to the vote the remainder of the preamble and
paragraphs 1 to 5 of the operative part.

The remainder of the preamble and paragraphs 1
to 5 of the operative part werre adopted by 39 votes to
7, with 6 abstentions.
90. The PRESIDENT (transl4ted from French): I
put to the vote paragraph 6, up to and including subparagraph (c).
Paragraph 6, up to and including sub"paragraph (c)
was adopted by 44 votes to 7, with 7 abstentions. '
91. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frenc.~):
The vote on paragraph 6 (d) will be taken in two
parts. In the first place, I put to the vote the first sentence, which ends with the words Iffederal laws".

General A••embly-Flfth Se.,lon-Plenary Meetlnp
It,"-'

Th, first s,.,.tl1ltr~ of pafagraph 6 (d) 'WfJ$ adopted
by 42 fl()1,s to 51 with to abstentions.
92. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frlnch): I
put to the vote the remainder of paragraph 6 (cl).
Th, flmaind", of paragraph 6 (d) was adopted by
44 votes to 7" with 5 abstentions.
93. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the beginning of paragraph 7, and the
fil st sentence of sub-paragraph (a).
Th, b,ginning of paragraph 7 and the first sentence
of sub-pcwagraph (a) were adopted by 45 votes to nonc1
with 11 abstentio~.
94. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the remainder of paragraph 7 (a).
The retnainder of paragraph 7 (a) was adopted by
42 votes to 0" with 8 abstentions.
95. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Separate votes have not been requested on the remainder of the draft resolution. I therefore put to the
vote the remainder of the draft resolution, beginning
with paragraph 7 (b).
The remainder of the draft rresolution was adopted
by 43 votes to 7, with 5 abstentions.
90. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote by roll-call on the draft resolution
as a whole [A/1561].
A flote was taken by roll-call.
ChiM1 having been drarzvn by lot by the Presidentl
U}(J,S called upon to vote first.
In favour: China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, France. Greece, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon,
Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexi(Co~ Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippi!les, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Union of South
Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
lteland, United States of America, Venezuela, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bofjvi~, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile.
Against; Cuba,. Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Pakistan, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Abstaining: Israel, Saudi Arabia" Sweden, Uruguay.
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by 46
votes to 10, with 4 abstentions.
97. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
must now ask the Assembly to vote on the second draft
resolution submitted by the Ad Hoc Political Committee in its additional report [A/1561/Add.1].
98~ Before putting this text to the vote, I would ask
the Rapporteur of the Ad Hoc Political Committee
for an explanation. Is it intentionally 1?-rovided that
if members of the proposed committee fad to agree on
the nomination of one candidate, they should nominate
three candidates? Is. three a maximum figure? Did the
authors of the draft resolution mean that the committee
could nomD late either two or three candidates?
l

~i'"

_~I.'l.t.,...

'Wz'rpti-,r , . , ;

..

99. Mr. LOPEZ (Philippines), Rlp'pa:t~\tr of the
Ad Hoc Political Conunlttee: I think It was the inten..
tion of the ..4" Hoc Political Comntittee tbat, in the
event that there was no ngreentent among the metn..
bers of the nominating committee, the greatest prac..
ticable latitude should lie left in the "latter of choosing
a. commissioner for Eritrea. For thnt ren~on, the btun..
ber was fixed at three.
100. However. if it is the intention of the General
Assembly that this choice should be limited to either
two or three, then I believe that it. should be explicitly
so stated in the draft resolution. It might therefore be
s1.1ggestccl thn~ n small drafting chnt'1ge should be in..
troduced so that the draft resolution would rend Utwo

or three cancUdntes for the post of United Nntions
Commissioner for Eritrenu •
101. The PRESIDENT (translatttd frotn P"nch): I
thank the Rapporteur for hi, explanation. I think the
cotnnlittee should be left free to nomillnte two or three
candidates. The committee mny not be able to fil'ld three
persons whom it considers fully qualified.
102. I therefore support the last suggestion made by
the Rapporteur, and 1 propose, accordingly, that the
amendment he has just submitted should be adopted.
Tho anlfmdnecnt was adopted.
103. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall now vote 011 the draft resolution, with the
amendment which has just been adopted.
The draft rosoEutsonl (J$ amltaded, was adopted by 45
votes to 51 with 6 abstentions.
104. The PRESIDENT (translated from Frlnch):
We shall now vote on the draft resolution of the Soviet
Union [A/1570]. A vote by division has been requested. I therefore invite the Assembly to vote 011 each
of the three paragraphs of the draft resolution in turn.
The first paragraph 'lvas rejected by 32 votes to 13,
with 8 abstentions.
The second paragraph was "cjected by 34 votes to 9~
with 10 abstlnnons.
The third paragraph was rejected by 38 votes to 5~
with 14 abstentions.
105. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
{\s. all three paragraphs have been r~jected separatels.
It 1& unnecessary to vote on the draft resolution as a.
whole.
106. I now ask the Assembly- to vote on the Polish
draft resolution [A/ 'I (64 and C0".1] .
107. Mr. GARCIA BAUER (Guatemala) (translatld
from Spanish) : I request that paragraph 1 should be
voted upon separately and by roll..call.
108. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
A roll-call vote is in order. The Assembly will there..
fore proceed to vote on paragrap~' 1.
A vote was taken by fall-call.
Bra...~ll having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Pakistan, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

. . . . .·,' .... ,'&'11(111"

...

',1

't""

1

c

341

S16th Meetl~ December 1950
¥

J4.gaiftst: Bralit, Burma, Canada, Chile, China, Costa
Rica) Demnal'lt, Etutldo1", Ethi~t>ia) FtanCi:. Greece,

Haiti) H()nd\tr~\s) Iceland; India,. Liberia, Luxembourg,
',Me..~ioo, Netherlands, New Zta1an~,. N!earag1!8., .Norway, 1".an3.1\1a, Paraguay. Peru, Phdlp.pmes, T.haitand.
Turh."e)!') Union of South Africa) Dmted Kingdom of
Great Britnitt and Northern Ireland, United States of
Anteri<:a) Ven~zuela) Yugoslavia, Australia, Belgium,
Bolivia.
A.~staittiftg: COI0tt'l.biQ, Dominiean. Republic, Emt,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanou. Sweden, Syna,
Uruguay, "\ emen. Afgbanistallt Argentina.
Par",ra.ph 1 tMS "jedtd b, 36 'f)()t,s to 10J ttJitl. 14
4bst~Hh(ms.

109. The PRESIDENT (trlJnslat,d fro. Prtnch):
I shall 1\0\'" put to the vote, in turn, paragraphs 2, 3
and 4 of the draft resolutt{)n submitted liy the delegation

of Poland.

Paragrafl!t 2 tt-m ,ejected by 3'1 votes to 5" ttlith 13
<WstlfHtioflS.

Ptlr4!Jrll/llt 3 ttlQS r~jettcd by 34 tlotes to 8" with 11

abSM"t~OHS.

Pa/f'agraph 4- ttWrfijected b, 35 fJotes to 5) with 11
abstttttic)fls.
110. The PRESIDENT (trmtslatld from Frencl:.):
Since nIl the paragraphs of the Polish draft resolution have been rejected separately) there is no need to
vote on the draft resolution as a whole.

Postponentent of the consideration of the que-st~on
of du~ admission of new Members to the U~tl~d
Nations

111.'I'be PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The next item on the agenda is the admission of new
Members to the United Nations. and the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice. A draft
resolution on this item has jU$t been submitted by the
delegation of El Salvador [A/1585]. Since delegations
have perllap5 not bad sufficient time to study the te..x:t,
we shall postpone the discussion of the question until
:Monday, if there are no objections.

It was s:o decided.
Report of the Trusteeship Councll: report of the
Fourth Conunittee (A/l546)
[Aget'da item 13]
},{r. Ankcr (Norway), Rapporteur, presented, the
report 01 the Fourth Committee ana the accompanying
draft resolutions [A/1546].
112. The PRESIDENT (traff.Slated from French):
I intend to put to the vote separately each of the eleven
draft resolutiorls contained in the Fourth Committee's
report.
113. Air. BARTOS .(Yugoslavia) (traff.Slated from
Frencl1,) : As regards draft resolution I, we have asked
that each of the paragraphs should be 'Voted on
separately.
114. The PRESIDENT (1rI1M$laf,d from P'-IHC'h):
We shall vote sutcessively on paragraphs 1,2 and 3 of
>draft resolution I.

PfJYQumPh 1 was adopred by 44 't)otes to 1, with 6

a,bst'tttlons.
Paraflraph 2 was adopted by 41 flotes to none" with 8
abstentIons.
Par«gmph 3 ttl(Z.$ adopted b, 45 flot,s to none" Men 6
abstentions.
115. The PRESIDENT (translat'd from FreKCh):
I now put 4raft resolution I as a whole to the vote.
Draft resolution I as a whole was adopted by 45·'Votes
to none, with 7 abstentions.

116. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) ~
We shall now vote on draft resolution 11.
Ui.Mr. ICHASO (Cuba) (translated from Spa,."
ish) : I request a vote by roll-call.
.
118. The PRESIDENT (translated from FrmcA) :
The representative of Cuba certainly has the right to
request a roU-call vote, but I would draw his attention
to the fact that we still have ten draft resolutions be...
fore us. If we have to vote by roll-call on each of them,
we shall still be here in January.
.
.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
China, having bee'1S dr~Jfl,
lot by the President,

b,

was called upon tOf)ote first.
In favour: China, C\")lombia,. Cuba, Czechoslovakia.

Denmark, Egypt, El Salvador, Ett.\iopia, Greece. Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, lra:q,
Lebanon, Liberia1 Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan. Panama, l?araguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sweden,
Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic. Union of South Africa, Union of Soviet So"
cialist Republics. United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina. Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Byelo...
russian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile.
Against: Guatemala.
Abstaining: Dominican Republic, Ecuador, France.
Draft resolution 11 was adopted by 53 votes to 1,
with 3 abstentions.119. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall now put to the vote draft resolution Ill.
..
120. 1fr. PEREZ CISNEROS (Cuba): (translated
fro,n S pani.sh) : I am afraid that the procedure my dele..
gation is going to request will delay. the Assembly a
little. However, since a two~thirds majority is required
for the adoption of proposals. on matters affecting
trusteeship, my delegation especially reguests a roll-call
vote on draft resolutions Ill, IV. V, VI and X. I prefer
to make this request now, for all the draft resolutions
I have mentioned, so as not to interrupt the voting each
tUne.
.
121. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We shall therefore vote by roll-call on draft reSOlutions
HI, IV, V, VI and X. The United States representative has the floor to explain his vote.
122. Mr. COOPER (United States of America):
The United States delegation requests that a.separate
vote should be taken on the third recital of draft resolution Ill.

'.,

General Assembly-Fifth Seesion-Plel18ry Meetings

123. The United States delegation is obliged to vote
against this recital because it attempts to define the
relationship between the Trusteeship Council and the
General Assembly. The Trust.eeship Council prescribes
its own rules. It has the competence to take decisions,
'and its members are representatives of governments and
act under instructions from their governments. I t is
our position that it would be unwise to attempt in the
prenmble of a resolution of this type to define this
relationship, a'ld we shall therefore vote against the
recital and request that a separate vote should be
taken on it.
124. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
In accordance with the wish expressed by the representative of the United States, the third recital of
draft resolution III will be put to the vote separatelr.
The representative of Cuba has the floor to explam
his vote.
125. Mr. PEREZ CISNEROS (Cuba) (translated
from Spanish) : I should like briefly to explain my vote,
since a separate vote has been requested on the third
recital. I also request that the vote should be taken by
roll-eaU.
126. The delegation of Cuba will vote in favour of that
recital because, although we understand that the Trusteeship Council is free to adopt its own rules of procedure, it is nevertheless obliged by Article 85, paragraph 2, of the Cha.'ier to assist the General Assembly
in discharging the functions enumerated in Chapter XII
of the Charter.
127. The third recital of the draft resolution simply
states that the Council, in adopting its rules of procedure under Article 90 of the Charter, must consider
"the inclusion of all provisions required to assist the
General Assembly in carrying out its functions with
regard to the Trusteeship System as provided in the
Charter". The Cuban delegation considers, therefore,
that this is a faithful interpretation of the relationship
which exists, and must exist, between Article 90 and
Article 85, paragraph 2. It is necessary to sttess this
relationship because of certain minor difficulties which
have arisen in connexion with the relationship between
the Council and the General Assembly.
128. My delegation will therefore vote in favour of
this recital, since we consider it essential that the Assembly should make its views clear in the matter.
129. The PRESIDENT (translated from French,):
Would the representative of Cuba be satisfied if his
statement appeared in the verbatim record? It would
then be known that the Cuban delegation had voted in
favour of this paragraph, and it wouid perhaps be unnecessary to press for a roll-eaU vote.
130. Mr. PEREZ CISNEROS (Cuba) (translated
from Spanish) : I insist on a vote by roll-call.
131. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put to the vote the third recital of draft resolution Ill.
A roll-call vote has been request~d.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Turkey, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
U.ion of Soviet Socialist Republics, Uruguay, Yemen,

Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Brazil, Byelorussian Soviet
Socialist Republic, China, Colombia Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, El Salvador, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Lebanon, Liheria, Mexico, Philippines, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, Syria.
Against: Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Burma, Denmark, France, Iceland, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New
Zealanc1, Norway, Sweden, Thailand.
Abstaining: Turkey, Venezuela, Argentina, Canada,
Chile, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Greece,
Iran, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru.
The result of the vote was 25 in favour, 16 against
and 14 abstentions.
132. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Under rule 84 of the rules of procedure, decisions on
questions relating to the operation of the Trusteeship
System must be made by a two-thirds majority.
The third redtal of draft resolution III was not
adopted, havi1tg failed to obtain the req'ttired twothirds ·majority.
133. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put to the vote draft resolution HI as a whole, excluding the third recital, which has not been adopted. A rollcall vote has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Thailand, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour.' Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Unian of South Africa, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia,
Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France,
Greece, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Lebanon, Liberia, L~embourg, Mexico, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Pn!and, Saudi Arabia, Sweden,
Syria.
Abstaining: Canada, Dominican Republic.
Draft resolution Ill, excluding the third recital, was
adopted by 53 'Votes to none~ with 2 abstentions.
134. The PRESIDENT (translated from French) : I
put draft resolution IV to the vote. A roll-call vote has
been requested.
A vote was taken by iYoll-call.
Israel, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Sweden, Sytia, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republit, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Mghanistan, Argentina, Bolhia, Brazil,
Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Cuba,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salva-

Meeting-2 December 1950
--------------316th
.........--.
dor, Ethiopia, Greece, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq.
Abstaining: Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Paraguay, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Domin.ican
Republic, France.
Draft resolution IV was' adopted by 41 votes to none,
with 14 abstentions.
135. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
We now come to draft resolution V.

136. Mr. COOK (United Kingdom) : I wish to re9.,uest a separate vote on the fifth recital of draft resolutlOn V. My delegation would vote against this recital
because we cannot accept the suggestion that there is
such a thing as an anonymous petition. There may, of
course, be anonymous communications and, in the
Fourth Committee, my delegation voted in favour of an
amendment which would have introduced this concept.
137. However, having regard for the present wording
of this recital, and bearing in mind that there is no
reference to anonymous petitions or even to anonymous communications in the operative part of this draft
resolution, my delegation feels that this recital is out of
place in the present draft resolution. If it is deleted, my
delegation will vote in favour of the draft resolution,
although it must also point out that, in its view, the
words referring to the right of petition as one of the
fundamental human rights are also out of place in view
of the discussions which have been going on in the
Third Committee on the proposed covenant of human
rights.
138. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I now put the fifth recital of draft resolution V to the
vote.
The fifth recital of draft resolution V was rejected by
24 votes !o 17, with 7 abstentions.

139. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I now put to the vote draft resolution V as a whole,
excluding the fifth recital, which has just been rejected.
The Cuban delegation has requested a roll-caIl vote.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Iran, having been drawn by lot by the President, was
called upon to vote first.
In favour: Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Saudi
Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Union of
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United State3 of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Greece, Haiti, Iceland, India,
Indonesia.
Abstaining: Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Australia,
Belgium, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Czechoslovakia, Dominican Republic.

549

D"ajt resolution VI excluding the fifth recital, was
adopted by 47 votes to none, with 8 abstentions.

140. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put draft resolution VI to the vote. A roll-call vote
has been requested.
A vote was to.ken by roll-caU.
Australia, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour: Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Haiti, India, Indonesia,
Iran, .Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Thailand, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Uruguay, Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina.
Against: Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Union of
South Africa, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Abstaining: Bolivia, Chile, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Greece, Iceland, Israel, Netherlands,
Peru, Turkey, Venezuela.
Draft resolution VI was adopted by 33 votes to 11,
with 12 abstentions.
'
Draft resolution VII was adopted by 47 votes to
none, with 6 abstentions.
Draft resolution VIII was adopted by S4 votes to
none, with 1 abstention.
Draft resolution IX was adopted by Sl 'Votes to
none, with 2 abstentions.

141. Th,,: PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I put draft resolution X to the vote. A roll-call has been
requested.
.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Yemen, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.
In favour : Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France,
Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pa.1dstan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Saudi
Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela.
Abstaining: Belgium, Union of South Africa.
n"aft resolution X was adopted by 55 votes to none,
with 2 abstention.'i.
Draft resolution XI was ,adopted by 48 votes to none,
with 6 abstentions.

550

General Assembly-Fifth Sel.lon-Plenary Meetings

Former Italian eotonies: (c) draft trusteeship
. agreement for the Tel"ritory· of Soma111and
, under Italian administration: reports of the
Fourth Committee (A/1550) and the Fifth
Committee (A/1573)

.

[Agenda item 21]
142.' The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
The General Assembly has before it the Fourth Committee's report on the draft trusteeship agreement £01'
the Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration [A/1550]. The Fourth Committee has not submitted a draft resolution in its report. The General
Assembly, howe'Ver, must take a decision by 'Voting on
Cl draft resolution.
.
143. I have inquired as to what was done in previous
years,and I propose that the Assembly should udr· 'It a
draft resolution similar to the one which was ad, :ed
before. It reads as follows:
.
(The General Assembly
uApproves the draft trusteeship agreement for the
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration;
as contained in document A/1294."
144. I put this draft resolution to the vote.
145. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian) : I wish to explain my
vote.
146. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall call upon you after the vote. I am not required
to allow speakers to explain their votes before the vote
is taken" unless they wish to raise a point, of order with
regard to the vote.
147. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated j1'om Russian) : I simply wish to ex..
plain my vote.
148. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I shall call upon you after the vote. Moreover, there
are other speakers already on my list.
The draft resolution, as read out by the President,
was adopted by 44 votes to 6.
149. Tht.\ PRESIDENT (translated f'1"om French):
The representative of Poland has the floor to explain
his vote.
150. Mr. DROHOJOWSKI (Poland) : If I correctly
recall, the President was asked whether a representative should explain his vote before or after the voting,
and the President said that he did not intend to break
the tradition which had been established that representr1tives could explain their votes before the voting.
Today, however, that tradition has heen broken, and I
.
am very sorry that that has happened.
151. During the deliberations of the Fourth Committee;4 the Polish delegation undertook an article by
article analysis of the proposed trusteeship agreement
for Somali1and and the appended declaration on constitutional principles. This analysis and the subsequent
discussion in the Fourth. Committee led us to certain
conclusions.
i

4Ibid., Fifth Se$sion, Fourth CO'mmittee, 173rd to 180th and
100th meetings.

152. In the first place, n~ither the trusteeship agreement nor the declaration of constitutional principles
safe~ards the proper influence of the Somalis in· the
admInistration of the country, in its educational system
and in its social institutions. The documents in question do n,ot give the Somalis the right to elect their
own repr\~sentati'Ves in the Territorial Council, which
is to be COi'llposed only of nominees of the administering
Power. The judicial system is to be based on Italian
law with Italian judges. Schools will be run in accordance with the wishes of the Administering Authority
and not in the interests of the Somali people.
153. Secondly, the country is being left open for a
colonial expldtation of all its natural resources and to
such an economic domination of the Administering
Authority cnat the achievement of full political independence by the Somali nation will be Jeopardized.
154. Thirdly, important recoInr.-nendations of last year's
resolution of the General Assembly [resolution 289 A
(IV)] have been disregarded, as have the binding suggestions of the Indian annexure, to which many delegations attached such great importance last year.
155. Fourthly, the statement of the Chairman of the
United Nations Advisory Council on SomaIiland during the discussion in the Fourth Committee convinced
us that this is not a body which will properly defend
the rights of the Somali people.
156. The Polish delegation, at the last session of the
General Assembly, pleaded that the granting of independence to the Somali people and to Somaliland should
not be unduly delayed. We pleaded for the establishment of a trusteeship over SomaliIand, with the United
Nations as the Administering Authority. We pleaded
for a solution which neither in letter nor in spirit would
be similar to the sad experiences of the tradition of
colonial exploitation, which every Member of the United
Nations should fight with all the means at its disposal.
157. The majority chos~ to go in another direction.
We were forced, therefore, to vote against the Trusteeship Agreement as proposed in the documents before
us 111 the Fourth Committee, and we had to vote against
it also in the plenary meeting.
158. We cannot fail to add that this Agreement, which
reminds us of the bygone times of colonial empires,
does not serve the legitimate interests and aspirations
of the Somalis. Instead, it serves the interests of those
who are establishing military bases all over Africa. In
not serving the Somalis it does not serve the cause of
peace and the peaceful international co-operation of all
the peoples of the world.
159. I wish to reiterate my great regret that the
President did not allow my delegation to speak before
the vote.
160. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
I should not have replied if the Polish representative
had not repeated his objection to my procedure after
explaining h~s vote. As everyone knows, the President
has discretion to allow members to explain their votes
either before or after the voting. This morning, some
representatives asked me to allow them to explain their
votes before the voting began. I gladly acceded to their
request. It will be understood, however, that once the
voting has begun I cannot interrupt it to allow a mem-

J'l

316lh Meeting-2 Decemb6l' 1950
ber to ~plain h~s vote. The members of the Gen~ral
Assembly will agree that I acted in accordance with the
rules of procedure and in order to ensure the orderly
.
conduct of our debates.
161. Mr. BIHELLER (Czechoslovakia): In the
course of the deb~t~ in the Fourth Committee, the
Czechoslovak delegation clearly expressed its funda:nental opposition to the~dea that Somaliland should be
placed under the trusteeship of a single Power, and
objected in particular to the idea that that Power should
be Italy, the fOJ."mer colonial master of that territory.
162. The decision of the General Assembly which
initiated such a course was contrary to the peace treaty
with Italy and "contrary to the spirit of the Charter and
the aims of the Trusteeship System. We know that in
this case also the United States Government imposed
its will upon the majority. Ignoring and setting aside
the interests and wishes of the Somali people, the
United States Govenunent is all out to have Somaliland
transformed into a military base and a source of raw
material and man-power ·for its aggressive plans against
the Soviet U mon and the peoples' democracies, as well
as against the national liberation movements of Asia
and Africa.
163. The Trusteeship Agreement for Somali1and,
based upon a fundamentally wrong decision, contains
provisions which will enable the Administering Authority to take political and economical roots in that
country and to fortify its colonial possessions there at
the expense of the Somali people. The Czechoslovak
delegation discussed this item in detail in the Fourth
Committee. It will therefore be sufficient to mention in
brief the most important shortcomings. of that Agreement.
164. There is no provision in the Agreement which
sHpulates the right of the United Nations, through its
competent organs, including the Advisory Council, decisively to influence the formulation of administration
policies in Somaliland. The Agreement concedes to t11P.
Advisory Council only the right to give aid and advice
which the Administering Authority mayor may not
take into account. It does not give the Advisory Council
the right to prevent, if necessary, the taking of measures
by the Administering Authority which might hinder
the attainment of the objectives of the trusteeship.
165. Secondly, although this trusteeship is explicitly
limited to a period of ten years, the Agreement does not
contain any provisions whatsoever which would oblige
the Administering Authority progressively to establish
appropriate, democratically elected representative bodies
of the Somali people. The Territorial Council mentioned
in the. Agreement is no substitute fot' a democratically
elected representative body of the Somalis; it has only
an advisory status. Its members are to be selected by
the Administering Authority, and there . ~. an be no doubt
that those will be only persons prepared to agree to all
and any measures of the Administration, including those
contrary to the interests of the Somali people and to the
objectives of the trusteeship.
166. Thirdly. the Agreement does not contain provisions which would effectively safeguard the economic
interests of the Somali people. On the contr,try, it enables the Administering Authority to permit the lease
of as much as 1,000 acres of land to non-indigenous

551

persons or companies for an t1lnlimited period, necessitating only the consent of two-thirds of the members of
the Territorial Council. Such c:onsent will be easily received, considering the hand..picked composition of that
body. Equally ineffective as a safeguard of SomaJi in...
terests is a provision permittin!~ - and in fact authorizing - the Administering Authority to lease for an unlimited period, to non-indigenous persons or companies,
the exploitation of the natural. resources in the Territory. It is obvious that the l,ong...t erm lease which is
permitted by the Agreement will. give the present and
prospective colonial exploiters sufficient latitude to enable them ruthlessly and profitably to exploit the soil,
the natural resources and the mart-power in the Territory for a long time to come, ceven after the attainment
of independence.
167. Fourthly, the Agreement authorizes the Administering Authority to set up a police force and armed.
forces, supposedly for the maintenance of peace in and
defence of the Territory. Both these provisions give theAdministering Authority the right firmly t., establish
Italian colcnial rule in the Territory, and to violate the
peace treaty with Italy by e(Xtending and using the
forces under its command far beyond the limits set up.
therein. The Agreement gives the Italian administration·
the right to set up military bases in Somaliland and
thus drag that Territory and its people into the network
of United States strategic sch~~mes. This is all the more
objectionable as these plans are directed not only
against the .independent, pe~lce-loving and freedomloving countries, but also agaitlst the liberation struggles
of the peoples in the coloniE;s. The purposes of this.
provision are clearly to engagc~ and entangle the Sl>malipeople in war preparations which are not of their mak-<
ing and which are contrary to their interests, thus
chaining them to the Amedcan war chariot without
giving them. the right and possibility to decide on thi~
matter freely and in accordance with their interests.
168. These are the main reasons why the Czechoslovak
celegation objected to the draft resolution approving the
Trusteeship Agreement aHd voted .against it.
169. Mr. TAJIBAEV (Utlion of Soviet Socialist Re...,
publics) (transZated Jrom R1Jessittn): I should Jike togive a brief explanation of the USSR delegation's vote.
I veri inuch regret that I was net given an opportunity
of doing so before the vote WillS taken, as my delegation
requested.
170. The Government of the Soviet Union considers
that the Somali people should be granted independence
at the earliest possible date and should themselves decide their own fate. They are fully. entitled and abie to·
do so.
171. That is why, as long ago as at the last session of
the Genel~l Assembly, the USSR opposed the idea that
former Italian Somaliland sl~ould be placed under
Italian administration for a period of ten years, and
proposed instead that it should be placed under a nrovisional trusteeship administerc~d directly by the United
Nations Trusteeship Council a1.1d that it should be given
full independence five years later.G
172. But the Anglo-Amer"'C2m bloc, desirous of using
Italian Somaliland as !jl stl'ategic military base, suc'"
G

Ibid., Plenary Meetings, Annesl document A/l082.

552

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

ceeded - thanks to the subservient majority at its
corr--nand - in getting the General Assembly to adopt
r
unon 289 A (IV), which provided that Italian
Svrnalilal1d was to be placed under Italian administration for a period of ten years.
173. And now the same majority is foisting on us a
Trusteeship Agreement for Somaliland under Italian
adtninistration; the Agree.ment was drafted by the
United Nations Trusteeship Council and approved by
the same majority in the Fourth Committee -' and now
in the General Assembly.
174. The agreement which the General Assembly has
just approved is not in confonnity with the aims of the
International Trusteeship System. It provides for the
l'etention of the colonial system in Somali1and rather
than for the development of the Territory towards self,government and independence. The Agreement in effect
.excludes the indigenous population from any part in
the administration of the country.
175. All power in the Territory is in fact transferred
to the Administrator who, under the pretext of "ex-ceptional circumstances" - to be defined by the Administering Authority - is free to administer the
-country quite arbitrarily. The grant of democratic rights
and freedoms - one of the fundamental objectives
which tl~e United Nations Charter i~ designed to secure
- is subject, !.mder articles 19 and 20 of the Agreement, to the obsel"'!anc~ by th(; local popul~tion of the
so-called require1nents of public order. This proviso can
.always be used as a pretext for violating the democratic
:dg'hts and iree~oms of the population of Somaliland.
176. The Agre:ement gives the imperialist Powers complete freedom fo... economic expansion in Somaliland
and for the rapacious exploitation of its natural wealth;
it also pla(;~s fae whole economy of the Territory under
foreign control. At the same time, the Agreement makes
no provision £0'.' .the protection of the economic interests
()f the indigenous popllllation of SomaIiland.
177. Under the pi'etext of maintaining peace and
-order in Italian Somaliland, the Agreement permits the
Administering Authority to e~ta.biish military iT!sblla-

Printed in U.S.A.

tions, to maintain so-called police forces -- which may
in fact be Italian armed forces ........, and to take other
military measures with a view to converting Somaliland
into an Anglo·American military and strategic base.
This is a glaring violation of the United Nations
Charter.
178. The 4greement thus, in fact, preserves the former
colonial system in Italian Somaliland. This is borne out
by the fact that the Italian Government has retained
intact the previous administrative system, which dates
back to the fascist dictatorship of Mussolini. It has
reappointed to various administrative posts in Italian
Somaliland many one-time fascist administrators who
served in the former Italian colonies in Africa, including Italian Somaliland itself. Moreover, many laws enacted by the former fascist government are still operative in Somaliland.
179. It follows from what I have said that, far from
corresponding to the interests of the Somali people, this
Agreement contributes to their further enslavement
and also defers their attainment of freedom and independence.
~
180. The USSR delegation therefore voted against the
approval of the draft trusteeship agreement for Somaliland unde~talian administration, submitted to the
General Assembly by the Trusteeship Council.

Place of meeting of the sixth session of the Gen"
eral Assembly
181. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
As you know, the delegations of Bolivia, Colombia and
Perit have submitted a draft resolution [A/1593] asking that, for technical reasons, the sixth session of the
General Assembly should be held in Europe.
182. If there are no objections, this draft resolution will
be referred to the Fifth Committee for consideration.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

-,-------_._-----_.......:-----:::
A-40464-February 1951-3,600
