96

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

structural socio-economic changes for the strengthening
of national independence and achievemei:it of t~e ultimate goals of social progr~ss and con~idered it ~ppropriate to study the experience of various countries
in this field,
Recalling that in resolution 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 th~ General Assembly reaffirmed the right
of every Stat~ to carry out fundamenta\ social and economic changes for the purpose ~f social progress an~
the necessity to continue the studies of national experience in this field,
Desirous of securing a speedy and complete removal
of obstacles to the economic and social progress of peoples, especially colonialism, ra~ism, racial. discrimination, apartheid, aggression, forei~n occupation_ or_ domination and all forms of inequahty and expl01tat1on of
peoples,
Convinced that peaceful coexist~nce and friend~y
relations among States would contribute to economic
and social development,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General16
prepared on the basis of information received from
Governments on national experience in achieving farreaching social and economic changes,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of all nations to
pursue freely their econo_mic and social ?ev.elopment
and to exercise full sovereignty over all their nches and
natural resources;
2. Considers that the elimination of all forms of
subjugation and dependence such as aggression, foreign
occupation, colonialism, apartheid, racism and ~11. forms
of racial discrimination constitutes a prereqmsite for
social and economic advancement;
3. Emphasizes that the carrying out of internal ~asic
socio-economic changes designed to safeguard national
independence and to ensure speedy improvement of the
well-being of the population is of great importance for
the achievement of social and economic progress;
4. Re-emphasizes the advisability of holding, within
the programm~ of advi_sory services, regula~ interregional and reg10nal s_emmars to study the natlon_al e~perience of developmg and developed countries m
carrying out far-reaching social and economic changes
for the purpose of social progress;
5. Calls upon the Commission for Social Development, the Economic and Social Council and the regio~al
commissions to pay special attention, on a regular basis,
to studies and analyses of national experience in carrying
out far-reaching socio-economic changes for the purpose
of social progress;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, through
the Commission for Social Development and/or the
Economic and Social Council, a comprehensive report
prepared on the basis of information received from
Governments on national experience in carrying out
far-reaching changes for the purpose of social progress;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress".
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
16 A/10166.

31/39.

Preservation and further development of
cultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973,
Referring to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 17 in particular to article 15,
which reaffirms the right of everyone to participate_ in
the preservation and development of culture, and bemg
aware that one of the bases of international co-operation
in the cultural field is mutual respect for cultural integrity,
Considering that the cultural dimension of development is integral to the whole development process,
Convinced that the development of cultural values,
cultural exchange and co-operation contribute.to~ ?etter
understanding among States, peol?les an~ mdivi?uals
and contribute to the strengthemng of mternatlonal
peace and security, which is an important pre-condition
for socio-economic progress,
Stressing the need to evolve a harmonious blend of
the cultural values of the traditional civilizations with
developments in science and technology,
Profoundly convinced of the urgent need to develop
international cultural relations,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization on the subject of
the preservation and further development of cultural
values, 18
Noting with satisfaction the work of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in increasing awareness of the need for concerted
action in the field of preservation and further development of cultural values,
I. Requests the Director-General of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to submit to the General Assembly early in 1978
a progress report on the implementation of Assembly
resolution 3148 (XXVIII);
2. Further requests the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to continue efforts and research in this
field and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the item entitled "Preservation
and further development of cultural values".
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/40.

Protection and restitution of works of
art as part of the preservation and further development of eultural values

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3026 A (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, 3148 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
11 Resolution

2200 A (XXI), annex.
ISA/31/111, annex.
