S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6217th meeting
Friday, 13 November 2009, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mayr-Harting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Austria)

Members:

Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Zongo
Mr. Rao Wu
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Škrabalo
Mr. Bonne
Mr. Nakashima
Mr. Gouider
Mr. Heller
Mr. Salov
Mr. Sevi
Mr. Kafeero
Ms. Godwin
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Do Le Chi

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-60696 (E)

*0960696*

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as I
indicated at the morning’s session, to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor
Representative of New Zealand.

to

the

Permanent

Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand
welcomes today’s briefings by the Committees tasked
with supporting the implementation of the Security
Council’s measures to counter the threat to peace and
security that is posed by terrorism.
The United Nations has an indispensable role in
efforts to combat global terrorism. The framework
provided by the United Nations Global Strategy on
Counter-Terrorism, the 16 international counterterrorism instruments, Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and their
successors has established the principles, norms and
mechanisms underpinning counter-terrorism efforts
globally and provided them with authority and
legitimacy. The sanctions implemented by the
Committees form an important element of this
framework.
Over the past decade, targeted United Nations
sanctions have proved an effective tool in global
counter-terrorism efforts. United Nations sanctions
have played an important role in collective efforts to
restrain and disrupt the activities of individuals,
entities and networks engaged in or providing support
to acts of terrorism, and to restrict their movement and
access to weapons and resources. It is nevertheless
essential to keep such measures under constant review
to ensure that they remain effective, credible and
relevant, and to consider further enhancements to their
design and implementation.
New Zealand is a strong supporter of targeted
sanctions, which offer the global community a means
of achieving its political and security objectives while
minimizing unintended humanitarian and human rights
impacts. We have therefore been encouraged by this
Council’s recent steps to enhance the transparency and
effectiveness of its existing sanctions regimes,
particularly through the changes introduced in

2

resolution 1822 (2008) to strengthen procedures for
listing and delisting, notification and availability of
information relating to the consolidated list of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). New Zealand welcomes the progress made by
the 1267 Committee in preparing publicly accessible
narrative summaries outlining the reasons for specific
listings.
Upcoming decisions on the renewal of the
mandate of that Committee’s Monitoring Team will
provide an important opportunity for the Council to
take further practical steps to ensure that its sanctions
regimes are effective, transparent and fair, and that its
listings remain accurate, relevant and actionable. For
example, in order to ensure that United Nations
sanctions regimes are accurate, fair and capable of
effective implementation, it is important that listings be
backed by sufficient information. New Zealand
supports further measures to promote a cleaner, leaner
list of greater utility. We also support consideration of
further steps to strengthen the Committees’ listing and
delisting procedures to ensure these are as rigorous and
transparent as the special circumstances of their work
will allow.
Full and conscientious implementation of
measures mandated by the Council under Chapter VII
of the Charter is a fundamental obligation for all
Member States. This in turn places a responsibility on
the Council to ensure that such measures are practical,
targeted and fair. New Zealand is conscious of the
difficulties in meeting international counter-terrorism
obligations faced by small developing States, including
many in our own region. We therefore welcome recent
efforts by the Secretariat to enhance engagement with
small developing States in the Pacific and elsewhere to
encourage and support compliance.
New Zealand is also determined to take all
necessary measures at the domestic level to prevent
and combat terrorism and to ensure that New Zealand
is neither a target nor a source of terrorist activity. We
continue to improve our legislative, policy and
operational capabilities in line with international
standards and obligations, including prioritizing work
to ratify all 16 international counter-terrorism
instruments. Last month, New Zealand enacted new
legislation aimed at combating money laundering and
countering the financing of terrorism, and designed to
implement fully the recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force. New Zealand was also pleased to
09-60696

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

host a highly productive visit by the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in July.
Much has been achieved over the past decade
through the collective efforts of the global community
to combat terrorism. Yet, sadly, continued attacks
around the world remind us of the continued threat
posed by terrorism and of the enduring need to combat
it through international cooperation. New Zealand fully
supports the vital contribution of the Council and its
sanctions Committees to such endeavours, and
encourages them in their efforts to ensure that their
measures remain as effective, transparent and credible
as possible.
We know full well that no single measure will be
sufficient to counter the threat to peace and security
posed by global terrorism, but equally we know that
sanctions imposed by this Council play an
indispensable role in efforts to combat that threat. New
Zealand therefore reiterates its wholehearted support
for this Council and its Committees in the
implementation of those measures.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Mr. President, I thank you
for convening this open debate, which constitutes an
excellent opportunity for delegations to hear from the
Chairs of key subsidiary bodies of the Security Council
and to provide input into their activities. I also wish to
commend the Chairs of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004)
for their work and their briefings today.
Brazil’s federal Constitution enshrines the
repudiation of terrorism as a guiding principle of our
foreign policy. We therefore condemn terrorism
unequivocally in all its forms and manifestations. Just
as importantly, we are committed to fighting it with
effective measures that prevent the planning,
preparation and execution of acts of terrorism and
other forms of transnational crime within our borders
and beyond. At the United Nations, Brazil has duly
submitted all the reports requested by the Committees.
My delegation has presented the CounterTerrorist Committee with a total of six reports, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). Furthermore, the Brazilian Government has
provided the CTC with additional information

09-60696

regarding the national implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), as requested. We were pleased to note the
positive remarks contained in the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment regarding the Brazilian
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
My delegation welcomes the efforts exerted by
all three Committees to present and combat terrorism
while upholding relevant rules of international law,
including human rights law. With regards to the 1267
Committee, currently under your capable guidance,
Mr. President, it is encouraging to see that, despite
difficulties, the Committee is making progress in
addressing the key aspect of due process in the listing
and de-listing of individuals and entities.
We note with satisfaction the update of its
guidelines, the development of procedures for
reviewing all names contained in the consolidated list
and the preparation of narrative summaries giving the
reasoning for listing each entry. Those are fundamental
steps to enhance not only the transparency and
legitimacy of the sanctions regime, but also its
effectiveness worldwide. No victory over terrorism
will ever be truly sustainable if it comes at the expense
of the rule of law.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee, ably chaired
by His Excellency Ambassador Ranko Vilović, has also
made significant progress in assessing the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and
facilitating technical assistance. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate has played a valuable
role in gathering information from Governments and in
assisting them in that regard. The adoption of adequate
standards and criteria for determining implementation
by Member States is crucial to ensure consistency in
the work of the CTC and Committee’s Executive
Directorate and, thereby, secure the continued support
of Governments.
Important activities are also under way in the
1540 Committee. Brazil has participated in and closely
follows the comprehensive review being carried out
under the able leadership of Ambassador Jorge Urbina.
The open session of the Committee, held from
30 September to 2 October, was an important step in
this process, inasmuch as it allowed all Member States
to express their views on an issue that directly affects
them all. As we progress towards the final document of
the review, we must continue to bear in mind the very
concrete difficulties faced by many countries in

3

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

fulfilling their obligations under the resolution. We
must make sure assistance is available to these
countries and guarantee that reporting requirements do
not represent an undue burden on them.
My delegation noted with interest the assessment
of the 1267 Committee with respect to the ninth report
elaborated by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, as contained in document
S/2009/427. We recognize that there have been
significant improvements in the implementation of the
sanctions regime established by resolution 1267
(1999).
However, the Committee could further enhance
its procedures, in particular with regard to transparency
and due process. Concrete ways must be found to
ensure that the views of individuals and entities listed
are taken into account to the largest extent possible. We
share the view that the 1267 Committee should take
into consideration, as appropriate, the opinion of a
national court that has evaluated the reasons for listing
presented by the Committee and undertaken its own
fact-finding procedures.
Another important aspect is the need to improve
the overall coordination among the different United
Nations bodies that fight terrorism. The Committees
and their respective subsidiary bodies should look at
additional ways to strengthen dialogue and
cooperation, not only among themselves, but also with
other entities, including those related to the promotion
and protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
Further coordination among the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force of the General
Assembly and the three Security Council Committees
is necessary. Operating on several parallel tracks may
prove to be excessively burdensome, especially for
smaller States, and tends to lead to either duplication or
reduced effectiveness.
Working with determination and a sense of shared
responsibility, the Council has been able to improve
some of its sanctions regimes. I am sure that, in the
same spirit, it will make further progress, so that it can
better prevent and fight terrorism, while upholding
democratic principles and protecting human rights.
Brazil is ready to engage in such an endeavour.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to

4

congratulate you for presiding over the Security
Council, at a time when we examine such an important
agenda item.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela is firm and unequivocal in its condemnation
of terrorism. It repudiates any terrorist activity
committed by anyone, whether it is individuals,
organizations or States. We need to recall that
resolution 1373 (2001) prevents States from providing
refuge to those who commit acts of terrorism and
prohibits the refusal of requests for the extradition of
terrorists for political reasons.
On this occasion we remember the serious crimes
committed by terrorists in 1976, in which a fatal
bombing of a Cuban airliner in Barbados took the lives
of 73 innocent people. Among them were 24 members
of Cuba’s fencing team, all teenagers, who were
wearing their gold medals won at the Youth Fencing
Championships in Caracas.
It was considered one of the worst acts of
terrorism in civil aviation history. How did this crime
happen? The explanations can largely be found in the
United States. The declassification of official
documents, now published on the Internet and
available to all of us and circulated in books
worldwide, has revealed the authorship of this flagrant
act of terrorism.
Three months before the Cuban aircraft was shot
down, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) informed
its authorities that an extremist group planned to put a
bomb on a Cubana Airlines flight. The State
Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research
reported to then Secretary of State Henry Kissinger
that a CIA source had overheard Luis Posada Carriles
say, a month before the attack, “we are going to bring
down a Cuban airplane”. The United States
Government, with foreknowledge of this situation, did
not warn the Cuban authorities about this terrorist
threat.
It has been clearly shown that the masterminds of
the attack were Luis Posada Carriles and Orlando
Bosch, and that those who planted the bombs on the
plane were the Venezuelans Hernan Ricardo and
Freddy Lugo. These individuals belonged to the
Coordination of United Revolutionary Organizations,
an umbrella group of Cuban exile organizations that
was formed in 1976, according to the FBI, to “plan,

09-60696

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

finance and carry out terrorist operations and attacks
against Cuba”.
According to their confessions, Hernan Ricardo
and Freddy Lugo placed the C-4 explosives aboard the
aircraft in a tube of toothpaste and a camera. They got
on the CU-455 flight in Trinidad at 12.45 p.m., bound
for Barbados. During the flight, they placed the C-4
explosives. The terrorists got off the plane during its
brief stopover at Seawell Airport in Barbados. Nine
minutes after takeoff, a terrible explosion brought the
aircraft down in full flight. It fell into the waters of
Deep Water Bay, off the coast of Barbados.
In Port of Spain, the terrorists were arrested and
interrogated by detectives from the Trinidad Police
Department, to whom they confessed their guilt in
writing and admitted to being CIA agents working for
Luis Posada Carriles. Venezuelan police arrested Luis
Posada Carriles and Orlando Bosch in Caracas and
found, in Posada’s office in Caracas, a Cubana de
Aviación flight schedule and an intelligence report
written by Hernan Ricardo on Cuban diplomats and
business entities in Barbados, Colombia, Panama and
Trinidad.
After the arrests, Trinidad, Barbados, Guyana and
Cuba ceded jurisdiction over the downing of the
passenger plane to Venezuela, and the four criminals
were prosecuted in Caracas. Lugo and Ricardo were
sentenced to 20 years. Orlando Bosch was released,
supposedly, for good behaviour. But before the
Venezuelan courts could issue a verdict on Luis Posada
Carriles, he escaped in 1985 from the prison of San
Juan de los Morros, Guarico State, Venezuela.
Luis Posada Carriles spent the next few years in
various countries of Central America, working for the
security services of El Salvador, Guatemala and
Honduras. But in the 1990s, he again turned his
attention to Cuba. He recruited Salvadoran and
Guatemalan mercenaries, smuggled explosives into
Cuba, including bombs that exploded at hotels and
restaurants in Havana in 1997, killing an Italian tourist,
Fabio Di Celmo, and leaving several injured.
For a long time, Luis Posada Carriles, although
not a United States citizen, lived in complete freedom
in Miami. The authorities of this country knew of his
stay but did not detain him. Upon learning of this
situation, in May 2005 Venezuela asked the United
States Government to detain Posada Carriles
preventively so that he might face trial on 73 counts of

09-60696

first-degree murder in relation to the downing of the
Cuban airliner. The extradition request made by
Venezuela to the United States Government is based on
three specific instruments: the extradition treaty
between the United States and Venezuela, which
remains in force; the Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation;
and the International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings.
Only after Posada called a news conference in
Miami on 16 May 2005, at which he openly boasted
that the State Department was not even looking for
him, did the United States Government proceed to
arrest him. Posada was charged, however, with illegally
entering the United States. Thus began a legal charade
designed to divert attention from the Venezuelan
extradition request, which remains neglected by the
Justice Department to this day.
On 11 January 2007, the United States
Government, rather than charge him with murder and
terrorism, accused Posada Carriles of seven counts of
immigration fraud. Today, Posada Carriles is free and
lives in Miami. He is a veritable czar of terrorism.
Our country has urged the Government of the
United States to extradite this terrorist to Venezuela so
that he may face trial. If the United States Government
decides not to grant the extradition, international law
obliges the United States to try him in court under
article 7 of the Montreal Convention on Civil Aviation.
By allowing Posada to remain at liberty in this country
and by not accepting the request that he be extradited
to Venezuela, the United States is in violation of
resolution 1373 (2001), which we are discussing today.
The Bolivarian Government stands by the
extradition request and calls on the United Nations to
rule on this horrible case. For the past several years,
Venezuela has told the Security Council that impunity
is the absence of justice, and its prevalence over time is
as ominous as the act of terrorism itself. Venezuela
demands once again that the United States Government
comply with its extradition treaty with Venezuela or
prosecute and punish Luis Posada Carriles as a
terrorist.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation appreciates this opportunity to participate in

5

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

this meeting of the Security Council, and congratulates
Austria on organizing this open debate on the activities
of the three Security Council counter-terrorism
Committees. In this regard, I fully endorse the content
of the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Sweden on behalf of the European Union.
Terrorism infringes on people’s human rights and
fundamental freedoms, and has become a threat to
peace and international security. To counteract
terrorism, it is essential to formulate collective, allinclusive and coordinated response in which the United
Nations system must play a relevant role as an
expression of an organized international community.
To that end, we should all move forward towards an
effective and balanced implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its
Action Plan (General Assembly resolution 60/288),
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly in
September 2006.
Spain, as a country that has suffered terribly from
terrorism in its myriad manifestations, is actively
engaged, both domestically and abroad, to prevent and
combat it. We have learned from experience that we
can be successful in this difficult task only within a
multilateral framework and always in strict respect of
international law and human rights.
I would like to thank the Chairmen of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) — the CounterTerrorism Committee — and 1540 (2004) for the
information they provided today and for the work of
their respective expert groups in the fulfilment of their
mandates. We commend their intention to strengthen
cooperation among them, which should be intensified
even further in order to make optimal the use of the
available resources, avoid duplication and achieve
better results. Likewise, we should strive for a better
interaction between the work done by the Security
Council and its specialized Committees and the work
done by the General Assembly in the fight against
terrorism, in order to allow for the participation of all
in combating this shared threat.
First of all, we would like to highlight the work
of the 1267 Committee, which ensures the
implementation of the Security Council sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban and other
associated groups, as well as the adoption of resolution
1822 (2008), which modified earlier procedures in

6

order to arrive at more rigorous and transparent
implementation of sanctions. In this context, I would
like to point out that last week a delegation from 1267
Committee Monitoring Team visited Spain, which was
very interesting and useful for both parties.
My delegation would also like to draw attention
to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate (CTED), which is now focusing on the
implementation by Member States of anti-terrorism
policies as well as the dissemination of best practices.
Spain appreciates the tools employed by CTED to
analyse the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
at the national and global levels, and values the
Executive Directorate’s technical assistance and
capacity-building activities aimed at strengthening its
dialogue between donor and recipient States in order to
achieve better performance in this task.
Since its creation, Spain has offered technical
assistance to CTED in different regions of the world
and in different fields, such as the development of
legislation in the fight against terrorism and its
financial sources or in areas such as border control or
the work of police and security agencies. Additionally,
Spain has strengthened the cooperation between CTED
and other international, regional and subregional
organizations by financing events such as the
Conference on Terrorism and Cyber-Security, which
took place in Madrid in April 2009.
The international community has before it the
challenge of preventing the access by non-State actors
to the use of weapons of mass destruction, missiles and
related material. In this respect, the efforts of the 1540
Committee to create control mechanisms aimed at the
effective global implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and towards greater dialogue, assistance and
cooperation among Member States are of the greatest
importance. Spain underscores the need for Member
States to comply with the obligations set forth in this
resolution and to advance in areas such as legal
prohibition of activities of proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in their respective territories, the
protection of sensitive materials and an effective export
control system.
The scourge of terrorism continues to threaten the
international community, as, unfortunately, we have
witnessed throughout recent weeks. My delegation
believes that, to combat this barbarism, it is imperative

09-60696

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

to reinforce the commitment of the international
community to fight it while maintaining strict respect
for human rights and international law.
For this reason, we consider these open debates to
be extremely useful in order to allow all Member
States to express their views, ideas and suggestions
about the complex work performed by these three
Security Council Committees dedicated to the fight
against terrorism with a view to providing for its final
eradication.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): I have the honour
today to speak also on behalf of Belgium, Costa Rica,
Denmark, Germany, Finland, Liechtenstein, Norway,
Sweden and Switzerland, which together form the
informal group of like-minded States. The Netherlands
would also like to align itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Sweden, who spoke
on behalf of the European Union.
We would like to present some additional
considerations regarding the 1267 Committee.
Let me start by very briefly recapitulating the
origins of the informal group of like-minded States,
because today is the first time that this group presents
itself here in the Security Council. The group dates
back to 2005, right after the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document called upon the Security Council
“to ensure that fair and clear procedures exist for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions
lists and for removing them, as well as for
granting humanitarian exemptions” (resolution
60/1, para. 109).
In March 2006, as part of a process instituted by
the Governments of Germany, Sweden and
Switzerland, the Watson Institute for International
Studies released a paper entitled “Strengthening
Targeted Sanctions through Fair and Clear
Procedures”.
The
paper
contained
several
recommendations and options to enhance far and clear
procedures and was submitted to the Security Council
in the spring of 2006.
The next step was taken in May 2008, when
Denmark, Germany, Liechtenstein, the Netherlands,
Sweden and Switzerland suggested in a letter
subsequently circulated as an official document of the

09-60696

General Assembly and the Security Council (A/62/891S/2008/428), the establishment of an expert panel
assisting the sanctions Committees in the consideration
of delisting requests and thus addressing concerns
regarding the right to review by an effective review
mechanism. In 2009, Belgium, Costa Rica, Finland and
Norway associated themselves with the informal likeminded group.
In the like-minded States’ view, resolution 1822
(2008) is an important step in the life of the 1267
Committee. The resolution added to the transparency
and enhanced fairness and clarity of the procedures of
the sanctions regime by introducing a number of
important innovations, in particular the review process
of all the names on the 1267 list by 30 June 2010 and
the posting of narrative summaries for all the names on
the Committee’s website. However, resolution 1822
(2008) did not remedy one remaining fundamental due
process concern: the absence of an effective review
mechanism that fulfils the requirements of impartiality,
independence and the ability to provide an effective
remedy.
Developments since the adoption of resolution
1822 (2008) have reinforced the need to address this
one remaining fundamental due process concern. First,
recent judgments by national courts worldwide and
regional courts indicate that further steps are needed in
order to guarantee fundamental human rights while
preventing and combating terrorism. In particular, at
stake here are the right of the individuals concerned to
be informed of the sanctions taken against them, the
right to be heard and the right to challenge the decision
taken by the sanctions Committee before an
independent body.
Secondly, a number of recently published
authoritative studies and reports have also addressed
these issues. An example of that is the second report by
the Watson Institute. In our view, this question is a
challenge to the efficiency, legitimacy and credibility
of the entire United Nations sanctions regime, as was
also pointed out in the tenth report of the Monitoring
Team.
The group of like-minded countries therefore
considers it imperative, while maintaining targeted
sanctions as an effective instrument available to the
Security Council, to look at the same time at the
importance of improvements fundamental to due
process. To this end, we have drafted a working paper

7

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

entitled “Working on strengthening targeted sanctions —
ideas and options”, which is annexed to my written
statement. This working paper contains a broad range of
suggestions, including that of a panel that might come
up with possible ways to further strengthen the existing
procedures by building on the listing, delisting, review
and exemption procedures as well as the focal point
process.
It should be emphasized that, although these
ideas and options are primarily discussed in the context
of the 1267 sanctions regime, they should, in our view,
also apply, as appropriate, to the other sanctions
regimes.
The purpose of this working paper is to share
views with Security Council members, and this in
order to constructively contribute to the work of the
Security Council for the purpose of further
strengthening the existing procedures. The informal
group of like-minded States would like to express their
appreciation to the members of the Security Council
for the open exchanges of views on this matter.
I would like to strongly encourage the Security
Council to continue to pursue an open and inclusive
dialogue with interested States, including through its
sanctions Committees, so as to achieve further
improvements in its listing and delisting process,
thereby securing the effectiveness of a sanctions
regime that may otherwise be at risk.
We wish to stress that any decision on listing and
delisting should be taken by the Security Council, thus
keeping decision-making within the realm of the
Council. We firmly believe that the required
improvements to procedures can be achieved without
in any way compromising the authority of the Council.
The new draft resolution on sanctions against
Al-Qaida, Osama bin Laden and/or the Taliban and
their associates will constitute an important step to that
end. We look forward to its adoption by the Security
Council in December.
In conclusion, the suggested changes in our
working paper will not weaken our sanctions regime.
On the contrary, they are needed to secure the use of
targeted sanctions as an effective tool in our fight
against terrorism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.

8

Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Australia wishes
to place on record its appreciation and strong support
for the work of the Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
as well for the assistance of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate. (CTED). A global effort is
needed to counter terrorism effectively. Multilateral
action through the United Nations system is a vital
element in any international strategy to address
terrorism and violent extremism.
Australia encourages the three Committees and
their respective expert bodies to continue to work
closely together and with the broader United Nations
system,
including
the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force. In our view, cooperation is
particularly important in relation to streamlined
reporting regimes, assessment missions and the
facilitation of technical assistance. We note, in that
regard, the importance of all three Committees
continuing to recognize the regional context of their
activities. We also encourage the 1540 Committee, as it
increases its focus on technical assistance, to work
with CTED to identify effective approaches.
The relationship of the subsidiary bodies with
other international organizations is also important. My
delegation would like to draw attention to a recent best
practices paper adopted by the Financial Action Task
Force on implementing terrorist asset freezing
obligations arising from both resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1373 (2001). As Co-Chair of the project team that
developed that paper, Australia would like to
acknowledge the significant contribution to that work
by both the 1267 Committee and CTED.
Effective relations with Member States —
particularly, of course, with donor and recipient
countries — are also critical to the success of the
Committees’ work. In that context, we welcomed the
recent visit to Australia, in July, by a CTED delegation.
We appreciated the opportunity to share our approach
to counter-terrorism efforts, both domestically and in
the region.
Continual institutional review is crucial. We
commend the 1267 Committee on its review of the
Consolidated List and for the conclusion of procedures
for drafting narrative summaries on the reasons for
listing each entry. That approach could be a model for
other regimes to follow. We also welcome the recent
open meeting of the 1540 Committee that was held as

09-60696

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

part of its comprehensive review of the implementation
of that resolution.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Australia’s
active and ongoing support for the Council’s counterterrorism bodies and our commitment to assisting
efforts to advance their work. The United Nations has
the unique capacity to set international norms and
standards on countering terrorism, as well as to
encourage adherence to them. That is a capacity that
my delegation will continue to support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Terrorism is one of the gravest threats to international
peace and security. Addressing this problem requires an
integrated and comprehensive approach. Clearly, the
United Nations has made considerable progress, both
in the areas of standard-setting and in implementing
counter-terrorism measures. But despite all those
efforts and activities, we have unfortunately witnessed
an escalation in terrorist attacks in various parts of the
world.
Genuinely combating terrorism very much
depends upon how we identify its root causes. Foreign
occupation, exclusion, selectivity and expansionist
economic and political policies are among the factors
that create conditions conductive to the spread of
violent acts and terrorism. Furthermore, the double
standard exercised by certain States in dealing with
terrorism has aggravated the situation. On the one
hand, they appear to confront some terrorist groups
while, on the other, they overlook others. Perhaps one
reason for the rise in terrorist activities in recent years,
in terms of frequency and the advanced tactics used by
terrorists, is the wrong and selective approach by
certain States in dealing with terrorism.
On the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we welcome the
initiative to convene the open meeting of the
comprehensive review on the status of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which was
held in October. The meeting was an opportunity to
address a number of serious and valid concerns of
Member States in connection with the work of 1540
Committee. The Islamic Republic of Iran believes that
the work of the Committee should not have operative
impact on the rights enshrined in internationally
negotiated instruments such as the Treaty on the

09-60696

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention, as well as the statute of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Islamic Republic of Iran also believes that
any emphasis on the concept of prohibiting access by
non-State actors to weapons of mass destruction and
nuclear materials should not divert the attention of
Member States from nuclear disarmament as the
highest priority of the international community.
In line with the points I have just made, the
Islamic Republic of Iran has submitted two reports to
the 1540 Committee on the measures Iran has taken to
implement the resolution.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has taken serious
steps in implementing the Security Council’s
resolutions on terrorism, including resolution 1373
(2001). We have submitted six national reports on our
implementation of that resolution, in which we have set
out the concrete steps that our country has taken to
implement the provisions of that and other relevant
resolutions. Those steps include stepping up border
control security and surveillance measures at border
entry and exit checkpoints. Moreover, we have
intensified our fight against drug trafficking originating
from Afghanistan. Given the fact that that menace
serves as a feeding ground for terrorism, Iran’s efforts
in that regard have undoubtedly made a fundamental
contribution to the global fight against terrorism. Iran
has thus far shouldered that burden almost singlehandedly.
As one of the first victims of terrorism in the
region, Iran made unwavering efforts to fight it and has
always strongly condemned that vicious menace in all
its forms and manifestations. As I stated earlier, the
application of double standards in dealing with
terrorism and terrorist groups is a matter of grave
concern that seriously undermines the international
community’s collective fight against terrorism. The
Islamic Republic of Iran has been subject to various
acts of terrorism by certain terrorist groups over the
past three decades.
In that regard, particular reference should be
made of the Mujaheddin e Khalq terrorist group, which
has thus far perpetrated more than 612 terrorist
operations in Iran, resulting in the killing and
wounding of many civilians and officials and damage
to private and government properties. That terrorist

9

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

group has also devised many atrocious ploys to incite
acts of terrorism inside and outside the country. This
terrorist group was long supported and sheltered by the
former regime in Iraq and was engaged in Saddam’s
bloody campaigns against the Iraqi people, too.
Despite its heinous and appalling record of
terrorist acts and incitement to terrorism, and although
it was officially designated a terrorist group by the
United States and others, elements and members of that
group continue to enjoy support and receive safe haven
in the United States and some European countries,
including some States members of the European Union.
The irony is that the European Union Council of
Foreign Ministers, despite its own belief in and
emphasis on the terrorist nature of the Mujaheddin e
Khalq, decided, on 26 January 2009, to remove the
name of this notorious terrorist cult from the European
Union list of terrorist groups by invoking the judgment
of the Court of First Instance of the European Court of
Justice. The European Union decision has put on
display the selective approach and double standard
with which the European Union deals with the vicious
menace of terrorism. It is obvious that this kind of
attitude towards terrorist groups weakens the
international consensus against terrorism and
encourages terrorists to continue their inhuman
activities. Such support is indeed in clear violation of
the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
particularly resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).
There are certain other terrorist groups that have
committed acts of terrorism against the Iranian people.
In the past several years, the Jundullah terrorist group
has attacked and killed dozens of people in the eastern
and south-eastern parts of the country in an attempt to
create an environment of intimidation and insecurity.
On 18 October, that group attacked participants in a
conference of tribal and local leaders in the border city
of Pishin in the eastern province of Sistan-Baluchistan,
killing at least 57 and injuring 150. This group also
enjoys the support of some foreign countries. We
expect all countries to uphold their international
obligations in this respect.
I would like to conclude by reiterating that we
should all strengthen our cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. Only through a coordinated and
comprehensive approach will the international
community’s fight against terrorism yield lasting
results.

10

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like at the outset, Sir, to congratulate
your country on its presidency of the Council for this
month. We thank the Permanent Representative of Viet
Nam and the members of his friendly delegation for
their work last month. We also wish to thank the
Chairmen of the Council Committees for their
briefings at this meeting and for their efforts to
coordinate international cooperation in combating
terrorism.
The Syrian Arab Republic became aware of the
threat posed by terrorism at an early date. It was one of
the first States to highlight, in the mid 1980s, the need
to foster efforts to eradicate international terrorism and
to hold an international United Nations conference to
draw up a specific definition of the concept of
terrorism and to formulate an effective international
strategy to combat it and distinguish it from the
legitimate liberation struggle of peoples suffering
under the yoke of occupation. The right to such
struggle has been enshrined in international norms and
instruments.
My country, the Syrian Arab Republic,
emphasizes its condemnation of terrorism as an unjust,
aggressive and criminal action that targets the lives and
property of innocent people. My country calls for
action on all levels to combat international terrorism in
conformity with the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter and the provisions of
international law.
The crimes perpetrated by Israel against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories and
against Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan
are without a doubt war crimes. They are the very
definition of terrorism. They constitute a blatant form
of State terrorism and a grave violation of the
principles of human rights, international law and
resolutions of international legitimacy, including
Security Council resolutions. The Syrian Arab
Republic believes that the United Nations has a pivotal
role to the play in combating terrorism and grappling
with it internationally, and therefore fully cooperates
with the Security Council Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004).

09-60696

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

The Syrian Arab Republic has established
complementary national committees to ensure the
optimal application of these resolutions and to achieve
the best possible cooperation with the Security
Council’s Committees. This cooperation stems from
my country’s keen interest in successfully
implementing resolutions of international legitimacy,
including Security Council resolutions, and from our
belief in the pressing need to cooperate with these
Committees in order to eradicate terrorism. This is
particularly true since the Syrian Arab Republic has
suffered for decades from the scourge of terrorism and
terrorist actions inflicted upon its territory, the most
recent of which was last year’s military operation
against al-Qazzaz.
Once again, the Syria states that terrorism
constitutes an ongoing threat to international peace and
security. We also reiterate our commitment to the
relevant international resolutions on combating
terrorism. We are persuaded that the United Nations
has a pivotal role to play in grappling with
international terrorism and establishing international
consensus on this topic.
My country is of the view that the Committees of
the Security Council established to combat terrorism
contribute to efforts to coordinate international action
to combat terrorism. However, we must state that the
Committees show a kind of discrimination in dealing
with Member States. For instance, we notice a focus on
certain States or particular geographic groupings and
not on others. While the Committees request certain
States to submit reports on the implementation of
terrorism-related resolutions, they turn a blind eye to
other States.

and Crime. Syria participated in the International
Workshop for National Counter-Terrorism Focal
Points, held in Vienna — your capital, Mr. President —
on 12 and 13 October. Syria has submitted its national
report to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) on the
implementation of that resolution.
Syria was among the first States to sign the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) in 1968. We do not possess any nuclear
weapons, any means of their delivery or any material
that can be used for their manufacture. We also signed
a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 1992.
Meanwhile, Israel is the only party in the Middle
East that possesses a huge arsenal of nuclear weapons
and that refuses to accede to the NPT. Its facilities are
not subject to any verification. Therefore, the
accumulated negative impact of Israel’s non-compliance
with the NPT reflects Israel’s disrespect for resolution
1540 (2004) and its disregard for the IAEA and all
international efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament.
Finally, my country calls once again for the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East. In that connection, we wish to refer to the
draft resolution that my country submitted to the
Security Council in 2003 during our Council
membership (see S/2003/1219), calling for the
establishment of such a zone in the region.
The President: I now call on the representative
of India.

The Syrian Arab Republic deploys strenuous
efforts to combat money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism. The Syrian Commission for Combating
Money-Laundering and Terrorism Financing has joined
the Egmont Group, whose units seek to verify financial
transactions in 108 States. The Group is responsible for
gathering information and reporting on financial
transactions suspected to be related to moneylaundering or terrorist financing.

Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Allow me at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. We
appreciate the approach that you have taken thus far in
conducting the business of the Council, including in
interactions with non-members. I would also like to
thank you, in your capacity as Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), and the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for your briefings.

Syria has attended counter-terrorism workshops,
including the Doha workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and a national workshop held in
Abu Dhabi from 28 to 30 June, organized in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs

I take the floor barely two weeks before the first
anniversary of the horrific terrorist attacks in Mumbai,
in my country. The images of those heinous attacks
remain deeply etched in the minds and hearts of the
Indian people. They demand an early end to the

09-60696

11

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

scourge of terrorism which has plagued us for the past
two decades.
Terrorism poses a grave threat to all States and all
societies. It undermines peace, democracy and
freedom, thus endangering the very foundations of the
continued existence of democratic societies. Terrorism
is a global threat and requires a coordinated and
concerted global response. India is a party to all 13
sectoral conventions on terrorism that have been
adopted under the auspices of the United Nations. India
participated constructively in discussions leading to the
adoption of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy (see General Assembly resolution
60/288) in September 2006.
We at the United Nations have been negotiating a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
for more than a decade. Nearly all the elements of the
proposed convention have met with the agreement of
Member States. It is important that we all put our heads
and minds together with a common resolve to ensure
the early adoption of the convention. Its time has really
arrived, and we all need to act with the necessary
political will to ensure the adoption of the convention.
India supports the anti-terrorism mechanisms
established by the United Nations, including Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999), related to sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban; Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), which led to the establishment
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee; and Security
Council resolution 1540 (2004), which addressed the
issue of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. India also supports the subsequent
resolutions that renewed, strengthened or amended
those three original resolutions. We are fully
committed to implementing our obligations under those
resolutions.
India has been accorded observer status by the
Financial Action Task Force. We are working towards
full membership. We are reviewing our legislative,
regulatory and institutional framework with a view to
becoming fully compliant with the recommendations of
the Task Force on combating money-laundering and
terrorist financing.
Regarding our participation in the regime created
by resolution 1267 (1999) and subsequent associated
resolutions, it may be recalled that in January 2004, the
Government of India enacted an order entitled
Prevention
and
Suppression
of
Terrorism

12

(Implementation of Security Council Resolutions),
revised in March 2006, 2007 and July 2009, which
enables the central and State authorities concerned to
take necessary action as required under resolution 1267
(1999) in respect of the individuals and entities
included in the 1267 list. In December 2008, the
Government of India amended the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967, in order to effectively
implement resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001).
At the same time, however, we are concerned that the
process of listing and delisting on the consolidated list
is subject to political will and pressure — a scenario
that we can ill afford in our united fight against
terrorism.
We received the first visit by the 1267
Committee’s Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team from 1 to 3 September 2009. From
our perspective, the visit was very useful, as it gave us
an opportunity to closely interact with the head of the
Monitoring Team. We look forward to cooperating with
the Team and the regime in the future.
Regarding our cooperation with the CounterTerrorism Committee, it is pertinent to note that India
has submitted five national reports to the Committee
on measures taken to implement resolution 1373
(2001). We also hosted a visit by the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate in
November 2006. We encourage the ongoing
stocktaking exercise with a view to the full
implementation of the provisions of resolution 1373
(2001).
Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
India has taken additional steps to further strengthen
the existing legislative and regulatory mechanism for
exercising controls over weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). A major step was the enactment of the WMD
Act in June 2005. The Act provides for integrated and
overarching legislation on prohibiting unlawful
activities in relation to WMDs, their delivery systems
and related materials, equipment and technologies. The
Act criminalizes a range of unlawful activities in
relation to WMDs and their means of delivery.
Separately, industry outreach activities and training
programmes are organized to highlight various aspects
of resolution 1540 (2004).
We support efforts to prepare guidelines for
handling assistance requests by countries and to find
means to address the most commonly found gaps in the

09-60696

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). It is
important that these activities be performed only at the
request of a country and keeping in mind the varying
national capacities, procedures and systems. Based on
specific requests by countries, India remains ready to
assist them bilaterally in capacity-building and in
fulfilling their obligations under Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). With respect to the
involvement of regional organizations, this may need
to be carefully considered since this subject is rather
specialized in nature and capability and expertise at the
level of regional or subregional organizations may not
often be available.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that we will
continue to work closely with the counter-terrorism
mechanisms established by Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).
The scourge of terrorism requires the international
community to act in concert and in a comprehensive
manner, including through termination of sources of its
financing and stamping out its networks. The necessary
political will and resolve needs to be constantly on
demonstration for the international community to give
a truly strong and unambiguous signal in our resolve to
fight terrorism.
The President: I give
representative of Colombia.

the

floor

to

the

Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia appreciates the briefings on the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council that were presented in
today’s meeting. My Government particularly
appreciates the work of these Committees.
Colombia emphasizes the importance of ensuring
international cooperation and the commitment of each
and every Member State to honour its international
obligations in the fight against terrorism and associated
criminal activities. My country makes this appeal
based on its own experience. We, Colombians, have
suffered from terrorist acts committed by illegal armed
groups, some of them already demobilized and others
still in existence, such as the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional.
Our firm and recognized democratic practices
give us the authority to reiterate that today the only
raison d’être for these groups is the criminal business
of drug trafficking. These groups are not only
repudiated by the Colombian people, but are also

09-60696

designated as terrorists on the lists of many countries,
including several States members of the Security
Council.
In order to overcome terrorist violence, in order
to permit increased investment, growth, social
development and well-being, Colombians since 2002
have carried out the Democratic Security Policy. That
has reduced crime and brought about progress in
guaranteeing rights and in strengthening our
democratic institutions. In making progress towards
those goals solidarity and international cooperation has
also been essential. It is clear that no country can
confront terrorism on its own.
International solidarity includes the repudiation
of terrorist groups. In resolution 1465 (2003) the
Council condemned the terrorist act that occurred in
Bogota in February 2003 and urged all States to
cooperate with Colombia, in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001), to find and bring to justice the
perpetrators. That act was one of many carried out by
FARC.
Plan Colombia, which was funded with
significant national resources and supportive
international cooperation, particularly from the United
States, has made verifiable achievements in the fight
against the global drug problem. The 2008 World Drug
Report published by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime informs us of significant declines
both in the illicit crops and the production of drugs, as
well as a sharp increase in seizures of those substances.
Those who question the effectiveness of Plan Colombia
show a deep lack of knowledge of today’s reality that
we the Colombians experience.
In Colombia we have also experienced the
adverse effect of a lack of cooperation and the
interference by another country in our internal affairs.
In this regard, I must refer to the particular concern of
the Colombian Government at the lack of willingness
by the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to cooperate in the fight against criminal
groups that have inflicted great pain on my country.
This lack of willingness is reflected in several ways
and I will refer to some examples that the Government
of Colombia has already brought to the attention of
Council members.
Arms have been diverted from Venezuela to
recognized terrorist groups that operate in Colombia.
Recently, anti-tank weapons and their ammunition

13

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

were found by Colombian authorities in a camp
belonging to the illegal armed group FARC. There is a
record of the legal sale of this weaponry to the
Venezuelan Government. The Foreign Minister of
Colombia sent a dossier on this matter to the
Venezuelan Government, but to date no satisfactory
explanation befitting the seriousness of the matter has
been received.
Since the 1980s, Colombia and Venezuela have
engaged in reciprocal cooperation mechanisms in
matters of border security and the fight against drug
trafficking. Nonetheless, the Venezuelan Government
decided not to continue its cooperation within the
framework of these mechanisms, which in the past had
proven to be effective in achieving greater control of
illicit drug trafficking and other criminal activities.
Moreover, the Venezuelan Government has
generated disinformation regarding international
cooperation agreements in the fight against terrorism
and drug trafficking. It has referred to the agreement
signed between Colombia and the United States of
America. This agreement resulted from a long history
of cooperation between the two countries and is limited
to the sole purpose of combating illicit drug trafficking
and terrorism in Colombia. It will be implemented in
strict compliance with the principles of sovereign
equality, the territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.
Disinformation or distortion will not alter the legal
soundness and political transparency of the actions of
the Government of Colombia.
The people of Colombia do not understand why
the Venezuelan Government insists on questioning the
national and cooperation strategies implemented to
confront drug trafficking and terrorism in my country.
The people of Colombia are committed to their
democratic institutions in the fight against those
phenomena. They also do not understand and are
dismayed by the threat of war uttered last Sunday by
the President of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
about which the Colombian Government informed the
members of the Council in a timely manner.
My delegation shares the Council’s concern with
regard to the connection between terrorism,
international crime, illicit drugs and illicit arms
trafficking. Colombia trusts that the Council will
continue to promote measures to ensure that, in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), all States

14

refrain from providing any form of support, active or
passive, to groups involved in acts of terrorism.
In this regard, my Government will continue to
cooperate actively with the United Nations in the fight
against terrorism. Likewise, we will continue to
support other countries’ efforts to confront crime and
drug trafficking. We will continue to contribute our
experience and good practices in this field.
My Government wishes to thank those countries
that, through effective cooperation, have contributed to
the strengthening of our capacities in this fight, and we
invite those that still have not done so to show their
solidarity with a people that repudiates terrorism and
desires to live in a country with development and wellbeing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela, who has asked to make a further
statement.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, and in particular its
President Hugo Chávez Frias, has been a major player
in the quest for peace in Colombia. Through his
activities in the area of peace, he has been responsible
for the only release of prisoners held by armed groups,
for which he has been widely recognized by the
international community. The Government of President
Hugo Chávez Frias has worked for peace in Colombia,
a country that has suffered from a terrible internal war
for more than 60 years. That internal war has affected
not just Venezuela, but also various other neighbours of
Colombia.
In the specific case of Venezuela, thousands and
thousands of Colombians have come to our country. It
is estimated that approximately 4 million have left
Colombia for Venezuela and received help and
protection from the Government of Venezuela, and
benefit fully from our social programmes. Thus, the
Government of Venezuela has a major interest in
seeing the conflict in Colombia come to an end.
However, the Government of Colombia, far from
seeking mechanisms for political dialogue in order to
put an end to the terrible massacres and political
violence, only foments further war and violence. That
is clear from the fact that, far from seeking political
dialogue as called for by the international community,

09-60696

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

it is instead fomenting and expanding war to other
countries of the continent. That was clearly
demonstrated by its invasion of the brotherly nation of
Ecuador, which was condemned by the Rio Group at its
meeting in Santo Domingo, leading President Uribe
Veléz to ask forgiveness of the heads of State gathered
at that meeting.
However, the Colombian Government, far from
seeking peaceful relations with the other countries on
the continent, insists on having recourse to violence
and broadening the conflict, which has gone on for so
long. Thus, he has concluded a political and military
agreement with the Government of the United States
that virtually converts Colombia into a mechanism for
extending war into the whole continent and
subordinates Colombia to the United States policy of
aggression against the countries of the continent.
That is why the countries of South America,
meeting in Bariloche, Argentina, declared their deep
concern at the establishment of seven United States
military bases in Colombia. The warlike intentions of
President Uribe’s Government have been confirmed by
documentation available to all, issued by the United
States Departments of State and Defense, and by
numerous official reports of the United States
Government. These clearly establish that the United
States military bases in Colombia will be used to
monitor and control not just Colombia but the entire
South American continent.
I would also like to refer to the unfounded
statements made by the representative of Colombia at
this meeting. Drug trafficking in Colombia is an
endemic evil, and I would like to state here in a
responsible manner that drug trafficking and its effects
on Colombia and the world have not decreased but
have actually increased significantly. The policy of
democratic security has totally failed; it has instead
intensified the war and prevented Colombia from
working with other countries of the continent to fight
both terrorism and drug trafficking.
The best demonstration that military bases are not
being established in Colombia to fight terrorism or
drug trafficking is the statement made by former
President Ernesto Samper of Colombia, who has said
that this rationale is false and that, on the contrary, the
purpose is to convert the Colombian army into a
military tool for bellicose expansion throughout the
continent.

09-60696

In the matter of the arms found in the possession
of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, those
were seized as a result of a military action that was
carried out against the armed forces of Venezuela,
when armed groups from Colombia seized arms that
had been fully deactivated. Those weapons are now
being presented as if they had come form Venezuela,
which is a terrible falsehood and manipulation of
historical fact. The Government of Venezuela would
like to assert that we are in favour of peace, and calls
on the Government of Colombia to cease its
expansionist warlike policies and its transformation
into a tool for spreading violence and war into
neighbouring countries.
Venezuela loves peace. Venezuela and its
Government are always interested in contributing to a
peaceful solution to regional conflicts. Venezuela and
its Government have the highest interest in the
achievement of peace in Colombia, because peace in
Colombia means peace in Venezuela, and because
Venezuela is the country that has suffered most from
the effects of the terrible war that the Government of
Colombia is perpetuating and which the Government of
Venezuela would like to help resolve peacefully. That
is why, on the occasions when President Chávez has
acted as facilitator in seeking alternative means to
peace, he has done so at the special request of the
Government of Colombia.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of the United States of America, who
has asked to make an additional statement.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
feel I must take the floor to correct the
mischaracterizations we have just heard with respect to
the Defense Cooperation Agreement that was just
signed recently between the United States and
Colombia.
The United States and Colombia on 30 October
signed the Defense Cooperation Agreement, which
facilitates United States access to Colombian bases in
support of mutually approved activities within
Colombia only. The Agreement harmonizes existing
bilateral cooperation in eliminating narcotics
production and trafficking and illicit smuggling of all
types, and augments assistance efforts for humanitarian
and natural disasters. The Agreement explicitly
indicates that all activities will be consistent with the
principles of sovereignty, non-interventionism and

15

S/PV.6217 (Resumption 1)

territorial integrity. It has no regional or extraterritorial
application.
We also heard, I am pleased to note, of
Venezuela’s interest in international cooperation
against terrorism, which is an issue of global and
regional importance. One of the reasons that we reestablished relations at the ambassadorial level in July
was to ensure a high quality dialogue with Venezuela
on issues of mutual concern, including counterterrorism and counter-narcotics efforts. While the
Venezuelan Government has not yet taken advantage of
this opportunity, we are hopeful that its new-found
interest in the topic, as evidenced by this discussion,
will encourage a meaningful dialogue between our
Governments.
The President: The representative of Colombia
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
give her the floor.

16

Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation does not seek to make an additional
statement or to alter the scope of this meeting. We have
taken note of the reference made to the information
presented by Colombia to the members of the Security
Council, and of the adjectives applied to it. The
information presented today by the Government of
Colombia is based neither on adjectives or baseless
qualifications, nor on mere rhetoric; it is based on
specific and verifiable facts. In my statement, I made
reference to some of these. I thank the President and
other members of the Council for the attention that
they have given to that information.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

09-60696
