Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

3. Urges these authorities to agree at an early date
on the holding of genuinely free elections in accordance
with the principles endorsed by the General Assembly;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue its
work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to place the Korean
question on the provisional agenda of the fourteenth
session of the General Assembly.
781st plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.

1287 (XIIl). Question of Cypnu4
The General Assembly,
Having consider eel the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 1013 (XI) of 26 February
1957,
Expresses its confidence that continued efforts will
be made by the parties to reach a peaceful, democratic
and just solution in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
782nd plenary meeting,
5 December 1958.

1347 (XIIl). Effects of atomic radiation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 913 (X) of 3 December 1955,
Noting with satisfaction the unanimously adopted report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the
Effects of Atomic Radiation, 11
Recalling also its resolution 1147 (XII) of 14 November 1957 which requested the Secretary-General in
consultation with the Committee to consider the question
of the strengthening and widening of scientific activities
in this field,
Taking note of the Secretary-General's report8 prepared in response to the above-mentioned resolution,
1. Commends the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation for its work and
for the valuable report which it has presented ;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
agencies, to the international non-governmental and the
national scientific organizations, and to the individual
scientists who have assisted the Committee in its work;
3. Urges all concerned to take note of the suggestions
made and the views expressed in the report of the Committee;
4. Decides to request the Committee to continue its
useful work, and to report to the General Assembly as
appropriate ;
• This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assembly after consideration of
the report of the First Committee. For the text of the report,
see Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Ses.rion, Annexes, agenda item 68, document A/4029.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Ses.rion, Supplement No.17 (A/3838).
'Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 25, documents A/3864 and Add.1,

5

5. Requests the Committee to consult with the other
agencies and organizations concerned on projects within
its sphere of activities so as to avoid the duplication of
wort and ensure effective co-ordination ;
6. Calls upon all concerned to assist the Committee
by making available to it reports and studies relating to
the short-term and long-term effects of ionizing radiation upon man and his environment and radiological
data collected by them, and by pursuing such investigations as may broaden world scientific knowledge in this
sphere and by transmitting their results to the Committee;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with the assistance necessary for
the conduct of its work.
792nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1958.

1348 (XIII). Question of the peaceful use
of outer space
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the common interest of mankind in outer
space and recognizing that it is the common aim that
outer space should be used for peaceful purposes only,
Bearing in mind the provision of Article 2, paragraph
1, of the Charter of the United Nations, which states
that the Organization is based on the principle of the
sovereign equality of all its Members,
Wishing to avoid the extension of present national
rivalries into this new field,
Desiring to promote energetically the fullest exploration and exploitation of outer space for the benefit of
mankind,
Conscious that recent developments in respect of
outer space have added a new dimension to man's existence and opened new possibilities for the increase of his
knowledge and the improvement of his life,
Noting the success of the scientific co-operative programme of the International Geophysical Year in the
exploration of outer space and the decision to continue
and expand this type of co-operation,
Recognizing the great importance of international cooperation in the study and utilization of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Consiclering that such co-operation will promote mutual understanding and the strengthening of friendly
relations among peoples,
Believing that the developtl}ent of programmes of international and scientific co-operation in the peaceful
uses of outer space should be vigorously pursued,
Believing that progress in this field will materially
help to achieve the ahn that outer space should be used
for peaceful purposes only,
Considering that an important contribution can be
made by the establishment within the framework of the
United Nations of an appropriate international body for
co-operation in the study of outer space for peaceful
purposes,
Desiring to obtain the fullest information on the many
problems relating to the peaceful uses of outer space before recommending specific programmes of international
co-operation in this field,

6

General Auembly-Thirteenth Session

1. Establishes an ad hoe Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space composed of the representatives of
Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Czechoslovakia, France, India, Iran, Italy, Japan, Mexico,
Poland, Sweden, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Arab Republic, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America, and requests it to report to the General Assembly at its fourteenth session on the following:
(a) The activities and resources of the United Nations, of its specialized agencies and of other international bodies relating ·to the peaceful uses of outer space;
( b) The area of international co-operation and programmes in the peaceful uses of outer space which could
appropriately be undertaken under United Nations auspices to the benefit of States irrespective of the state of
their economic or scientific development, taking into
account the following proposals, inter alia:

(i) Continuation on a permanent basis of the outer
space research now being carried on within the
framework of the International Geophysical
Year;

(ii) Organization of the mutual exchange and dissemination of information on outer space research;
(iii) Co-ordination of national research programmes
for the study of outer space, and the rendering
of all possible assistance and help towards their
realization ;
( c) The future organizational arrangements to facilitate international co-operation in this field within the
framework of the United Nations;
(d) The nature of legal problems which may arise
in the carrying out of programmes to explore outer
space;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to render appropriate assistance to the above-named Committee and to
recommend any other steps that might be taken within
the existing United Nations framework to encourage
the fullest international co-operation for the peaceful
uses of outer space.

792nd plenary meeting,
13 December 1958.
