A/55/PV.82

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fifth session

82nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 6 December 2000, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 11 a.m.

(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions

Agenda item 17 (continued)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/424/Add.1)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/652)
The
President:
The
Fifth
Committee
recommends in paragraph 11 of its report, document
A/55/652, that the General Assembly appoint the
following persons as members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
for a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2001: Mr. Andrzej Abraszewski, Mr. Manlan Narcisse
Ahounou, Mr. Felipe Mabilingan, Mr. Besley Maycock
and Mr. C. S. M. Mselle.
May I take it that the Assembly appoints these
persons?
It was so decided.

The President: In paragraph 5 of its report,
document A/55/424/Add.1, the Fifth Committee
recommends that the General Assembly appoint the
following persons as members of the Committee on
Contributions for a three-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2001: Mr. Petru Dumitriu, Mr. Chinmaya
Gharekhan, Mr. Ihor Hummeny, Mr. Gebhard Benjamin
Kandanga, Mr. David Leis and Mr. Kazuo Watanabe.
In paragraph 6 of the same report, the Fifth
Committee also recommends that the General
Assembly appoint Mr. Henry Fox as a member of the
Committee on Contributions for a term of office
beginning on 6 December 2000 and ending on
31 December 2001.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint these persons?
It was so decided.
(c) Appointment of a member of the Board
of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/653)
The President: In paragraph 5 of its report,
document A/55/653, the Fifth Committee recommends
that the General Assembly appoint the Court of Audit

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

00-78349 (E)

A/55/PV.82

of France as a member of the Board of Auditors for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 July 2001.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to appoint
the Court of Audit of France?
It was so decided.
(d) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/654)
The
President:
The
Fifth
Committee
recommends in paragraph 5 of its report, document
A/55/654, that the General Assembly confirm the
appointment by the Secretary-General of the following
persons as members of the Investments Committee for
a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2001: Mr. Ahmad Abdullatif, Mr. Fernando Chico
Pardo and Mr. J. Y. Pillay.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to confirm the appointment of these persons?
It was so decided.
(e) Appointment of members of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/655)
The President: In paragraph 5 of its report,
document A/55/655, the Fifth Committee recommends
that the General Assembly appoint the following
persons as members of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2001: Mr. Omer Yousif
Bireedo, Mr. Spyridon Flogaitis and Ms. Brigitte Stern.
May I consider that the Assembly appoints these
persons?
It was so decided.
(g) Appointment of members of the International
Civil Service Commission
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/55/656)
The President: In paragraph 7 of its report,
document A/55/656, the Fifth Committee recommends
that the General Assembly appoint the following

2

persons as members of the International Civil Service
Commission for a four-year term of office beginning
1 January 2001: Mr. Ernest Rusita, Mr. El Hassane
Zahid, Mr. Asda Jayanama, Mr. C. M. Shafi Sami and
Mr. Alexei Fedotov.
May I take it that the General Assembly appoints
these persons?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 17.
Agenda item 47 (continued)
Assistance in mine action
Draft resolution (A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the debate on this item at its
73rd plenary meeting, on 28 November 2000. In this
connection, the General Assembly has before it a
revised draft resolution issued as document
A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1.
I now give the floor to the representative of
France to introduce draft resolution A/55/L.44/Rev.2.
Mr. Le Bret (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the European Union and all of the sponsors, I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution
A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1, “Assistance in mine
action”.
I shall not go back over the substance of the text,
which was covered during the earlier debate in plenary
meeting. I simply want to say that the document now
before us in A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1 is the result of
informal consultations that allowed for agreement on
the revised text among the sponsors and all interested
delegations.
In this connection, I would like to thank all those
delegations that participated in the negotiations for
their support and for the goodwill demonstrated
throughout the sometimes difficult process. The
authors of the draft resolution trust that it can be
adopted this year by consensus, like others before it.

A/55/PV.82

The President: I should like to inform members
that the sponsor of the amendments contained in
document A/55/L.51 has withdrawn the amendments.
We shall now proceed to take a decision on draft
resolution A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1?
Draft resolution A/55/L.44/Rev.2 and Corr.1 was
adopted (resolution 55/120).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to make statements in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Amer (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation joined the consensus on this
draft resolution, but we would like to place on record
that we do not accept all its elements. In particular, I
would like to refer to the first operative paragraph,
which welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
the activities of the United Nations in assistance in
mine action. Although we concur with the information
contained in the report, we note that it concentrates on
mines that were planted recently and does not deal with
mines planted earlier, from which my country suffers.
During the Second World War millions of mines were
planted on Libyan territory. These mines continue to
kill many people, destroy the property of many people
and hamper our efforts in the field of combating
desertification and expansion of agrarian reform.
Nor does the report deal with the responsibility of
countries that have planted mines on the territories of
other countries for paying the necessary reparations or
for the removal of such mines. At previous sessions of
the General Assembly, we drew attention to the
problems we were experiencing due to this situation.
We would again like to draw the attention of the
Secretary-General to this matter.
We had expressed hope that the United Nations
would pay the necessary attention to mines planted in
the past. Unfortunately, the report presented at this
session does not differ from the previous reports; it
concentrates only on mines that were planted recently.
Therefore, we would like once more to express our
concern regarding this trend. We hope that the

Secretary-General will avoid such a trend in the future,
that he will draw international attention to the
problems posed by mines planted in the past and that
he will attach as much importance to this problem as to
mines that were planted recently. The mines that were
planted in the past, just like those planted recently,
cause many tragedies. It has become incumbent on the
international community to solidify its efforts in
confronting such problems.
Mr. Khairat (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt has asked for the floor to explain
its position with regard to the resolution on assistance
in mine action, which has just been adopted.
At the outset, I wish to point out that this is an
extremely important subject for Egypt, as it is one of
the countries most heavily affected by landmines. In
fact, there are about 23 million mines and pieces of
unexploded ordnance on Egyptian territory. This
hampers the efforts of the Egyptian Government to
develop the areas in which those explosives are found.
From a practical standpoint, Egypt attaches great
importance to efforts to remove landmines and to the
way in which the United Nations is dealing with this
issue.
Additionally, landmines continue to be a
legitimate means of defending a country’s borders,
especially countries with extensive borders. This fact
has prompted Egypt and many other countries to
refrain from joining the Ottawa Convention, as the
Convention did not take into account the security and
defence concerns of such countries.
In the light of these considerations, the delegation
of Egypt put forth a number of amendments, which are
contained in document A/55/L.51. It did so in an
attempt to emphasize the concerns I have referred to in
connection with the problem of landmines, as well as
to make it possible for the General Assembly to deal
with this subject in a comprehensive and integrated
manner that takes into account the concerns of all
countries. It was in order to support the humanitarian
objectives of the resolution and to maintain consensus
that the delegation of Egypt withdrew its amendments
to the resolution just adopted.
Those amendments included proposed changes to
the sixth and eleventh preambular paragraphs, which
concern the legitimacy of the responsible use of antipersonnel landmines to defend a country’s borders. In
that regard, we would like to reaffirm that landmines

3

A/55/PV.82

continue to be an important element for the security
and defence of Egypt’s extensive borders and for
protecting itself from incursions, terrorism and
smuggling. We had hoped those concerns would have
been included in the text of the resolution.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
As it has done in the case of similar draft resolutions in
previous years, the delegation of Cuba joined the
consensus on the draft resolution contained in
document A/55/L.44/Rev.2. As is well known, since
the early years of their consideration, resolutions on
this question have focused on demining issues.
However, their content has gradually been increased to
include a much broader and more ambiguous concept
referred to as “assistance in mine action”. This has
made the annual negotiations held prior to the adoption
of these resolutions increasingly complex and
intensive. What happened this year confirms this.
Several weeks of intensive consultations were required
to arrive at a draft resolution acceptable to all parties.
The text of the resolution we have just adopted reflects
overall a very delicate balance that does not allow for
selective readings or qualifications of selected parts of
the resolution that do not take into account its contents
as a whole.
Our delegation would have preferred that the
resolution explicitly reflect the legitimate national
security concerns associated with anti-personnel mines.
Mines continue to be an indispensable weapon for the
legitimate defence of many States, in particular for
developing countries that do not have the necessary
resources to equip themselves with alternative means
of defence.
Despite the shortcomings of the resolution, Cuba
has supported it primarily because of its interest in
contributing to every genuine effort made to eliminate
the terrible effects that the indiscriminate and
irresponsible use of anti-personnel landmines are
having on the civilian populations of many countries.
I would like to conclude by conveying our
appreciation to the sponsors of the resolution and to all
the delegations that took part in the consultations for
their spirit of compromise and the flexibility they
demonstrated. That spirit made it possible to conclude
successfully the consideration of this question today.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.

4

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 47?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the fifty-fifth
session of the General Assembly
Second report of the Credentials Committee
(A/55/537/Add.1)
The
President:
The
draft
resolution
recommended by the Credentials Committee in
paragraph 10 of its report reads as follows:
“The General Assembly,
“Having considered the second report of the
Credentials Committee and the recommendations
contained therein,
“Approves the second
Credentials Committee.”

report

of

the

We shall now take action on the recommendation
of the Credentials Committee set forth in paragraph 10
of its second report.
The Credentials Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
55/16 B).
The President: We have thus concluded this
stage of our consideration of agenda item 3.
Announcement
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly, by its resolution 55/13 of 3
November 2000, decided to convene a special session
on HIV/AIDS from 25 to 27 June 2001. The resolution
also invited me, in my capacity as President of the
General Assembly, to appoint, in consultation with
Member States, two facilitators to assist in carrying out
the preparatory process to ensure effective participation
of all countries. In this regard, I have conducted
intensive consultations, both through the Chairmen of

A/55/PV.82

regional groups and with a significant number of
individual delegations representing all regions.
It is my great pleasure to announce my decision
to appoint Ambassador Penny Wensley, Permanent
Representative of Australia, and Ambassador Ibra
Deguène Ka, Permanent Representative of Senegal, as
the two facilitators of the preparatory process of the

special session on HIV/AIDS. Both are highly praised
for their excellence as mediators and consensus
builders. Both are also persons with exceptional skills
to seek and find solutions to different and sensitive
issues.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

5
