General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

48

!S. Decides that Namibians shall continue to be eligible
for assistance through the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southem Africa and the United
Nations Trust Fund for South Africa;
9. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, when
planning and initiating their new measures of assistance to
Namibians, to do so within the context of the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and the United Nations Institute
for Namibia;
IO. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in the
light of the urgent need to strengthen the programme of
assistance to the Namibian people, to make every effort
to expedite the execution of Nationhood Programme for
Namibia projects and other projects in favour ofNámibians
and to execute these projects on the basis of procedures
which will reflect the role of the United Nations Council
for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for
Namibia;
l l. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to assist
Namibian refugees and requests him to expand these efforts
in view of the substantial increase in the number of Namibian refugees;
12. Decides that the United Nations Council for Námibia shall:
(a) Continue to formulate policies of assistance to
Namibians and co-ordinate assistance for Namibia provided
by the specialized agencies and other organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system;
(b) Continue to actas trustee of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia and, in this capacity, administer and manage
the Fund;
(e) Continue to provide broad guidelines and formulate
the principies and policies for the United Nations Institute
for Namibia;
(d) Continue to co-ordinate, plan and direct the Nationhood Programme for Namibia in consultation with the
South West Africa People's Organization, with the aim of
consolidating ali measures of assistance by the specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system into a comprehensive assistance programme;
(e) Continue to consult with the South West Africa Peopie's úrgamzanon ín the formu1ation and impfementanon
of assistance programmes for Namibians;
(f) Report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth
session on activities in respect of the United Nations Fund
for Namibia, the United Nations Institute for Namibia and
the Nationhood Programme for Namibia;
13. Approves the amendments to the Charter of
the United Nations Institute for Namibia adopted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia at its 391 st meeting,
on lO November 1982;!0 1
14. Commends the United Nations Institute for Namibia
for the effectiveness of its training programmes for Namibians and its research activities on Namibia, which contribute substantially to the struggle for freedom of the
Namibian people and to the establishment of an independent
State of Namibia;
15. Kequests the Umtect Nations Council for Namibia
tQcomplete the preparation of and publish atan early date,
through the United Nations Institute for Namibia, a comprehensive reference book on Namibia covering ali aspects
of the question of Namibia as considered by the Unitec
1111

IV.

/bid .. Thirty-seventh Session. Supplement No. 24 (A/37/24). annex

Nations since its inception, in accordance with the outline
prepared by the Council;
16. Commends the progress made in the implementation
of the pre-independence components of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia and requests the United Nations Council for Namibia to elaborate and consider in due course
policies and contingency plans regarding the transitional and
post-independence phases of the Programme;
17. Requests the United Nations lnstitute for Namibia
to prepare, in co-operation with the South West Africa People's Organization, the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia and the United Nations Development
Programme, a comprehensive document on all aspects of
economic planning in an independent Namibia, and requests
the Secretary-General to provide substantive support through
the .Office of the Commissioner for the preparation of that
document;
18. Requests the United Nations Council for Namibia
to carry out, in consultation with the Office of the United
Nations Commissioner for Namibia, a demographic study
of th,. Namibian population and a study of its educational
needs;
19. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to cooperate closely with the United Nations lnstitute for Namibia
in strengthening its programme of activities;
20. Expresses its appreciation to those specíalized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system that have contributed to the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and calls upon them to continue
their participation in the Programme by:
(a) Implementing projects approved by the United
Nations Council for Namibia;
(b) Preparing new project proposals at the request of
the Council;
(e) Allocating funds from their own financia! resources
for the implementation of the projects approved by the
Council;
21. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for its contribution to the financing and administration of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia and calls upon it to continue to allocate, at the
request of the United Nations Council for Namibia, funds
from the indicative planning figure for Namibia, for the
implementation of the projects within the Nationhood Programme and to increase the indicative planning figure for
Namibia;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia with the necessary resources for the performance
of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United Nations
Council for Namibia as the co-ordinating authority in the
imp]ementation ofthe Nationhood Programme for Namibia.
113th plenary meeting
20 December 1982

37/253.

Question of Cypruslll 2

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Recalling its resolution 3212 (XXIX) of I November 1974
and its subsequent resolutions on the question of Cyprus,
Recalling the high-level agreements of 12 February 1977
and 19 May 1979,
Reaffirming the principie of the inadmissibility of occupation and acquisition of territory by force,
'º2 See also sect. X B ,, decision J,14y;

11.

49

Resolutions adopted wlthout reference to a Maln Commlttee

Greatly concerned at the prolongation of the Cyprus crisis, which poses a serious threat to intemational peace and
security,
Deeply regretting that the resolutions of the United
Nations on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
Recalling the idea of holding an intemational conference
on Cyprus,
Deploring the fact that part of the territory of the Republic
of Cyprus is still occupied by foreign forces,
Deploring the Iack of progress in the intercommunal talks,
Deploring all unilateral actions that change the demographic structure of Cyprus or promote faits accomplis,
Reaffirming the need to settle the question of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant United Nations resolutions,
1. Reiterares its ful} support for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity, unity and non-alignment
of the Republic of Cyprus and calls once again for the
cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
2. Affirms the right of the Republic of Cyprus and its
people to ful} and effective sovereignty and control over the
entire territory of Cyprus and its natural and other resources
and calls upon ali States to support and help the Govemment
of the Republic of Cyprus to exercise these rights;
3. Condemns any act which tends to undermine the full
and effective exercise of the above-mentioned rights, including the unlawful issue of titles of ownership of property;
4. Welcomes the proposal for total demilitarization made
by the President of the Republic of Cyprus;
5. Expresses its support for the high-level agreements
of 12 February 1977 and 19 May 1979 and ali the provisions
thereof;
6. Demands the immediate and effective implementation of resolution 3212_ (XXIX), unanimously adopted by
the General Assembly and endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December 1974, and of
the subsequent resolutions of the Assembly and the Council
on Cyprus which provide the valid and essential basis for
the solution of the problem of Cyprus;
7. Considers the withdrawal of ali occupation forces
from the Republic of Cyprus as an essential basis for a
speedy and mutually acceptable solution of the problem of
Cyprus;
8. Demands the immediate withdrawal of ali occupation
forces from the Republic of Cyprus;
9. Commends the intensification of the efforts made by
the Secretary-General, while noting with concem the lack
of progress in the intercommunal talks;
10. Calls for meaningful, result-oriented, constructive
and substantive negotiations between the representatives of

the two communities, under the auspices of the SecretaryGeneral, to be conducted freely and on an equal footing.
on the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions and the
high-level agreements, with a view to reaching as early as
possible a mutually acceptable agreement based on the fundamental and legitimate rights of the two communities;
11. Calls for respect of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all Cypriots, including the freedom of
movement, the freedom of settlement and the right to property, and the instituting of urgent measures for the voluntary
retum of the refugees to their homes in safety;
12. Considers that the de facto situation created by the
force of arms should not be allowed to influence or in any
way affect the solution of the problem of Cyprus;
13. Calls upon the parties concemed to refrain from any
unilateral action which might adversely affect the prospects
of a just and lasting solution of the problem of Cyprus by
peaceful means and to co-operate fully with the SecretaryGeneral in the performance of bis task under the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council as well as with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force
in Cyprus;
14. Calls upon the parties concemed to refrain from any
action which violates or is designed to violate the independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus;
15. Reiterates its recommendation that the Security
Council should examine the question of implementation,
within a specified time-frame, of its relevant resolutions and
consider and adopt thereafter. if necessary, ali appropriate
and practica} measures under the Charter of the United
Nations for ensuring the speedy and effective implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations on Cyprus;
16. Welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General,
as expressed in bis report, 103 to pursue a renewed personal
involvement in the quest for a solution of the problem of
Cyprus and, in view of this, requests the Secretary-General
to undertake such actions or initiatives as he may consider
appropriate within the framework of the mission of good
offices entrusted to him by the Security Council for promoting a just and lasting solution of the problem and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session
on the results of his efforts;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''Question of Cyprus' ·
and requests the Secretary-General to follow up the implementation of the present resolution and to report on ali its
aspects to the General Assembly at that session.
I 21 st plenary meeting
/3 Mov /983

'°' A/37/805 and Corr. l
