A /72/PV.107

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

107th plenary meeting

Monday, 23 July 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Tevi (Vanuatu),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda items 14 and 117 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium
Summit
Draft resolution (A/72/L.64)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/72/L.64. Before giving the
floor for explanations of position, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now call on the representative of Egypt, who
wishes to speak in explanation of position before action
is taken on the draft resolution.
Ms. Elgarf (Egypt): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, I have the honour to deliver the
following explanation of position before the adoption
of draft resolution A/72/L.64, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 on
the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council”,
under agenda items 14 and 117.

The Group of 77 joined a hard consensus on the
draft resolution on the review process of the Economic
and Social Council, based on our belief in the Council’s
important work and its role in strengthening developing
countries’ efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and achieve sustainable
development, within its mandate as stipulated in Article
62 of the Charter of the United Nations, which clearly
identifies the Economic and Social Council’s powers
and functions.
The Group of 77 does not interpret the language
in operative paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, before
the annex, on the process of review of the Highlevel Political Forum on Sustainable Development
and the Economic and Social Council at its seventyfourth session and its subsequent review cycles, as
meaning that they will be conducted either jointly or in
conjunction with each other. The review processes of
the forum and the Economic and Social Council remain
separate. The review process of the high-level political
forum on sustainable development and of the Council
at its seventy-fourth session, and its subsequent cycles,
should not lead to a merger or to a combining of the
outcomes or the two processes of the forum and the
Council in one document or as one review process. The
Group wants to emphasize its firm belief that the Forum
and the Economic and Social Council are two distinct
processes in their legal mandate, scope and composition,
according to the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
The Group of 77 believes that the ninth preambular
paragraph, which contains a reference to ongoing
consultations on enhancing synergies and coherence

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-23506 (E)

*1823506*

A/72/PV.107

23/07/2017

and reducing overlap where it is found to exist in the
agendas of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and their subsidiary bodies, mandated
through the General Assembly’s separate resolution
71/323, goes beyond the mandate of resolution 68/1. The
reference to the synergies and coherence process should
not be used or interpreted to undermine or compromise
the Group’s position in the synergies and coherence
process. Resolutions 71/323 and 68/1 remain separate.
We regret the fact that paragraph 8 of the annex
does not explicitly reflect the full complement of the
meetings and forums on the means of implementation.
We strongly believe that the Economic and Social
Council’s special annual meeting on international
cooperation on tax matters, as a fundamental platform
for intergovernmental collaboration on tax matters, is
one of the structural meetings of the Council’s activities,
based on the relevant General Assembly resolutions.
The language in paragraph 21 of the annex
on possible ways of applying to other meetings
and segments certain aspects of the modalities of
engagement of major groups and other stakeholders in
the high-level political forum is vague and ambiguous.
The Group underlines that stakeholder participation
should adhere to the parameters established for their
participation, notably the non-objection basis and
respect for the terms of reference for their participation.
The Council’s implementation of paragraph 21 should
be conducted in a transparent manner, and it should not
divert or undermine relevant existing rules or create a
new mandate for stakeholders’ participation.
The Group of 77 is of the view that paragraph 30 of
the annex does not mandate the subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council to eliminate or decide on
the need for annual negotiated outcomes.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position. The Assembly will
now take action on draft resolution A/72/L.64, entitled
“Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 68/1 on the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/72/L.64?
Draft resolution A/72/L.64
(resolution 72/305).
2/9

was

adopted

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of Austria, who
will speak on behalf of the European Union.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States.
Let me start by thanking the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Iceland and Qatar, for
their work during the past month. This was not an easy
process.
At the first consultation six months ago, we made
it clear that our overarching policy objective for this
exercise was to align the Economic and Social Council
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In
order to strengthen the Council’s relevance, impact and
credibility, we suggested focusing on four overarching
objectives: first, clarity, which should start with a
common understanding of the division of labour
between the General Assembly and the Economic and
Social Council; secondly, comprehensiveness — the
need to systematically review the structures established
before 2015 in the light of the 2030 Agenda; thirdly,
intelligibility, as clarity of purpose would help better
communicate what the Council does and identify where
it can add value; and, fourthly, inclusiveness, because a
strong Economic and Social Council has to be open to
the world and the various actors that make it up.
However, throughout the negotiation process we
were faced with attempts to undermine those objectives.
At a time when we are all striving to adapt to the 2030
Agenda at the national level, some have argued that the
Economic and Social Council’s response should be to
not change — to maintain the status quo. Though we
joined the consensus today, we very much regret that the
text of resolution 72/305, which we have just adopted,
falls short of the ambition that guided our engagement.
At a time when we should be striving to strengthen
the legitimacy of the system, our collective inability
to meaningfully strengthen the Economic and Social
Council undermines it. I will now give a few examples.
First, though policy integration is a cross-cutting
priority, the integration segment has lost its purpose
18-23506

23/07/2017

A/72/PV.107

since the creation of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development and should therefore be
eliminated. Our proposal in that direction was blocked.
Secondly, in the 2030 Agenda, we acknowledged that we
needed all available forces to help deliver on the Goals,
but when it comes to the participation of civil society,
the Economic and Social Council remains stuck in the
past. The measures that we proposed to address that
were all blocked. Thirdly, the artificial duality of the
High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development
and the high-level segments of the Economic and Social
Council, including the ministerial declaration adopted
by both, continues to negatively affect the Council’s
credibility. We made proposals to fix that, but they were
blocked. Fourthly, we argued throughout the process
that the special event on the transition from relief to
development should be rebranded in line with today’s
reality. Even that proposal was blocked.

Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country,
Thailand.

At the same time, we witnessed attempts to
eliminate from the text references to structural
elements that are at the core of the Economic and
Social Council’s work. I will mention only two. The
first reference is to the Secretariat. The Department of
Social and Economic Affairs performs essential support
functions for the Economic and Social Council, and the
General Assembly mandated its reform two years ago.
The reform will be key to strengthening the Council’s
capacity to deliver value and should not be postponed
any longer. The second was to the Peacebuilding
Commission. We strongly regret that the final text is
silent on the link between the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, despite the
existence of agreed General Assembly language on that
matter.

The 10 countries of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations joined the consensus on resolution
72/305 to underscore the importance of the Economic
and Social Council and reaffirm our support for the
Council. The ASEAN Community Vision 2025 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. For ASEAN,
therefore, the Economic and Social Council is of
critical importance to helping us pursue sustainable
development, particularly in a manner that is balanced,
comprehensive and inclusive, without leaving anyone
behind. Our work in this context pertains to the lives of
people on the ground and has an impact on their wellbeing in the long run.

The EU is committed to multilateralism, but a
multilateralism that is geared to delivering results.
Three years into the 2030 Agenda, we have no time to
waste, and the Economic and Social Council should
be enabled to lead by example and embrace the future
rather than cling to the past. During the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly, both the High-level
Political Forum and the Council will be reviewed in
conjunction. We hope that all partners can then come to
the table with renewed ambition and that the Economic
and Social Council can finally be allowed to fulfil its
potential.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) — Brunei

At the outset, ASEAN aligns itself with the
statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Egypt on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
The 10 ASEAN member States congratulate all
member States on the important adoption of resolution
72/305 today. We join the colleagues who have preceded
us in expressing appreciation to the facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Iceland and Qatar, and
their teams, for their hard work, perseverance and
strong faith in multilateralism and intergovernmental
processes, such as the current one, so that today we
arrive at a consensual middle ground that enables all of
us to move forward.

At the same time, the Economic and Social Council
cannot remain static. It needs adjustment to better
respond to and address today’s pressing realities and
challenges. We regret to witness the unprecedented
trends and challenges, particularly during the recent
High-Level Political Forum and the Economic and
Social Council high-level segment, which are the key
platforms for making progress on our common global
goals, particularly the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).
In that regard, ASEAN supports the Economic and
Social Council review process that aims to strengthen
the Council and its working modalities, guided by the
principles of inclusiveness, transparency and flexibility,
based on the deliberative function of its meetings. In
line with the ongoing reform of the United Nations, the
Economic and Social Council needs to be more effective

18-235063/9

A/72/PV.107

and fit for purpose to serve as the intergovernmental
body that stimulates real in-depth debate and
policy deliberations, enhanced mutual learning and
knowledge-sharing and deepens engagement and
partnership with all stakeholders.
I have three priority points to highlight in relation to
the review process. First, the structure of the Economic
and Social Council needs to support the balanced
and integrated nature of the SDGs and ensure their
implementation in all three dimensions — economic,
social and environmental.
Secondly, one of the main areas in which the
Economic and Social Council should remain focused
is in strengthening of the means of implementation
required to achieve the SDGs. Forums such as the
annual Development Cooperation Forum, the Forum
on Financing for Development, the Multi-Stakeholder
Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation, and
the Partnership Forum are extremely critical in this
respect, providing as they do opportunities for Member
States and other stakeholders to share experience and
lessons learned and promote international cooperation
and follow-up on commitments made.
Thirdly, we see the Economic and Social Council
as the depository of a wealth of knowledge on economic
and social issues to be tapped by Member States
to support their national efforts. This can be found
particularly in the subsidiary bodies, which have an
indispensable role to play in translating knowledge
into valuable policy advice and recommendations. We
underscore the need for the subsidiary bodies to play an
even more proactive role in providing Member States
with practical, action-oriented solutions for addressing
implementation challenges and gaps in achieving
the SDGs.
Good reforms are not one-offs but should be a
process that is responsive to evolving progress and
challenges. Our work does not end in this Hall today,
and all parties should continue working together in a
constructive manner, including towards the next review
cycle of the Economic and Social Council, at its seventyfourth session. I wish to reassure the General Assembly
of ASEAN’s active engagement and full support in
that process.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words in
my national capacity. Thailand sees the Economic and
Social Council as a body that has served the interests
of all countries, both developed and developing alike.
4/9

23/07/2017

Countries are progressing the right direction, but
not fast enough with respect to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. We all look to the Economic
and Social Council with high hopes. With its strengths
and great potential, Thailand strongly believes that the
Council will continue to deliver on its mandate and live
up to the high expectations of us all. As a candidate
for membership in the Economic and Social Council for
the term 2020-2022, Thailand reaffirms its commitment
and continued support for the Council in this regard.
Ms. Clifford (Australia): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of Canada, New Zealand and
Australia (CANZ).
First, I offer thanks to the facilitators for their
ongoing efforts in this difficult process. At the outset of
negotiations, CANZ called for an ambitious outcome,
one worthy of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the reform processes under way
under the leadership of the Secretary-General. Today,
we find the outcome document (resolution 72/305) less
ambitious than we had hoped it would be. It is one that
falls short of the ambition of the 2030 Agenda.
We note that there are some incremental steps in
the right direction. For example, the integrated segment
has been reduced to a single day. The Economic and
Social Council’s various bodies have been asked to
review whether there is a continued need for their
negotiated outcome documents. Future reviews of both
the Economic and Social Council and the High-level
Political Forum will now occur in conjunction at the
seventy-fourth session of the Council, which should
be given its plain-language meaning. There is also a
call to limit to the greatest extent possible meetings to
ordinary business hours.
But, regrettably, we were unable to make progress
on a number of issues, for example, on the Development
Cooperation Forum; on the high-level segment, whose
mandate has been expanded despite the fact that we
thought we should be looking towards its elimination
given its overlap with the High-level Political Forum;
the absence of language on the Peacebuilding
Commission, despite multiple General Assembly
resolutions mandating this closer work; the absence
of any call concerning the urgent need to reform the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, pursuant
to the mandate contained in 70/299, which is a critical
ongoing process that must deliver real results, and with
only a very weak reference, the need for the Committee
18-23506

23/07/2017

on Non-Governmental Organizations to complete its
mandated work in a timely manner.
But despite all of these examples, we recognize
that this is an ongoing process and that we will have
occasion to reconsider many of these items two years
from now. For this reason, we were prepared to join
consensus at this time and look forward to working with
Member States to ensure that our work in the Economic
and Social Council and beyond is clearly aligned with
the 2030 Agenda.
Mr. Ríos Sánchez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the conclusion of the process of
strengthening the Economic and Social Council and
thanks the facilitators, the Permanent Representatives of
Iceland and Qatar, for their efforts to reach a consensus
text (resolution 72/305).
Before the start of this process, Mexico circulated
a proposal to make the Council a more dynamic and
efficient body. Although resolution 72/305 is not as
ambitious as we would have liked, we recognize its
positive elements, in particular the need for a deliberative
Council. However, this does not depend only on this
resolution, but also on the formats promoted by the
President and his Bureau and, more importantly, on the
decision of Member States to participate in meeting so
that there are no more empty conference rooms.
We also value the high-level segment’s mandate
to discuss the contribution of new technologies to the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and
their targets. This is undoubtedly a crucial issue that
offers great opportunities but also entails challenges
that we have to address within the Organization.
While we support the review of the Economic and
Social Council and the High-level Political Forum on
Sustainable Development, we regret that we will not
be able to address a number of outstanding issues until
the seventy-fourth session, thanks to the systematic
opposition of a group of countries to a full review of
the functions, format and timing of the Council and
considering that the High-level Political Forum reports
to it.
The effort to bring delegations closer together has
had a negative effect on the balance between the Council
segments. For instance, we added several activities
to the integration segment but limited it to one day,
while spending six days on procedural discussions that
actually require no more than 10 hours per year. In short,

A/72/PV.107

we are sacrificing to management issues the substance
of aligning the 2030 Agenda with other commitments
in the Paris Climate Change Agreement and the Sendai
Framework, among other things. Nor will we be able
to overcome the artificial division between sustainable
development and peacebuilding and sustaining peace,
considering that the former is essential to the latter two.
To sum up, although Mexico would have wished
for a more ambitious outcome, we joined the consensus
in the hope that the next review will benefit from the
reform process initiated by the Secretary-General in
order to achieve the Economic and Social Council that
a twenty-first-century organization needs.
Mr. Varganov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation joined the consensus
on the adoption of resolution 72/305, on the review of the
implementation of resolution 68/1, on the strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council. Strengthening
the Council’s structure and improving its work are
important elements in the general efforts to increase
the effectiveness of the United Nations system’s work
as a whole. It is important to recall that the Council is
an intergovernmental body, as enshrined in the Charter
of the Organization, and occupies a central position
in the United Nations system in promoting all three
aspects of sustainable development — economic, social
and environmental — and is also a central platform for
discussion and the development of innovative thinking,
achieving consensus on future directions for our work
and coordinating efforts to achieve goals agreed at the
international level. It is also responsible for following up
on the outcomes of major United Nations conferences.
The Russian Federation defended these key positions in
the Economic and Social Council’s mandate at every
stage of the negotiations on the resolution. We hope that
the revised structure and timetable will not present any
obstacles to the Council’s work.
We would like to make three key points. We
support the inclusion in the resolution of provisions
on the outcome ministerial declarations from the highlevel political forum on sustainable development and
the Economic and Social Council’s high-level segment.
Their approval by the Council is an important aspect in
defining the key directions for its work in the near future
and also in ensuring a hierarchy in the structure of the
meetings and forums that take place under its auspices.
The participation of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and representatives of civil society in the

18-235065/9

A/72/PV.107

Economic and Social Council is an important aspect
of the Council’s operations. However, it should not be
conducted to the detriment of the intergovernmental
character of the Council. We assume that issues of NGO
participation will continue to be regulated in accordance
with the relevant rules and procedures of the Council
and its functional commissions on a no-objection basis.
Lastly, my final important point has to do with the
provision on the Committee on Non-Governmental
Organizations (NGO Committee), whose wording we
still believe does not correspond to the true state of
affairs. The mechanisms for monitoring the Committee’s
activity are already sufficient. In particular, this is done
through the approval of the Committee’s reports on the
work of its regular and resumed sessions during the
Council’s session on management and coordination.
We believe that the wording covers up the reluctance
of some countries to comply with Economic and Social
Council resolution 96/31 and their willingness to ignore
the NGO Committee’s recommendations when they do
not suit some Committee member. The Committee can
regulate its own activity, as was demonstrated by a new
practical element, the 22 June meeting of the Advisory
Committee with non-governmental organizations
that have consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council.
Mr. Cho Yeong Moo (Republic of Korea): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representatives of Ireland and Qatar for their tireless
efforts and leadership during the consultation process.
Given the importance of resolution 72/305 in terms
of improving the Economic and Social Council’s
functioning in order to strengthen its role in policy,
leadership and the coordination of the relevant parts
of the United Nations system, my delegation hopes
that the resolution will help to ensure that the Council
is fit for purpose for the era of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We will once again have an opportunity to consider
the role and functions played by the Economic and
Social Council in the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session when we review and assess the High-level
Political Forum. Through that process, we should be able
to align the Council and the forum as fully as possible
in order to maximize the synergies between the two
bodies while keeping in mind their distinct mandates.
We are pleased that new and emerging issues
have been given more prominence in the work of the
6/9

23/07/2017

Economic and Social Council, particularly through
their incorporation into its high-level segment.
This role of the Council will become increasingly
important, and as the global community tries to adapt
to very challenging realities, the Economic and Social
Council should provide space for dialogue and peer
learning. The Economic and Social Council should
also provide better guidance for the United Nations
system to assist Member States. Improved use of the
operational-activity segment will be crucial in making
the system-wide coordination of and accountability for
the United Nations development system more effective.
The revised segment will make that possible. Similarly,
continued effort will be needed to improve the working
methods of various parts of the Council so as to ensure
coherence in its work.
We had hoped, however, that the resolution would
be more forward-looking. One such area for that
is partnership. We appreciate the emphasis on the
importance of stakeholder participation and the need for
exploring ways to do improve it. However, as the most
inclusive multi-stakeholder organ of the United Nations,
and one that functions all year long, the Economic and
Social Council is well positioned to facilitate wider
and better partnerships through systematic engagement
with institutional and other stakeholders. We should
strive for more concrete measures in the next review
process. It is also regrettable that the paragraph on
cooperation between the Economic and Social Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission was removed from
the final draft of the resolution. We firmly believe that
we should encourage better, more effective cooperation
between the two bodies.
Reiterating our full commitment to ensuring the
relevance and leadership of the Economic and Social
Council, the Republic of Korea will assist in current and
future work to improve the effectiveness and efficiency
of this vital organ.
Mr. Kimmel (United States of America): I would
like to acknowledge the efforts of the facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Iceland and Qatar, and
their teams in support of these negotiations. We would
also like to recognize those who engaged constructively
in this process.
Working to improve the Economic and Social
Council’s tangled bureaucracy is a pressing challenge,
and many delegations came forward with ambitious
proposals for streamlining the Economic and Social
18-23506

23/07/2017

Council’s overloaded schedule of meetings and
negotiations, advancing the participation of civil
society and improving the focus and relevance of
the Council’s work. Regrettably, resolution 72/305
takes only small steps in that direction. It passes on
important tasks — such as improving the working
methods of the functional commissions and the
Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGO Committee), reviewing the Economic and Social
Council and the High-level Political Forum together,
eliminating unproductive and duplicative negotiations
and more — to future reviews. We call on all member
States to ensure that those future reviews can be more
productive than this one.
We should also seize upon the gains that we see in
the resolution. Critically, it highlights the review of the
NGO Committee’s working methods and urges that the
review be concluded in a timely manner. We strongly
support improving the Committee’s methods of work
so as to enable it to fulfil its role to give civil society
a voice in the United Nations system. Civil-society
organizations are often the eyes and ears on the ground
and an invaluable resource for reporting, yet for many
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), including
those with well-established international credibility,
the NGO Committee continues to hinder their
participation. We are pleased to see that the number
of NGOs applying for Economic and Social Council
consultative status continues to grow, an indication of
the significance and impact that status has for NGOs
worldwide. Unfortunately, for many NGOs, it takes two
or more years to gain accreditation. Other applications
for credible NGOs are delayed seemingly indefinitely.
The current methods of work contribute to these and
other challenges, undermining the effectiveness and
the reputation of the Committee and the Economic and
Social Council as a whole.
Today’s resolution highlights the contribution
of important outside stakeholders, including NGOs
and the private sector. We hear time and again that
the unique value of the Economic and Social Council
is its convening power as part of the United Nations.
That argument is hollow when civil society is excluded
and ignored.
While this resolution reaffirms the role of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA)
of the Secretariat, we think it falls wholly short in
addressing the need for reforming DESA, which is
crucial to the revitalization of the Economic and Social

A/72/PV.107

Council. DESA has to be more efficient and effective.
The resolution also calls on the Council to avoid
duplication and overlap in order to ensure efficiency
and effectiveness, and emphasizes the division of
labour of its work. That is critical. The Economic and
Social Council and its subsidiary bodies will be most
successful when they focus narrowly on areas of true
comparative advantage and eliminate activities and
negotiations where they do not have competence,
authority or expertise.
We want to take this opportunity to make important
points clarifying language related to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We underscore that the
2030 Agenda is non-binding. It does not create or affect
rights or obligations under international law or create
any new financial commitments. The United States
recognizes the 2030 Agenda as a global framework
for sustainable development that can help countries
work towards global peace and prosperity. We applaud
the call for shared responsibility, including national
responsibility, in the 2030 Agenda, and emphasize that
all countries have a role to play in achieving its vision.
The 2030 Agenda recognizes that each country must
work towards implementation in accordance with its
own national policies and priorities. The United States
also underscores that paragraph 18 of the 2030 Agenda
calls for countries to implement the Agenda in a manner
that is consistent with the rights and obligations of
States under international law.
We highlight our mutual recognition of the
fact, as set out in paragraph 58 of the Agenda, that
implementation must respect and be without prejudice
to the independent mandates of other processes and
institutions, including negotiations, and does not
prejudge or serve as a precedent for decisions and actions
under way in other forums. For example, the 2030
Agenda does not represent a commitment to providing
new market access for goods or services, and it does
not interpret or alter any World Trade Organization
agreement or decision, including the Agreement on
Trade-related Aspects of Intellectual Property.
We also would like to make important points of
clarification regarding the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
Specifically, we note that much of the trade-related
language in the Addis Ababa outcome document has
been overtaken by events since July 2015 and is therefore
immaterial. In addition, certain elements of the Small
Island Developing States Accelerated Modalities of
Action Pathway, such as those on international trade,

18-235067/9

A/72/PV.107

may have been overtaken by events and may no longer
be implementable.
The New Urban Agenda is also a non-binding
agreement that does not create or affect rights or
obligations under international law. As we have
noted elsewhere, the United States believes that each
Member State has the sovereign right to determine
how it conducts trade with other countries, and that
includes restricting trade in certain circumstances.
Economic sanctions, whether unilateral or multilateral,
can be a successful means of achieving foreign-policy
objectives. In cases where the United States has applied
sanctions, they have been used with specific objectives
in mind, including as a means to promote a return to the
rule of law or democratic systems, encourage respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms or prevent
threats to international security. We are within our
rights to use our trade and commercial policies as tools
to achieve those noble objectives. Targeted economic
sanctions can be an appropriate, effective and legitimate
alternative to the use of force.
With regard to the Istanbul Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2011-2020, the United States would like to highlight its
concerns regarding the extent to which the Programme
of Action encourages financial assistance to the
Technology Bank and refers to technology transfer in
ways that do not clearly indicate to be both voluntary
and on mutually agreed terms. Such language will have
no standing in future negotiations for the United States,
and we continue to oppose language that we believe
undermines intellectual property rights.
With respect to references to the Paris Climate
Change Agreement, we note that the United States
has announced its intention to withdraw from the
Agreement as soon as it is eligible to do so, consistent
with the terms of the Agreement, unless we can identify
suitable terms for re-engagement.
The United States has been a strong supporter of
disaster risk-reduction initiatives designed to reduce
loss of life and the social and economic effects of
disasters. However, we reiterate our views on the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction set forth in the
explanation of the United States position delivered in
Sendai on 18 March 2015, specifically with respect to
coercive language on technology transfer, assumptions
with regard to the meaning of the right to development
or any language that creates new obligations or changes
8/9

23/07/2017

existing obligations of countries under international law
and relevant international agreements, or that mandates
any new activities.
Regarding new technologies mentioned in this
resolution specifically, the United States tries to focus
on how to maximize the benefits of existing, new and
emerging technologies, including through the support
of basic research, modernizing Government, and
developing our science, technology, engineering and
mathematics workforce. We are committed to creating
an environment where new technologies can succeed.
In addition, we are committed to achieving active
multi-stakeholder engagement and public participation
to promote accountability, optimize decision-making
and recognize potential risks associated with new
technologies as they arise, foster public trust and keep
abreast of the latest research.
In conclusion, incremental as it may be, this
resolution is a step towards a better functioning, more
efficient, more focused and streamlined Economic
and Social Council. At the same time, it falls far short
of the improvements that we need. We encourage all
delegations, as well as the Council’s subsidiary bodies
and the offices and staff in the Secretariat who support
its work, to help realize and build on that progress.
Mr. Al-Hamadi (Qatar): I would like to deliver
the following statement on behalf of Her Excellency
Ambassador Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Permanent
Representative of the State of Qatar to the United
Nations, and His Excellency Ambassador Einar
Gunnarsson, Permanent Representative of Iceland to
the United Nations.
As co-facilitators of the review of resolution 68/1, on
the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council,
it gives us great pleasure to convey our gratitude to
the President for convening this plenary meeting to
consider resolution 72/305. We welcome the adoption
of the resolution by consensus. We were humbled to be
selected to facilitate this important document, and at the
same time glad to join the efforts to carry out the task
entrusted to us and produce the best possible outcome.
As co-facilitators, we were encouraged by the
active and constructive engagement of all delegations
throughout the informal consultation process. We
would like to take this opportunity to thank delegations
for having participated actively and positively in
the consultations, and for their support and the spirit
of cooperation and flexibility shown throughout the
18-23506

23/07/2017

A/72/PV.107

process. We worked hard to accommodate the concerns
of all delegations, with regard to the time frame as
well as the substance of the process. Differing views
were expressed during the negotiations, but we were
convinced that the spirit of consensus would prevail
and we acted accordingly. We are very glad that we
have been able to reach a successful outcome and that
consensus on the resolution has been achieved.

General Assembly decided to allocate this sub-item
to the Fifth Committee. To enable the Assembly to
proceed expeditiously on the sub-item in this meeting,
may I also take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
sub-item (a) of agenda item 115 directly in plenary
meeting and proceed immediately to its consideration?

Finally, we would like to express our appreciation
to our team for their tremendous efforts and hard work.

Agenda item 115 (continued)

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassadors Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani of Qatar
and Einar Gunnarsson of Iceland the co-facilitators of
the informal consultations, who demonstrated great
ability and patience in the conduct of the discussions
and complex negotiations on resolution 72/305. I also
thank member States for their valuable contributions to
reaching an agreement on the resolution.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda items 14 and 117.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
turn to a note by the Secretary-General contained in
document A/72/101/Rev.1/Add.1 under sub-item (a) of
agenda item 115, entitled “Appointment of members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions”.
Members will recall that the General Assembly
concluded its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 115 at its 55th plenary meeting, on 17 November
2017. In order for the Assembly to consider the document
today, it will be necessary to reopen consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 115.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (a) of
agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 15 September 2017, the

It was so decided.

Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions
Note by the Secretary-General (A/72/101/
Rev.1/Add.1)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/72/101/Rev.1/Add.1, the Secretary-General has
received notification of the resignation of Mr. Takeshi
Akamatsu of Japan from the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, effective
15 August 2018. The Assembly will therefore be required
to appoint, at its current session, a person to fill the
vacancy for the remaining period of the term of office
of Mr. Akamatsu, which expires on 31 December 2019.
As also indicated in document A/72/101/
Rev.1/Add.1, the Government of Japan has nominated
Mr. Takeshi Matsunaga to fill the vacancy arising from
the resignation of Mr. Akamatsu.
The Secretariat was informed by the Chair of the
Group of Asia-Pacific States that the candidature of
Mr. Matsunaga has been endorsed by the Group. May
I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly to appoint
Mr. Takeshi Matsunaga of Japan as a member of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, for a term of office beginning on 15 August
2018 and ending on 31 December 2019?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

18-235069/9
