A /72/PV.104

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

104th plenary meeting

Friday, 29 June 2018, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Agenda item 122 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council
The President: Members will recall that, pursuant
to decision 71/553 of 19 July 2017, the Assembly
continued intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform in informal plenary meetings during
the current session.
We have come to the end of another session of
intergovernmental negotiations. At our first meeting
in February, I called for a credible process that could
lead us to a meaningful outcome. Today, I would like to
reflect on whether we have achieved that. In doing so, I
shall focus on three key areas.
The first is inclusivity and credibility. One is usually
linked to the other. I want to start by pointing out the
vast range of Member States we have heard from — big
and small, developing and developed, from the global
South and the global North, countries with different
languages, cultures and positions. I believe that it was
truly an inclusive process and that its credibility lay
in the dialogue. It seemed clear to me that the process
is one we still believe in. I am not saying that there
was no cynicism or that everyone saw eye to eye, but I
heard genuine efforts to understand each other’s points.
Creative proposals were made across all five key areas,
and flexibility was shown as Member States looked for
common positions that could move the process along. If

there is space for dialogue, progress is possible. I thank
you all for maintaining that space.
The second thing I want to reflect on is our
outcome. In February, I expressed hope that we would
arrive at a meaningful outcome. Now we are here, at
our last meeting, and we do have an outcome. It is
different from former documents. We did not start from
scratch in drafting it. But only you can judge whether it
is meaningful or not. It is your product, and you will be
the ones to decide upon its significance going forward.
All I can say is that I hope we can find a way to build
on our work.
Thirdly, I want to comment on the importance of the
process, and maybe “importance” is an understatement
here, because it does not quite capture the urgency of
our task. The process is about the Member States. They
drive it, they participate in it and they decide where it
goes. But beyond this Hall, the entire world is watching.
That is one of the major lessons I have learned as
President of the General Assembly. Everywhere I have
travelled, from South-East Asia to Africa, I have faced
questions about the reform process. What will happen
next? When will we see change? What will a new
Council look like? Those are not questions for me to
answer. Where we go, how we get there and the speed
at which we travel — all those matters are up to the
Membes.
One thing this experience has shown me is that
the United Nations is judged by the performance of
its Security Council. That means that everything the
Organization does, from humanitarian response to the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-20373 (E)

*1820373*

A/72/PV.104

implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
is as stake, because if people lose faith in the United
Nations, they will also lose faith in its work, no matter
the results on the ground. That could undermine our
entire system. The future of the Organization lies in
the hands of its Members.
Before I conclude, I would like to express my deep
gratitude to our co-Chairs, Ambassador Imnadze and
Ambassador Nusseibeh. The level of work required from
them and their teams was like taking on a second day
job. Yet they carried out their roles with commitment
and good humour, while always maintaining the highest
level of transparency.
As we close the intergovernmental negotiations
session, my final message is this. Throughout everything
we do, there are two major elements at stake, and they
both begin with the letter “p”. The first is process. This
is one of the most sensitive international processes going
on today. Every word matters. We need to do it right.
We cannot steam-roll through it, because only a strong
process can have a strong outcome. The second element
is people. They are the reason why the United Nations
and its Security Council were created. It is people who
stand to benefit from what we are doing here, and it is
people who stand to lose if we go nowhere. So this is a
political process, but it should never be at the expense
of people. They are out there — they are watching, and
they are counting on us. I thank everyone again, and I
wish them luck in the work ahead.
In a letter dated 28 June 2018, I circulated a draft
oral decision on this issue.
May I take it that the General Assembly, first,
decides to reaffirm the central role of the General
Assembly concerning the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership
of the Security Council and other matters related
to the Security Council; secondly, also decides to
immediately continue intergovernmental negotiations
on Security Council reform in informal plenary of
the General Assembly at its seventy-third session,
as mandated by Assembly decisions 62/557, of
15 September 2008; 63/565 B, of 14 September 2009;
64/568, of 13 September 2010; 65/554, of 12 September
2011; 66/566, of 13 September 2012; 67/561, of
29 August 2013; 68/557, of 8 September 2014; 69/560, of
14 September 2015; 70/559, of 27 July 2016; and 71/553,
of 19 July 2017, building on the informal meetings
held during its seventy-second session and on the
2/19

29/06/2018

revised elements of commonality and issues for further
consideration, circulated on 14 June 2018, as well as
the positions of and proposals made by Member States,
reflected in the text and its annex circulated on 31 July
2015, and using the elements of convergence circulated
on 12 July 2016 and the elements of commonality and
issues for further consideration circulated on 27 June
2017 to help inform its future work, while welcoming
the active engagement, initiatives and intensive efforts
of the President of the General Assembly, and noting
with appreciation the active role and concrete efforts
of the co-Chairs undertaken in a consultative manner
with a view to an early comprehensive reform of the
Security Council; thirdly, decides to convene the Openended Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership
of the Security Council and Other Matters related to
the Security Council during the seventy-third session
of the General Assembly, if Member States so decide;
and, fourthly, decides to include in the agenda of the
seventy-third session of the General Assembly the item
entitled “Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Security Council”?
The draft oral decision was adopted (decision 72/557).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, may I remind delegations
that explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sumah (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the African Union.
In doing so, let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your exemplary leadership of the General Assembly at
its seventy-second session. I wish to express our sincere
appreciation for your unwavering commitment and
dedication to the reform of the Security Council. We
remain steadfastly committed to a comprehensive and
meaningful reform of the Council. We also appreciate
the efforts of co-Chairs Ambassador Kaha Imnadze of
Georgia and Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh of the United
Arab Emirates.
Let me take this opportunity to commend the efforts
of all Member States in our collective commitment to an
inclusive and transparent process, leading to a roll-over
decision adopted by consensus. The Committee of Ten
Heads of State and Government of the African Union
has joined this consensus in the spirit of preserving
unity and mutual trust among the membership and of
18-20373

29/06/2018

moving forward the reform of the Security Council,
in conformity with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.
We take note of the efforts of the co-Chairs to
integrate the Common African Position into the final
revision of the elements of commonality and issues
for further consideration paper. However, we are
concerned that the document does not adequately and
accurately reflect the Common African Position. We
hope that the documents rolled over to the Assembly’s
seventy-third session will be built upon in a transparent
manner through a membership-driven process that will
ensure the accurate reflection of our position on all five
clusters of the intergovernmental negotiations.
We had also called for the harmonization of all
documents rolled over from the sixty-ninth, seventieth
and seventy-first sessions, which proved to be difficult
for the co-Chairs to achieve. Going forward, however,
we will continue to work with all Member States with
a view to achieving the much-needed progress on the
reform of the Security Council. We remain committed
to a comprehensive reform of the Security Council on
the basis of all five clusters outlined in decision 62/557
and to the intergovernmental negotiations process in
good faith and with mutual trust.
Let me conclude by thanking all Member States that
came out openly to unequivocally support the Common
African Position espoused in the Ezulwini Consensus
and the Sirte Declaration. We look forward to working
with the Assembly to build on the gains made in favour
of the Common African Position. We hope that those
Member States, especially countries friendly to Africa,
will join in support of redressing the historical injustice
done to the African continent and its people.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the L.69 group — a
diverse group of countries made up largely of small
States from Africa, Latin America, the Caribbean, Asia
and the Pacific that are united by the common cause
of achieving lasting and comprehensive reform of the
Security Council.
We appreciate your opening remarks and your
efforts, Mr. President, in organizing today’s meeting
and for the swift adoption today of decision 72/557, on
the roll-over of our work this year. We would like to
thank you for your leadership and stewardship of the
process and for your guidance to the co-Chairs.

A/72/PV.104

We congratulate the co-Chairs on providing
Member States with opportunities for substantive
and interactive discussions in this session, which
took place in a frank and cordial atmosphere. We
would like to express our appreciation to Ambassador
Lana Zaki Nusseibeh of the United Arab Emirates
and Ambassador Kaha Imnadze of Georgia for their
tireless efforts during this session in facilitating our
discussions in the intergovernmental negotiations and
in revising the Elements of Commonalities and Issues
for Further Consideration paper in a Member-Statesdriven process. The document we adopted today is an
important contribution of the co-Chairs to this process,
based on the active participation of Member States over
several meetings. It has the full support of our group
and, in our view, the entire membership.
Nevertheless, we are ending the session with mixed
feelings. We began this round of deliberations with the
positive development of attempting to harmonize and
build on the work of the previous three years and the
noble quest to establish a credible process. However,
we did not quite achieve what we set out to do. Despite
overwhelming support for attribution and the reflection
of the Common African Position in the commonalities
section of the paper, we did not see the inclusion of those
requests in the final revised elements of commonalities
and issues for further consideration paper. We also
asked for an extension of the timeline of this session.
Yet here we are today, ending the session two and a
half months before the end of this year’s session of the
General Assembly.
Our work must continue in the next session. We
thank you, Mr. President, for your decision and for
highlighting that we need to build on the work done in
this one. We believe that to be a positive development
that breaks from the repetitive copy-and-paste rollover decisions that we have seen in sessions past.
However, we are disappointed to see that the work
of the seventieth and seventy-first sessions is still
reflected in the decision. The documents generated in
those sessions were completely incorporated in this
year’s document. Why do we have that repetition?
What does “build on” really mean? Will that part of the
decision be redundant, as is the reference to the Openended Working Group? We do need to reflect on those
questions and contemplate the answers honestly if our
quest is indeed to establish a credible process with
meaningful progress.

18-203733/19

A/72/PV.104

As we close another session of deliberations, we
wish to remind the Assembly that in 1979, just 14 years
after the first expansion of the Security Council, a
request for a second expansion of the Council was made
to the General Assembly. The process for consideration
in the Assembly of the agenda item relating to Security
Council reform finally began in 1992.
To mark the twenty-fifth year of the consideration
of this agenda item by the Assembly, the L.69 group
decided to embark on a commemorative project to
collect as many documents as possible on the issue of
Security Council reform in a book, entitled Handbook
on Security Council Reform: 25 Years of Deliberations.
That was a mammoth undertaking. We have also
collected on a USB drive supplemental material that,
because of its sheer volume, could not be placed in
one handbook. That exercise underscored to our young
representatives who worked on the project the depth
and breadth of the discussions that have already taken
place over the past 25 years and the time spent. The
L.69 group hopes that the Handbook will be a useful
contribution to Member States and to our ongoing
deliberations on this crucial issue.
We look to the seventy-third session with
anticipation and with hope that we can build on the work
done in this session, even as we continue our quest for
a still-more-credible process, now ever mindful of time
spent, documents created and costs incurred over the
past 25 years.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the members of the group
of four (G-4): Germany, India, Japan, and my own
country, Brazil.
First, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
your leadership in the process of Security Council
reform during the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly. You have made your commitment
to this task clear since the beginning. I also would
like to thank the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform, Ambassador
Lana Zaki Nusseibeh of the United Arab Emirates and
Ambassador Kaha Imnadze of Georgia, for their hard
work in guiding us during our meetings this year.
As we all know, during this session the co-Chairs
elaborated a document called “Revised elements of
commonality and issues for further consideration”,
based on the past three outcome papers of the
intergovernmental negotiations and interventions
4/19

29/06/2018

made from the floor. Despite all the efforts in
that harmonization exercise, the outcome of the
intergovernmental negotiations during this session falls
short of our expectations.
We were hoping for more progress this year because
we believe that reform of the Security Council is long
overdue and the world cannot afford further delays.
More specifically, we were sincerely expecting the
final version of the document to include more of the
proposals made by different groups, including our own,
the G-4. Some of those suggestions clearly received
overwhelming support from Member States but even so
were not taken into account.
Among other points, we believe that the document
should have included the identification of countries
supporting the various options contained in the
text — or the “attribution of names”, as we called it.
An overwhelming majority asked for that, and we
had the widest possible support for that measure of
transparency. Moreover, the reference to the African
Common Position still needs to be accurately and
adequately reflected. Furthermore, the G-4 continues
to believe that restructuring the document using the five
main clusters of the intergovernmental negotiations as
its basic axis will contribute to more clarity. Allow me to
recall that we were able to completely subsume into it the
outcome documents produced in 2016 by Ambassador
Sylvie Lucas of Luxembourg — as the elements of
convergence paper — and in 2017 by Ambassador Ion
Jinga of Romania and Ambassador Mohamed Khaled
Khiari of Tunisia — as the elements of commonality
and issues for further consideration paper.
The revised elements of commonality and issues
for further consideration are far from perfect, as I
mentioned before. A lot was left unfinished. Clearly,
that paper requires more work, and we will be ready to
begin that work at the start of the next session. However,
the co-Chairs were able to guide us to a document that
indeed contains some improvements when compared
to last year’s outcome document. Having said that,
we also want to acknowledge that a large number of
countries suggested changes to the paper and shaped
that document. The paper therefore belongs to all of
us — the Member States.
What we should guarantee now is the continuity
of our efforts. The roll-over decision we just adopted
(decision 72/557) leads us forward. We have agreed
to build on the revised elements of commonality and
18-20373

29/06/2018

issues for further consideration and on the framework
document prepared during the sixty-ninth session by
the Permanent Representative of Jamaica, Ambassador
Courtenay Rattray.
During the next session of the General Assembly,
we will need to continue advancing the process
and concentrate on improving this year’s revised
document. Our objective is precise. We should continue
harmonizing and updating the paper so as to move
towards our goal of achieving text-based negotiations
to expeditiously reform the Security Council. After
25 years of discussion on Security Council reform
and 10 years of the intergovernmental negotiations
themselves, we cannot afford to witness during the next
session the same stagnation that we have seen for years.
We should break the cycle and begin real negotiations.
The credibility of the intergovernmental negotiations
process and the United Nations as a whole is at stake.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group
of Arab States.
At the outset, allow me to express the Group’s
appreciation to you, Sir, for focusing during your
presidency of the General Assembly on one of the
most important items on our agenda, “Question
of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council”. I would also like
to thank the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations, Ambassador Kaha Imnadze of Georgia
and Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh of the United Arab
Emirates, for their appreciated efforts to bring together
different points of view of various States and groups
during the negotiations.
The Group of Arab States believes that the paper
reflects the progress made by Member States during
the current session, and clarifies many elements of
commonality between the positions taken by the States
and various groups pertaining to the five issues of
negotiation. At the same time, it refers to the presence
of substantial divergent views requiring the continued
dialogue among Member States during subsequent
sessions to find common ground. In that regard, I would
like to emphasize that, as stated in decision 62/557, the
positions and proposals of the Member States are the
basis for the negotiation process.
The Group of Arab States congratulates you,
Mr. President, on the adoption by consensus of decision

A/72/PV.104

72/557. However, I underscore once again that the Group
is keen to see any step taken in the intergovernmental
negotiations enjoy the greatest possible level of political
acceptance, thereby allowing Member States to continue
to move forward so as to ensure a comprehensive and
equitable reform of the Security Council.
I would like to emphasize that the Arab
position calls for maintaining cohesion among the
general membership and for not discrediting the
intergovernmental negotiations by imposing steps
that do not enjoy consensus among Member States.
Following the adoption of today’s decision, the
Group of Arab States looks forward to continuing the
deliberations during the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly in order to build on the achievements
of previous sessions.
In conclusion, the Group of Arab States renews
its commitment to participating effectively and
constructively in the process and to working with all
other Member States towards finding common ground
leading to a solution that enjoys consensus with regard
to a comprehensive reform of the Security Council, in
order to meet the aspirations of all Member States.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): On behalf of the Uniting
for Consensus group, I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
for your leadership during the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly. I would also like to thank
the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental negotiations,
Ambassadors Nusseibeh and Imnadze, for their efforts.
We have just agreed to continue intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform, building on the
results of the informal meetings held during the current
session of work. Among those results, discussions
among the membership allowed the co-Chairs to
revise the elements of commonality and the issues that
deserve further consideration, which were compiled in
the document of last year’s co-Chairs.
We welcome the document’s evolution — what is
now the revised elements paper — as a further step
towards consensual reform. The revised elements
certainly represent a new building block of the reform
process. At the same time, they continue to be a work in
progress that Member States might or might not decide
to use during the next stage of the intergovernmental
negotiations. Much of that decision will depend
upon the ability of the future intergovernmental
negotiations Chairs to preserve the consensual nature
of the document.

18-203735/19

A/72/PV.104

Our reform must be built upon solid
foundations — elements that are truly shared by all
Member States. We cannot afford to leave any room
for ambiguous language in the reform process and
its related documents. There are neither linguistic or
procedural shortcuts to Security Council reform, and
our experience has shown that any attempt in that
direction only results in pulling us further from our
goal. Therefore, the United for Consensus group will
pursue its work to ensure that the bedrock of a reformed
Council remains genuinely consensual, as mandated by
decision 62/557.
During the latest intergovernmental negotiations
meeting, on 7 June, focusing on how to best advance the
negotiations, the Uniting for Consensus group recalled
that the prerequisites for tangible progress towards
an early Security Council reform are political will,
flexibility and a spirit of compromise. Those elements
are of the utmost importance to overcoming what all
evidence shows to be the obstacle to reform, the only
truly contentious aspect hindering our advancement in
the reform process — the proposal by some to increase
the number of permanent seats.
We are convinced that there is common ground on
which to make a collective effort to finally unlock the
reform process. Political will, flexibility and a spirit
of compromise can lead the General Assembly to the
consensual and sustainable reform of the Security
Council that we have been striving for. The Uniting
for Consensus group is looking forward to engaging
in future negotiations and building on those crucial
elements, hoping that they will help inform our future
work, with the sincere conviction that Security Council
reform remains possible.
Allow me several final words, as this will be my
final intergovernmental negotiations meeting after
five years. Through your person, Sir, I would like to
thank all the Presidents of the General Assembly with
whom I had the honour to work. Through Ambassadors
Nusseibeh and Imnadze, I thank all the co-facilitators
with whom I had the honour to work. I would like to
thank every colleague independently according to their
individual position, constituency, aspirations and ideas.
Sometimes we had very strong and hard, but always
very honest discussions. Some here might find it hard
to believe that the Italian Permanent Representative and
Deputy Permanent Representative will be leaving in
the next few days or weeks. Consider that an expression
of the Italian way of life, our capacity to organize
6/19

29/06/2018

the timing. Although some Italians are leaving, Italy
remains firmly here, convinced and involved in this
exercise, trying to find the only possible solution — the
consensual one.
Mr. Ten-Pow (Guyana): I have the distinct honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
following the adoption of decision 72/557 to roll over
to the Assembly’s seventy-third session consideration
of the item on “Question of equitable representation on
and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council”.
As we conclude this session’s intergovernmental
negotiations, CARICOM wishes first of all to express
its deep appreciation to you, Mr. President, for your
commitment to reform of the Council and for your
active engagement in the process. Throughout the
year, you kept your door open for consultations with
all stakeholders. CARICOM — a community of
mostly small island developing States that attach the
greatest importance to strengthening the rule of law in
international relations and, by extension, of the organs,
like the Security Council, that underpin the rule-oflaw architecture — commends you for the leadership
that you have shown on this important question of
Council reform.
CARICOM also wishes to thank the two co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations of the seventysecond session, Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh and
Ambassador Kaha Imnadze. They have done an
outstanding job, and we wish to place on record our
deep appreciation for the active role they played and
the concrete efforts they made, always in a consultative
and transparent manner with a view to an early and
comprehensive reform of the Security Council.
CARICOM notes with satisfaction that, going
forward, the intergovernmental negotiations will
build on the series of informal meetings held during
the Assembly’s seventy-second session and on the
revised elements of commonality and issues for further
consideration, circulated on 14 June, as well as on
the various positions and proposals made by Member
States. As we look to continue our consideration in the
next session of the intergovernmental negotiations of
the elements of commonality and issues identified for
further consideration, we wish to express our hope that
Member States will come to see the value of attribution
of their positions so as to lay the groundwork for real
18-20373

29/06/2018

negotiations to begin on those points on which there has
not as yet been convergence.
In conclusion, let me once again reiterate our
appreciation to you, Sir, and to the co-Chairs appointed
by you, for the intensive and inclusive efforts to bring
about progress in the work of the Open-ended Working
Group on the Question of Equitable Representation on
and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council
and Other Matters related to the Security Council at
this year’s intergovernmental negotiations. We look
forward to resuming during the seventy-third session
our work on this question, which, we all agree, is of the
utmost importance.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for the
oral technical decision 72/557, on rolling over the item
under consideration, on reform of the Security Council,
to the seventy-third session of the General Assembly.
The issue of Security Council reform is one of
the most important on the Organization’s agenda. We
are talking about an organ that, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, is imbued with the
primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. However, as the current session’s
discussions have illustrated, fundamental differences
on many aspects remain among Member States.
We must be honest with ourselves. Those
disagreements are at the heart of the problems faced
by the intergovernmental negotiations. Everything
else, including negotiating methodology, is secondary,
regardless of how some delegations might try to
prove otherwise.
Obviously, against the backdrop of the enormous
political importance of the issue of Security Council
reform, it is necessary to continue searching for a
solution that would enjoy much greater support among
Member States than the formally required two-thirds
majority. The best-case scenario would be a consensus.
Such work should be conducted in a transparent and
inclusive manner, without establishing artificial
timelines. In that regard, we note that progress on the
reform of the Security Council cannot be achieved by
imposing chairs’ texts, negotiating documents or any
other initiative that fails to enjoy universal support.
Previous sessions of the General Assembly have
convincingly shown the futility and danger of attempts
to reach a solution without considering the entire
spectrum of positions.

A/72/PV.104

We firmly believe that the five key issues of Security
Council reform must be discussed in their interrelated
aspects. Any attempt to single out one particular issue
risks diluting the package approach underlying the
negotiations agreed upon by all.
We believe that priority for membership of the
Security Council should be given to the developing
countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America. We are
certain that those States have sufficient potential to
make a substantial contribution to ensuring international
peace and security. It is of primary importance to ensure
that future Security Council decisions are balanced
and practical.
In concluding, we thank Permanent Representatives
Kaha Imnadze of Georgia and Lana Nusseibeh of the
United Arab Emirates for their work. They have ably and
responsibly carried out their obligations as co-Chairs of
the intergovernmental negotiations process during the
current session.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
General Assembly just adopted a short technical oral
decision (decision 72/557) by consensus to roll over the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform into next year’s session.
This year there were five informal meetings of the
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform. The co-Chairs of the negotiations, the Permanent
Representatives of the United Arab Emirates and of
Georgia, performed their duties under the mandate of
decision 62/557, respecting the Member State-driven
principle and hearing a broad range of views.
Member States have had candid, in-depth and patient
discussions and have increased mutual understanding
of the five key issues and their interlinkages in an
effort to reach the broadest possible consensus. China
commends the President of the General Assembly and
co-Chairs on their positive role in the process.
The revised elements of commonalities and issues
for further consideration paper is the personal working
document of the co-Chairs. It has no official status
accorded by the Member States. All documents proposed
by the Chairs and co-Chairs of intergovernmental
negotiations in recent years in the light of ongoing
discussions have reflected the efforts of Member
States to advance Security Council reform, providing
facilitation and reference for discussions among

18-203737/19

A/72/PV.104

29/06/2018

Member States. China believes that the four documents
are equal in status and should not be treated differently.

in the process and to do so in a consensual manner and
with respect for each other’s positions.

The intergovernmental negotiations process is an
important mechanism for Member States to discuss
Security Council reform. Therefore it must be driven
by the Member States to achieve stable development.
For years, Member States have been engaged in
negotiations and laid out positions, proposals and
recommendations that serve as an important basis
for the parties to patiently conduct discussions and
build consensus. Any attempt to artificially expedite
the process or set timelines in that regard will lead to
serious disagreement among Member States, which
will only serve to aggravate divisions and to undermine
efforts and results accumulated over the years, and will
contribute nothing to the healthy development of the
reform process.

Throughout our time as co-Chairs, we have been
reminded that the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform are like no other process in
the United Nations. The Security Council, as the body
charged with maintaining international peace and
security, is oftentimes the most visible measure of the
impact of the United Nations in the world as the key
organ in the global peace and security architecture.
The dynamics of the process need not be explained
to anyone in this Hall. Member States harbour no
illusions about the complexity, sensitivity, and strategic
importance of this issue. But that is precisely the reason
we all collectively continue to be committed to the
process, knowing that a reform process that enjoys the
widest possible support can arise only from careful,
considered progress that builds on convergence among
all States, one step at a time, towards our end goal.

China looks to the next session of the General
Assembly to continue to engage in the intergovernmental
negotiations in line with the mandate of decision
62/557, to maintain the Member State-driven principle
and the package-solution approach and to continue to
have broad-based and patient discussions. The goal
is to build consensus and keep the intergovernmental
negotiations on the right track to achieving the broadest
possible consensus and serving the common interests
of all Member States and the long-term interests of the
United Nations.
Ms. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): It is my
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform.
At the outset, let me join delegations in expressing
their appreciation to the President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-second session for his
guidance and leadership during the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform. We greatly
value the trust and confidence that President Lajčák
placed in Ambassador Imnadze and me as co-Chairs
of the intergovernmental negotiations for this session.
Secondly, once again I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all delegations, not just for
their proactive and constructive engagement in the
intergovernmental negotiations and the continued
support they have shown for the work of the co-Chairs
throughout the session, but also for their commitment to
working constructively throughout to achieve progress
8/19

Acknowledging the complexity of this endeavour,
at the outset of our work for this session President
Lajčák asked us to achieve meaningful progress and
engage in genuine dialogue with all Member States.
Throughout our five meetings held this year, we as
co-Chairs strived for inclusivity and transparency by
regularly consulting with Member States and groups.
We aimed to ensure interactivity by establishing the
practice of holding interactive segments on the second
days of our meetings, structured around a series of
questions circulated by the co-Chairs. We believe that
that format was helpful in breaking down the cut-andpaste statements of the past. During those sessions,
Member States also had opportunities to respond to
ideas raised by each other, fostering dialogue that we
believe led to a deeper understanding of positions.
The co-Chairs approached the process with no set
agenda or pre-cooked solutions for the way forward. We
had no preconceived notions as to whether producing
another document by the end of the session was the
best solution for moving the process forward. At the
same time, an overwhelming call was made for the
co-Chairs to guide an exercise in the intergovernmental
negotiations, whereby we examined the documents
referred to in decision 71/553 with a view to identifying
necessary improvements and filling in any perceived
gaps. We believe that the document we arrived at
represents meaningful progress.
18-20373

29/06/2018

The document produced during the seventysecond session builds on the paper, entitled “Elements
of commonality and issues for further consideration”
from the seventy-first session, while taking into
account the relevant positions and proposals made by
Member States and reflected in documents circulated
during the seventieth and sixty-ninth sessions. It makes
an imperfect but first attempt to harmonize that work
in one place. We also listened closely to proposals from
the floor that aimed to ensure a better reflection of
Member States’ positions in the paper.
We have heard today Member States express
diverging views on the ways and means in which the
paper can be further improved, and we fully agree that
the work is not done. The road ahead must be pursued
with energy and unity of purpose. However, it is the
conviction of the co-Chairs that this document is a step
in the right direction. It is one that has the potential
to bring Member States’ positions closer together and
to identify pathways for narrowing differences and
controversial elements. We trust that the document will
aid the work of the co-Chairs to be appointed for the
seventy-third session. Kaha and I will do our utmost
to ensure the proper continuity of that work and handover.
Let me reiterate what a pleasure and honour it has
been to serve at the helm of this process. Mr. President,
we thank you again for all your support and trust in us
as stewards of this process during the seventy-second
session. We also thank our colleagues for their support
and trust, and we apologize for any shortcomings.
Lastly, I would like to thank Ambassador Mudallali of
Lebanon for supplying the chocolates that kept my son
quiet during my speech.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 122?
It was so decided.
The meeting was suspended at 5 p.m. and resumed
at 6.50 p.m. on Thursday, 5 July.

A/72/PV.104

agenda items 133, 136, 148 to 154, 156 to 159, 160 (a)
and (b), 161 to 165 and 134.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Felipe García Landa of Mexico, to introduce the
reports of the Fifth Committee before the General
Assembly in one intervention.
Mr. García Landa (Mexico), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour
today to present to the General Assembly the reports
of the Fifth Committee containing recommendations
on issues that required action during the second
part of the resumed seventy-second session of the
General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 7 May to 4 July
in the morning and held 14 plenary meetings and
numerous rounds of informal consultations, many of
them until late at night and early morning, as well as
during the weekend.
(spoke in English)
In accordance with resolution 49/223 of
23 December 1994, the second part of the resumed
session of the Fifth Committee is devoted primarily
to the consideration of administrative and budgetary
aspects of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
and associated issues.
The current session was unusually heavy. In addition
to the consideration of 16 peacekeeping operations,
the report of the Board of Auditors on peacekeeping
operations and various questions related to the
administrative and budgetary aspects of peacekeeping
operations, the Committee also considered several
additional reports, notably those related to the reform
of the peace and security pillar and management
reform, including on the global service delivery model,
accountability and the status of the implementation of the
information and communications technology strategy
of the United Nations. It also considered financing
requests for the United Nations Assistance Missions
in Iraq and Afghanistan and a proposed revised budget
for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals for the biennium 2018-2019.

Reports of the Fifth Committee

Let me now introduce the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues that
require actions by the General Assembly.

The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee under

Under agenda item 133, entitled “Financial reports
and audited financial statements, and reports of

18-203739/19

A/72/PV.104

the Board of Auditors”, in paragraph 6 of its report
contained in document A/72/572/Add.1, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Under agenda item 136, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 2018-2019”, in paragraph 6 of
its report contained in document A/72/681/Add.2, the
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
adopt the draft resolution on special subjects relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2018-20119,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
Under agenda item 148, entitled “Financing of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained
in document A/72/669.Add.2, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which the Committee adopted without
a vote.
Under agenda item 149, entitled “Administrative
and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping operations”, in paragraph 12
of its report contained in document A/72/917, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of the following four draft resolutions:
draft resolution I, entitled “Rates of reimbursement
to troop- and police-contributing countries”; draft
resolution II, entitled “Financing of the Regional
Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda”; draft resolution
III, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Logistics
Base at Brindisi, Italy”; and draft resolution IV, entitled
“Support account for peacekeeping operations”. All
were adopted by the Committee without a vote.
In paragraph 13 of the same report, the Committee
also recommends to the General Assembly the adoption
of the draft decision that all resolutions relating to the
peacekeeping budget and special political missions
adopted today be effective 1 July 2018. The draft
decision was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to the draft resolutions on the financing
of peacekeeping operations, I would like to inform the
General Assembly that, with the exception of sub-item
(b) of agenda item 160, entitled “Financing of the United
Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East: United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon”, the Committee
adopted all draft resolutions without a vote.
10/19

29/06/2018

The reports of the Fifth Committee are presented
under the following agenda items: item 150, “Financing
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei”, as contained in document A/72/913; item 151,
“Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic”, as contained in document A/72/916; item
152, “Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire”, as contained in document A/72/915; item 153,
“Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus”, as contained in document A/72/904; item
154, “Financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo”, as contained in document A/72/907; item
156, “Financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti”, as contained in document A/72/903;
item 157, “Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo”, as contained in
document A/72/909; item 158, “Financing of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia”, as contained in document
A/72/914; item 159, “Financing of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali”, as contained in document A/72/908; sub-item (a)
of agenda item 160, “Financing of the United Nations
peacekeeping forces in the Middle East, Financing of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force”,
as contained in A/72/906; item 161, “Financing of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan”, as contained
in document A/72/911; item 162, “Financing of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara”, as contained in document A/72/910; item
163, “Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur”, as contained in document
A/72/671/Add. 1; item 164, “Financing of the activities
arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”,
as contained in A/72/912; and item 165, “Financing
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti”, as contained in document A/72/670/Add. 1.
With regard to sub-item (b) of agenda item 160,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East: United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon”, the report of the Fifth Committee
is contained in document A/72/905. The Committee
considered the draft resolution, as orally amended,
and decided to retain the fourth preambular paragraph
and the existing operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 13 by
a single recorded vote. In paragraph 11 of that report,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of the draft resolution as a whole, as
18-20373

29/06/2018

orally amended, which the Committee adopted by a
recorded vote.
Under agenda item 134, entitled “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 10
of its report contained in document A/72/682/Add.2,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of two draft resolutions: draft resolution
I, entitled “Shifting the management paradigm in
the United Nations”, and draft resolution II, entitled
“Progress towards an accountability system in the
United Nations Secretariat”. The Committee adopted
both without a vote. In paragraph 11 of the same report,
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft decision on questions deferred
for future consideration. The Committee adopted the
draft decision without a vote.
Finally, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of an oral draft decision that
all resolutions relating to the peacekeeping budget
and special political missions adopted today would be
effective as of 1 July 2018.
(spoke in Spanish)
I would like to thank delegations for their cooperation
during the session and for the spirit of agreement they
showed, which allowed the Committee to conclude its
duties on time. I would also like to thank the Chair of
the Committee, Ambassador Tommo Monthe, for his
guidance during our work, as well as the secretariat of
the Fifth Committee for its ongoing support.
I wish to publicly acknowledge my colleagues in
the Bureau — Abbas Yazdani of Iran, Haseeb Gohar of
Pakistan, Julie O’Brien of Ireland, and Anda Grinbera
of Latvia, as well as Katlego Mmalane of Botswana,
who supported the Chair during the session — for their
camaraderie, professionalism and good faith. I would
also like to thank them for their friendship and good
humour during the most difficult moments. It has been
a pleasure to work with them.
I would like to wish the delegations a wonderful
summer break.
The President: I thank the Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to
emphasize to delegations that, as the Fifth Committee
concluded its work this afternoon, the relevant reports

A/72/PV.104

before the Assembly today are available in English
only. It is my understanding that they will be issued in
all the official languages as soon as possible. I thank
members for their understanding.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote. The positions of delegations on
the recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless
the secretariat is notified to the contrary in advance.
That means that, where recorded votes were taken, we
will do the same. I also hope that we may proceed to
adopt without a vote those recommendations that were
adopted without a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 133 (continued)
Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/572/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the

18-2037311/19

A/72/PV.104

29/06/2018

text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.32.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/8 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 133.
Agenda item 136 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/681/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.52.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2018-2019”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 72 / 2 62 C ) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 136.
Agenda item 148 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/669/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.34.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 72 / 2 58 B) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 148.
12/19

Agenda item 149
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/917)
The President: The Assembly has before it four
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 12 of its report and a draft decision
recommended by the Committee in paragraph 13 of its
report. We will now take a decision on draft resolutions
I through IV and the draft decision one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Rates of reimbursement
to troop- and police-contributing countries”, the text
of which, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.33. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution I without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 72/285).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe,
Uganda”, the text of which, for the time being, is
contained in document A/C.5/72/L.48. The Fifth
Committee adopted draft resolution II without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 72/286).
The President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at
Brindisi, Italy”, the text of which, for the time being,
is contained in document A/C.5/72/L.49. The Fifth
Committee adopted draft resolution III without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 72/287).
The President: Draft resolution IV is entitled
“Support account for peacekeeping operations”, the text
of which, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.55. The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution IV without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 72/288).
The President: The draft decision is entitled
“Effective date of resolutions relating to the
peacekeeping budget and special political missions”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 72/558).
18-20373

29/06/2018

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 149.
Agenda item 150
Financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/913)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.47.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/289).

A/72/PV.104

Agenda item 152
Financing of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/915)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.51.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/291).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 152.
Agenda item 153

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 150.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus

Agenda item 151

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.38.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/916)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.54.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/290).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 151.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/904)

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do
the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/292).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 153.
Agenda item 154
Financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/908)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the

18-2037313/19

A/72/PV.104

text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.41.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/293).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 154.
Agenda item 156
Financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/903)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.36.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/294).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 156.
Agenda item 157
Financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/909)

29/06/2018

Agenda item 158
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/914)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.50.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/296).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 158.
Agenda item 159
Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/907)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.40.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/297).

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.42.

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 159.

The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
forces in the Middle East

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/295).

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/906)

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 157.
14/19

Agenda item 160

(a) United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. For the time being, the
18-20373

29/06/2018

text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.39.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic): The United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
was established by Security Council resolution 350
(1974), which separated the Syrian forces and the
Israeli occupying forces in the occupied Syrian Golan
following the war of October 1973. The main reason for
the establishment and continuation of the Force was the
Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan in 1967. Since
then, Israel has refused the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions of international
legitimacy with regard to that issue, which called for
full withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
line of 4 June 1967. That means that the presence of
UNDOF will conclude with the end of the occupation
and the implementation of relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy.
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic has
reiterated its position several times in rejecting the
attempts of some well-known delegations to politicize
UNDOF’s mandate. During the two months of informal
negotiations, those delegations refused to accept our
legitimate proposal meant to avoid a vote and reach a
consensual resolution, as we used to have in previous
years in the Fifth Committee.
For that reason, my delegation submits an oral
amendment to add the following paragraph after
paragraph 8 of draft resolution A/C.5/72/L.39,
on UNDOF:
“Takes note of paragraph 27 of the report of
the Advisory Committee and decides to abolish
two international temporary positions in the Office
of the Force Commander and Head of Mission for
one Special Adviser (P-5) and one Mission Liaison
Officer (P-4), and further decides not to approve
the five general temporary assistance positions to
be converted to international posts to strengthen
the Security Section.”
My delegation respectfully urges all Member States
to adopt this proposal by consensus, and if some
delegations intend to object, I urge them once again to
vote in favour of the inclusion of this paragraph.
Finally, Syria emphasizes that this is not a matter
of argument on functions or posts. Rather, it is an

A/72/PV.104

essential concern of the existence of the peacekeeping
mission on Syria’s territories, which should be taken
into account. The proposal submitted by the Syrian
Arab Republic is based on the Charter of the United
Nations and the principle of peacekeeping operations
from the beginning.
The President: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic has submitted an oral amendment to
draft resolution A/C.5/72/L.39, recommended in the
report of the Fifth Committee. In accordance with rule
90 of the rules of procedure, the Assembly will first
take a decision on the oral amendment submitted by the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Belarus, Burundi, China, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Gambia, Guyana, India,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Panama, Philippines,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand,

18-2037315/19

A/72/PV.104

Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Zimbabwe
The oral amendment to draft resolution
A/C.5/72/L.39 was rejected by 53 votes to 10, with
50 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Montenegro and
the Republic of Macedonia informed the Secretariat
that they had intended to vote against.]
The President: Since the oral amendment
submitted by the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic was not adopted, we will now take a decision
on the draft resolution recommended in the report of
the Fifth Committee. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/298).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 160.
(b) United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/905)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 11 of its report. For the time being, the
text of the draft resolution is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.31, as orally revised.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Financing of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to speak in explanation of vote before
the vote.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic): My delegation
joins the consensus on the adoption of resolution 72/298,
on the financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force. Our delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution on the financing of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, based on the confirmed
principle that the responsibility for financing those two
Forces must be borne by Israel, the occupying Power,
which caused their establishment. Our position is in
line with the basic principles contained in General
Assembly resolution 1874 (S-IV), of 27 June 1963.
16/19

29/06/2018

The President: A single separate vote has been
requested on the fourth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraphs 4, 5 and 13 of the draft resolution,
based on the paragraph numbers in document
A/C.5/72/L.31.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Gambia, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Liberia, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, South Africa, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany,
Greece,
Guatemala,
Honduras,
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland
The fourth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraphs 4, 5 and 13 were retained by 74 votes
to 3, with 47 abstentions.
18-20373

29/06/2018

[Subsequently, the delegation of Bhutan informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour;
the delegations of Montenegro and the Republic of
Macedonia informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to abstain.]
The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution as a whole, as orally revised.
A recorded vote was requested.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Guatemala

A/72/PV.104

The draft resolution as a whole, as orally revised,
was adopted by 125 votes to 3, with 1 abstention
(resolution 72/299).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bhutan,
Montenegro and the Republic of Macedonia
informed the Secretariat that they had intended to
vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 160.
Agenda item 161
Financing of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/911)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.44.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/300).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 161.
Agenda item 162
Financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/910)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.43.
We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/301).

18-2037317/19

A/72/PV.104

29/06/2018

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 162.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/671/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.45.
We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 163.
Agenda item 164
Financing of the activities arising from
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/912)
The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.46.
We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 72/302).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 164.
18/19

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/670/Add.1)

Agenda item 163 (continued)

The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 72 / 2 59 B) .

Agenda item 165 (continued)

The President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The text of the draft
resolution, for the time being, is contained in document
A/C.5/72/L.37.
We shall now take a decision on the draft resolution.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t i o n 72 / 2 6 0 B) .

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 165.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/682/Add.2)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report and a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 11 of the same report. We
will now take a decision on draft resolutions I and II
and on the draft decision, one by one.
We shall now turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“Shifting the management paradigm in the United
Nations”, the text of which is contained for the time
being in document A/C.5/72/L.53. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution I without a vote. May I take it
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 72/266 B).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution II, entitled “Progress
towards an accountability system in the United Nations
Secretariat”, the text of which is contained for the time
being in document A/C.5/72/L.35. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft resolution II without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 72/303).
18-20373

29/06/2018

The President: The Assembly will now turn to the
draft decision entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”, the text of which is contained for the
time being in document A/C.5/72/L.56. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft decision without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 72/547 C).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 134.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.

A/72/PV.104

I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
members’ hard work and dedication. This second
resumed session of the Fifth Committee handled a very
important agenda of unprecedented weight. Members
have shown the ability to tackle complex issues and
to exercise the spirit of compromise and flexibility so
as to reach consensual outcomes, and they have done
so through many long days and nights. Their hard
work and dedication, often well into the late night and
early morning hours, are more than admirable. They
have helped to strengthen multilateralism and equip
the United Nations with the tools necessary for better
delivery on its work. They should all be very proud. I
thank them and offer my congratulations.
The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.

18-2037319/19
