S/2021/456

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 May 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 11 May 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by His
Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkir, President of the General Assembly, as well as the
statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Ralph Gonsalves, Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; Mr. Wang Yi,
State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of China; Ms. Eva-Maria Liimets,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia; Mr. Simon Coveney, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Defence of Ireland; Ms. Raychelle Omamo, Cabinet Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Kenya; Mr. Marcelo Ebrard Casaubón, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico; Mr. Hassoumi Massaoudou, Minister of State, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of the Niger; Ms. Ine Eriksen Søreide, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Norway; Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation;
Mr. Othman Jerandi, Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and Tunisians Abroad
of Tunisia; Mr. Antony Blinken, Secretary of State of the United States of America;
Mr. Bui Thanh Son, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam; Mr. Harsh Vardhan
Shringla, Foreign Secretary of India; Mr. Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, Minister of State
for Tourism, French Nationals Abroad and Francophonie, attached to the Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France; and Lord Tariq Ahmad of Wimbledon,
Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United Nations and South Asia of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in connection with the videoteleconference on “Maintenance of international peace and security: Upholding
multilateralism and the United Nations-centred international system” convened on
Friday, 7 May 2021.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light
of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
this briefing and these statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

21-06283 (E) 120521 070621

*2106283*

S/2021/456

Annex I
Briefing by the President of the General Assembly at its seventyfifth session, Volkan Bozkir
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this timely debate on an issue that
is of great importance to the General Assembly. It is a privilege to brief the Security
Council on behalf of the 193 States Members of the United Nations. I also thank
your delegation here in New York, in particular Ambassador Zhang Jun, for his
participation in the recent high-level interactive dialogue with the principals of
the main organs of the United Nations to commemorate the International Day of
Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace.
Let me begin by stating unequivocally that strong and effective multilateralism,
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and justice, is the foundation for security, stability, peace and
prosperity. Importantly, the multilateral system benefits all of us, from small States
to the largest ones. Multilateralism plays a crucial role in fostering dialogue and trust
and in managing security challenges, such as terrorism and weapons proliferation. It
provides a framework for States to resolve disputes peacefully and without coercion.
In September, world leaders affirmed in the Declaration on the Commemoration of
the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution
75/1) that multilateralism is not an option, but a necessity. Therefore, we must be
clear during these discussions that there is no alternative to our current system.
As imperfect as the multilateral system may be, we must acknowledge that
we are at the helm. Member States are the United Nations, and the failures are our
own. Great enterprises are dynamic and should evolve in sync with the realities in
which they operate. The multilateral system, centred around the United Nations,
is no exception, and it is incumbent on us to refine and update the system, which
is indispensable.
We have many examples of success. From the United Nations Charter, over
the past 75 years a web of treaties and norms have developed to promote cooperation
in relation to global challenges in areas as diverse as civil aviation, hazardous waste,
health security and human rights.
However, unacceptable levels of human suffering remain. Moreover, due to
the multidimensional effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic,
our world is currently facing the deepest global economic recession since the
Great Depression and the largest loss of incomes since 1870. Foreign investment is
gradually decreasing. The livelihoods of billions of people are under threat.
Global extreme poverty numbers are expected to rise for the first time in 20
years. Approximately 115 million people are on the verge of falling into extreme
poverty. It is calculated that 235 million people will need humanitarian aid this year.
Meeting the humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable 160 million people requires
$35 billion.
Approximately 690 million people are at risk of malnutrition. In 22 countries,
violence and conflict are the root causes of the hunger, affecting 77 million.
Millions of people are on the move. Millions are displaced due to conflict,
persecution, hunger or climate change. Millions had to flee their home countries,
ending up as refugees.
That scale of suffering is difficult to fully comprehend, but it is unimaginable
to think of the extent of hardship and death that would unfold in a world without the
United Nations. We can never afford to forget the impact that our actions have on the
people of the world.
2/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Under the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council is entrusted
with a special responsibility in relation to international peace and security. However,
the threats to international peace and security affect more than the 15 members of
the Security Council. Right or wrong, for millions of people around the world, the
Security Council is the face and embodiment of the United Nations. Its success or
failure to achieve its mandate is seen as the success or failure of the United Nations.
On many occasions, the Council has been divided and unable to rise to the challenge.
For most of those cases, the reason for failure is the differences among its members,
in particular its permanent members.
The reform of the Security Council is a core interest of States Members of the
United Nations. It is a core interest of the United Nations itself, as well as going to
the heart of its legitimacy. We need a more representative, accountable, transparent
Council. I am conveying that as the President of the most democratic organ of
our system.
As members of the General Assembly, Council members are of course aware of
a number of issues before them that are also on the agenda of the General Assembly.
A just and lasting settlement to the Israel-Palestine conflict on the basis of the
vision of two States is still pending. The Palestinian people have been living under
occupation for more than 50 years. The essential needs of the Palestine refugees
in Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and the occupied Palestinian territory are met by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
the longest-standing United Nations agency and a lifeline for more than 5 million
Palestine refugees. Hence, providing sufficient and sustainable financing to the
Agency is essential.
The largest humanitarian crisis has unfolded before our eyes for a full decade
now in Syria, with ordeals that are hard to describe. Nearly 16.2 million people are
food insecure in Yemen, where famine remains a serious threat. Libyans have been
suffering for almost a decade. The situation in Myanmar is a matter of deep concern.
The military coup was a strike on the democratic processes in the country, and the
increasing loss of life since then is alarming.
In the same spirit of responsibility for the people whom we serve, I join the
call by the leaders of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations for an immediate
end to the violence in Myanmar. I am deeply concerned about the humanitarian
implications of the military’s actions in Myanmar, particularly as they affect the
most vulnerable communities, including the Rohingya Muslims, ethnic minorities,
women and young people. Later this month, I will travel to Cox’s Bazar, which hosts
more than 800,000 refugees, who fled Myanmar in search of safety.
I firmly believe that we need to meet and speak with the people for whom
peace has thus far been elusive. Indeed, I recently visited the Hatay region on the
Turkish-Syrian border, where I met with Syrian refugees. At the United Nations
trans-shipment hub in Reyhanli representatives of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs showed me the aid delivery process and its monitoring
mechanism. I have to say, standing on the truck, surrounded by United Nations
personnel who put their lives at risk to save the lives of others, and again, as I looked
out over Atme tent city, I asked myself, “How long must the Syrian people endure
such hardship?”
If, in this seventy-fifth year of the United Nations, the international
community fails to step up to end that suffering, who will? There is no backstop. We
are responsible for the fate of the most vulnerable. To that end, I call on the Security
Council to ensure that the vital cross-border assistance continues uninterrupted. It is
my most fervent hope that the Council will renew that critical mandate in July and
work together to strengthen efforts to bring about peace in Syria.
21-062833/39

S/2021/456

I urge all States Members of the United Nations, including the members of
the Security Council, to strengthen the implementation of the Charter and formulate
rules and processes that expedite justice when it comes to human rights abusers and
those who violate international humanitarian law. Such actions should be the baseline
for the rules-based international order. The lack of accountability for serious crimes
signifies our collective failure to enable all mechanisms and tools of the multilateral
system to prevent violations from occurring and reoccurring.
Furthermore, all COVID-19 recovery plans and humanitarian responses must
be centred around human rights and the protection of civilians, for actions taken
without accountability and full regard for human rights will never reach the most
vulnerable in society. That includes the equal and fair distribution of COVID-19
vaccines for all.
Let me be clear: in that context, the protection of civilians equals a vaccine for
all. Without vaccinating the people whom we serve, we are, in a literal sense, failing
to protect civilians from the most widespread, deadly threat facing the world today.
Many issues that cross our desks do not have easy solutions, or even plausible ones.
However, we can end COVID-19 if we work together.
I commend the recent steps taken to waive intellectual property protections
on COVID-19 vaccinations. Once approved by the World Trade Organization, that
much-needed development will support increased vaccine production, which will
enable us to save lives.
The task ahead is clear: we have the ammunition to defeat this universal
adversary. Yet, at this moment, only 0.3 per cent of all vaccines have been given to
low-income countries. I repeat: 0.3 per cent. We can do better. We must do better.
The COVID-19 pandemic is not a zero-sum game. Good intentions are no match for
vaccines in arms.
It is clear that conventional approaches will not bring about peace or shape an
equal, resilient and sustainable world. Just as peace and development are mutually
reinforcing, respect for human rights is a foundation for peace and security as well.
We need to reinforce United Nations reforms, which support an integrated approach
to the challenges that we face. Sustaining peace requires us to address peace and
security challenges in all their dimensions.
This is the moment of reckoning to fulfil our commitments to our generation,
future generations and our planet. I look forward to our continued cooperation for
the remainder of the seventy-fifth session as we work to create a better world for all.

4/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex II
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Ralph E. Gonsalves
I thank the preceding speakers for their remarks and commend China for
convening this important debate. As a small country whose continued peaceful
existence depends on the norms and principles of international law and the multilateral
system in which those tenets are enveloped, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines places
particular emphasis on today’s discussion. This fundamental principle is applicable
to all States, large and small, in every part of the world. Commandist, bullying
or threatening behaviour by any State in relation to another is antithetical to that
precept and portends dangerous consequences for all.
Last September, we commemorated the seventy-fifth anniversary of this
treasured institution. We also celebrated the many successes and achievements
realized in our collective quest for peace and prosperity. Yet there is still much more
to be done in order to be ever more focused, creative and relevant in these complex
and challenging times.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has laid bare the reality
that a renewed multilateralism remains an urgent moral, political and existential
imperative, undergirded by the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of the Charter of the United Nations.
Amid the severe health, socioeconomic, political and security implications
of COVID-19, States are required to contend with the ever-intensifying hazards of
climate change, the continued spread of terrorism and organized crime, increased
hunger and acute food insecurity, political polarization, disinformation and hate
speech, the escalation of ethnic and intercommunal tensions and, in far too many
contexts, conflict and mass human displacement.
Those contemporary challenges are inextricably interconnected, and they will
not be successfully addressed by any short-sighted unilateral or military means. To
the extent that many of such issues stretch across borders and more easily overwhelm
the limited capacities of vulnerable States, effective and coordinated multilateral
action is an essential condition for any sustainable solution. Only a comprehensive
whole-of-system approach will suffice in addressing the peace and security,
development and humanitarian concerns of affected States.
In the face of the vast but continually expanding peace and security challenges
experienced globally, we must move quickly in a fresh direction. Bold and innovative
steps are needed to alleviate human suffering, especially in conflict-affected settings.
Capacity-building and development assistance should be scaled up and national
ownership over peace and political processes should be strengthened. Practical,
inclusive, people-centred and climate-sensitive solutions ought to be developed and
implemented in line with national needs and priorities and in accordance with the
Sustainable Development Goals.
It is necessary and desirable that all States work together constructively and
within the framework of international law, with the support and assistance of the
United Nations and relevant regional and subregional organizations, to achieve this
vision of a more peaceful and prosperous world. When disputes do occur, they ought
to be settled amicably and equitably through dialogue, diplomacy, mediation and other
participatory approaches, rather than through unilateral or coercive means. There can
be no substitute for trust and mutual respect. Any deviation from those universally
accepted norms, wheresoever and by whomsoever committed, severely undermines
the ideals of multilateralism embodied in the Charter of the United Nations. Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines remains committed to these guiding principles.
21-062835/39

S/2021/456

In conclusion, let us all be reminded of our forebears’ vision of unity and
solidarity as they fashioned the United Nations system. As we seek to confront the
unique and complex challenges of the twenty-first century, including a sustainable
recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic which has already destroyed far too many
lives and livelihoods, the extant circumstances demand the presence of a renewed
and effective multilateralism steeped in the virtues of inclusivity, equality and
justice and guided by the principles of international law. We cannot remain separated
by narrow interests or be divided in purpose. We must work in comity even more,
together, urgently and resolutely, to realize peace, security and development for all
of humankind.

6/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex III
Statement by the State Councilor and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of China, Wang Yi
[Original: Chinese]
Last September, at the high-level meeting to commemorate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, President Xi Jinping expounded on the essence
of multilateralism and underscored the importance of sticking to multilateralism as
the path forward (see A/75/PV.3, annex 14). Leaders of all nations also reiterated, in
the declaration on the commemoration of United Nations seventy-fifth anniversary
(resolution 75/1), that multilateralism is not an option but a necessity.
The United Nations is the banner of multilateralism. To pursue multilateralism,
we must follow the basic norms governing international relations, built around the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, uphold the authority
and stature of the United Nations and ensure its central role in international affairs.
That is what it means to practice multilateralism, whose intrinsic nature is absolutely
incompatible with unilateralism.
As the world goes through a raging pandemic and profound changes rarely
seen in a century, we need to firmly commit to the path of cooperation, mutual
benefit and win-win, and to put true multilateralism into practice. In this context,
China wishes to propose the following.
We should engage in win-win cooperation, not zero-sum games. The more
complex the global issues are, the greater is the need for collective response.
The more daunting the challenges facing all humanity, the greater is the need for
solidarity and unity of heart. What is needed is dialogue and cooperation on the basis
of equality and mutual respect among all countries. No country should expect others
to lose. Rather, countries must work together to ensure that all come out as winners
and to achieve security and prosperity for all.
We should pursue equity and justice, not bullying or hegemony. Promoting
democracy in international relations is central to ensuring international equity and
justice. It is essential that all countries share the responsibilities of global governance
and work together for peace and development. The key is to promote law-based
international relations, observe universally recognized international laws and
norms, and honour international agreements adopted by all parties. International
rules must be based on international law and drawn up by all. They are not a patent
or a privilege of a few. They must be applicable to all countries, and there should be
no room for exceptionalism or double standards.
We should focus on action rather than on rhetoric. Multilateralism means
taking action and finding solutions. Otherwise, it will not stand its ground and will
not endure. The actions we take must not be short-sighted. We must always act in the
common interests of all and bear in mind that each and every country will benefit
from what is best for the world. The actions we take must also serve long-term
needs in addition to immediate ones, and no action should be taken for the sake of
expediency at the expense of the long-term peace and sustainable development of the
whole world. Major countries in particular must lead by example to provide global
public goods.
We should respect diversity instead of seeking supremacy. Every country
has its unique history and culture, and needs to take a path of development suited
to its own realities. This diversity, together with the common values of peace,
development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom, will unleash the great power
21-062837/39

S/2021/456

of multilateralism. On the other hand, however, splitting the world along ideological
lines conflicts with the spirit of multilateralism and is an historical regression.
The United Nations is like a mirror and a benchmark to show whether
multilateralism works and whether it works well.
The United Nations was founded with a mission to preserve peace. It is
important that the United Nations continue to focus on this primary responsibility,
promote dialogue and consultation, resolve differences, end conflicts through
mediation and good offices, and address hotspot issues through political means.
Sanctions and other enforcement measures should be used only after all other nonenforcement means are exhausted and for the purpose of seeking political settlement.
All unilateral moves that circumvent the Security Council are illegitimate and must
be abandoned.
Elevating development to the same important status as peace is a vital initiative
of the United Nations. What is important for the United Nations now is to build
global consensus more effectively and promote peace and human rights through
development. The United Nations needs to pay greater attention to the difficulties
facing developing countries, make their voice heard, address their concerns and
protect their rights and interests. Most important, the Sustainable Development
Goals must be achieved on time and with high quality by 2030.
Non-traditional security issues have as much impact on humankind as the
trauma of wars and conf licts. For the United Nations, it is important to pursue a
new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and
to lay greater emphasis on public health, counter-terrorism, climate change and
other non-traditional security threats so as to eliminate the root causes of crises
and cement the foundation for security. The Security Council can play a bigger role
within its mandate.
The ongoing pandemic has also amplified the unadaptable side of the global
governance system. The United Nations needs to keep pace with the times. It should
improve its efficiency, emergency response capability and the transparency of its
work through reform, earnestly increase the representation and voice of developing
countries, and make the global governance system more just and equitable.
This year marks the 100th anniversary of the founding of the Communist
Party of China. We have successfully eradicated extreme poverty and embarked on a
new journey towards a modern socialist country in all respects. This year also marks
the fiftieth anniversary of the restoration of the lawful seat of the People’s Republic
of China at the United Nations. These five decades have witnessed China’s active
practice of multilateralism, its full participation in and support for the cause of the
United Nations, and its continuous contributions to world peace and development.
To maintain peace, China is always committed to the political settlement of
hotspot issues. Having participated in more than 30 United Nations peacekeeping
operations, China has become the largest contributor of peacekeepers among the
permanent members of the Security Council. To promote development, China is
fully implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We have met the
goal of poverty reduction 10 years ahead of schedule. We are also advancing highquality Belt and Road cooperation, which will give impetus to global development.
To protect the environment, China has contributed to the conclusion of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change and announced its targets for peaking carbon
emissions and carbon neutrality. The time span between these two targets of ours
is much shorter than that of developed countries. To defeat the pandemic, China
launched the largest emergency humanitarian operation since the founding of New
China, and has been providing vaccines to other developing countries as a global
public good to boost global solidarity in fighting the coronavirus disease .
8/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

At this new historic starting point, China will continue to hold high the
banner of multilateralism, thoroughly implement the major initiatives announced by
President Xi Jinping at the high-level events marking the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations last year, and continue to support the United Nations-centred
multilateral mechanism with concrete actions. China will remain a builder of
world peace, a contributor to global development, a defender of international order
and a provider of public goods. We stand ready to work with all parties to bring
multilateralism and the United Nations forward from a new starting point and jointly
build a community with a shared future for humankind.

21-062839/39

S/2021/456

Annex IV
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia, EvaMaria Liimets
Please accept my warm greetings to you, Mr. President, and to the people of
China. I warmly welcome Your Excellency Mr. Bozkir at this meeting. I would like
to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this important meeting today.
Estonia has always been a firm supporter of a rules-based international order
built on the understanding of respect for and promotion of international law, including
human rights law and international humanitarian law, democracy, the rule of law and
the fight against impunity. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has only
highlighted why we need this method of diplomacy.
Both the United Nations and the Security Council lie at the heart of the
multilateral system. We have achieved a lot over the past 75 years, but we cannot
stop here. We must remain committed to our core values and principles, which were
agreed upon in the Charter of the United Nations.
The promotion and protection of human rights are one of the most efficient
means of conflict prevention and clearly linked to the maintenance of peace and
security. In this context, we render our full support to the Secretary-General’s call
to action for human rights.
The United Nations, with its well-established structure of human rights
treaties and their monitoring mechanisms, has a central role in the protection and
promotion of universal human rights. We support improved information exchange
between the Security Council, the Human Rights Council and its special procedures,
and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. It is
crucial that the Security Council take into account and consider the valuable work of
the High Commissioner and the Human Rights Council in its deliberations.
Estonia maintains its strong commitment to the implementation of its human
rights obligations and we consider the universal periodic review process a useful
element of this work. On Tuesday this week, Estonia participated in its third universal
periodic review.
Estonia also continues to focus on the most vulnerable, including women
and children affected by conflicts. That is why today Estonia, with its partners, is
organizing an informal Security Council meeting on the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on grave violations against children affected by armed conflict. This
meeting will launch the study prepared by the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict on this topic.
We must remain committed to the rules-based international order where
international law, including in cyberspace, is followed. Respect for territorial integrity
and the prohibition of the use of force are fundamental principles of international
law that stand at the core of the United Nations and our values. Therefore, we are
observing with concern the ongoing violations of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, in Europe — in Ukraine and Georgia.
Estonia strongly believes that multilateral diplomacy cannot hold without
cooperating with a wide range of actors. For example, strengthening civil society
engagement at the United Nations, including at the Security Council, is vital for
ensuring effective policymaking. I see with regret how many civil society activists
are being harassed and suffer from reprisals by rogue regimes.
The declaration on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations (resolution 75/1) reaffirmed that multilateralism is not an option but
10/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

a necessity. However, in order to address new and emerging challenges, we need new
practices and agreements to enrich multilateral cooperation.
Digital technologies are higher on our agendas than ever before. Unfortunately,
the COVID-19 crisis has also amplified challenges around digitalization, including
the digital divide that still exists worldwide. To close this gap, we need global
partnerships and collaboration. Estonia is actively contributing to the SecretaryGeneral’s digital cooperation process. We are also happy to collaborate with the
GovStack initiative to develop a digital governance reference architecture together
with Germany, the International Telecommunication Union and the Digital Impact
Alliance. It will accelerate national digital transformation and the digitalization
of government services, and thereby contribute to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.
Climate change poses a real threat and therefore needs a global answer. To
make the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change a real success, we must all set ambitious targets and
take actions today. Estonia has set the target of reaching climate neutrality by 2050
and established a clear timeline for phasing out fossil fuel-based energy production
by 2040. We cannot be successful in this field without the availability of data and
effective data management. Estonia has launched the Data for the Environment
Alliance, which will support the United Nations Environment Programme in
developing a global environmental data strategy by 2025. We invite all countries to
join this alliance. Given the clear links between climate and security, the Security
Council should also show leadership in this field.
In conclusion, multilateralism is an inevitable choice in order to meet global
challenges. I can promise you, Sir, that Estonia shall continue to stand for multilateral
cooperation and international law. We remain a responsible and active partner to all
other United Nations Members during this crisis and beyond.

21-0628311/39

S/2021/456

Annex V
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defense of
Ireland, Simon Coveney
Allow me first to congratulate you, Minister, on China’s assumption of the
presidency of the Council. I also wish to thank you, Sir, very much for organizing
today’s important debate on promoting multilateralism. I would also like to thank
President Bozkir for his powerful words today.
When China last held the presidency of the Council, in March 2020, the
coronavirus disease pandemic cast a dark shadow across many parts of the globe.
There is one clear lesson coming out of what we have collectively faced in the
last year, and that is that global challenges are too great for any nation, regardless of
its size, means or power, to face alone; we can only face them successfully when we
face them together.
A strong and fair rules-based international order, with the United Nations at
its core, remains our best option — our only option — to address the multitude of
challenges that we face across the world.
I would like to make four key points today.
First, the complexity and interdependency of our world require a functioning
multilateral system. We depend on a network of multilateral institutions to govern
and regulate the international economy and trade, global public goods, such as health
and the environment , and many other areas of human activity central to our way of
life. These institutions must operate in an open, equitable and rules-based manner.
Through the United Nations and regional organizations, we are working
collectively to reduce poverty and hunger, promote and defend human rights,
increase access to education and health care, protect migrants and refugees, advance
gender equality and build sustainable peace.
Vital institutions, such as the Human Rights Council and the International
Criminal Court, uphold international law and protect human rights, which need to
apply equally to everybody.
Through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, vaccines
are being delivered to millions of people, with a lot more still to do. The World Health
Organization continues to support States in fighting the pandemic and preparing for
the next pandemic. In February, this Council spoke in unison to demand that parties
to conflicts facilitate the delivery of vaccines.
Landmark agreements, such as the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development,
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons, seek to shape a sustainable and secure future for all of the inhabitants of
this planet.
Collective multilateral engagement enhances our sovereignty, rather than
diminishes it.
This wider system of multilateralism may have its shortcomings — and I will
return to this point — but without it we would face a world ruled by might and zerosum competition, rather than one shaped by partnership and cooperation. And we do
not have to look far, to the lessons of history, to see where that road leads us.
My second point is that multilateralism is essential if we are to achieve the
promise of the Charter of the United Nations to spare succeeding generations from
the scourge of war.
12/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

The United Nations, and this Council have unique legitimacy for the
maintenance of international peace and security. No other body can aspire to
represent humankind in all its rich diversity and complexity.
To take one example, peacekeeping operations continue to play a critical role
in preserving peace, preventing the resurgence of conflict and protecting civilians.
Peacekeeping saves lives and prevents conflict. For more than six decades, Irish
women and men have served in United Nations peace operations across the Middle
East, Europe and Africa. They have served proudly alongside peacekeepers from
across the world, including many countries on this Council today.
Peacekeepers now face new challenges, and we must ensure that they are fully
equipped to meet those challenges. We must also prepare so that, when the time
comes for peacekeepers to leave, we have put in place the resources and planning to
preserve the peace they leave behind.
We need to become much better at linking peacekeeping to peacebuilding,
ensuring continued and sustained support for countries emerging from conflict —
and there are far too many of those — and finding durable solutions to the causes of
those conflicts in the first place.
Thirdly, just as no State alone can adequately address global challenges, no
one arm of the multilateral system can craft the solutions that we need today. We see
this is many arenas, but let me take one example — an obvious one.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our generation. Its impact is
global and our collective security is very much at risk. The future of this planet and
of generations to come relies upon facing up to that reality. A concerted multilateral
response — with all organs of the United Nations, including this Council, playing
their role — is urgently needed.
We must match our ambition with action. We know that climate change can
exacerbate existing tensions and drive conflict and insecurity, but we also know that
effective climate action can build peace.
As Co-Chair with the Niger of the Informal Expert Group on Climate and
Security, made up of members of the Security Council, Ireland is working to forge
consensus on this critical issue. And I would urge all countries and colleagues to join
us in those efforts.
My final point is that, to sustain and uphold the legitimacy and relevance of
the United Nations, we need to see institutional and political reform in the United
Nations. Ireland is a strong advocate for the Secretary-General’s reform agenda.
The United Nations must be capable of addressing intersecting challenges
that cut across each of its three pillars. Our citizens do not live in separate boxes,
labelled “human rights”, “peace and security” and/or “development”. Nor do global
challenges — climate change, migration, conflict and fragility, inequality — fit
neatly into separate boxes.
Extensive efforts have been made to promote greater collaboration across the
pillars of the Organization, including across the humanitarian, development and
peacebuilding nexus. Important progress is being made to improve the effectiveness
and cohesion of the United Nations development system. And I want to recognize
and applaud those efforts.
But we cannot address the issues facing the multilateral system without
reforming this Council itself. Ireland has long argued for a larger and more
representative Council. I reiterate my call today to address the historic and unjust
underrepresentation of Africa as a continent, for example.
21-0628313/39

S/2021/456

We also need to assess not just our actions, but also our inactions on this
Council. Too often, this Council has been unable to act to alleviate immense
suffering due to the use, or the threat of the use, of the veto. Such inaction affects the
legitimacy of our whole system and the trust that people have in it. Such inaction is
unacceptable, and, I would argue, even immoral at times.
Each of us at this table has a responsibility to find the political will necessary
to build consensus. Those who sit here permanently bear a particular responsibility.
A reformed and more representative Council that better reflects twenty-first
century global realities would have enhanced legitimacy. That legitimacy is essential
to delivering on this Council’s mandate to maintain international peace and security
for the sake of every country.
In conclusion, we have a collective responsibility to strengthen and defend
the United Nations and the international rules-based order. We must uphold the
multilateral system, promote respect for international law, and ensure that the
United Nations is equipped to meet these global challenges. Ireland takes these
responsibilities very seriously, and I know others do, too.

14/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex VI
Statement by the Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs Of Kenya,
Raychelle Omamo
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Your Excellency, Mr. Wang Yi, on
China’s assumption of the presidency of the Security Council this month and for
convening this important debate.
I also thank His Excellency Mr. Volkan Bozkir, President of the General
Assembly, for his briefing and welcome our colleague, the new Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Niger.
Rarely in the past 30 years has effective multilateralism been as sorely needed
as it is today. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has dramatically
showcased the interconnectedness of our world. COVID-19 has touched us all,
exposing State vulnerabilities, revealing stark inequalities in our societies and
unveiling latent weaknesses within international institutions. Despite regular calls for
global solidarity, responses to the pandemic have, in many instances, paradoxically
spawned increased isolationism, nationalism and protectionism, thereby diluting
State cooperation and depleting the potency of multilateral agencies.
In fact, the stark absence of widely accepted rules, norms and principles to
guide the international system through this crisis has become apparent. For this
reason, Kenya has joined other States in appealing for a pandemic treaty domiciled
within the World Health Organization framework. We would encourage all States to
embrace this noble cause so as to enhance rules-based multilateralism.
Although Kenya wholeheartedly welcomes and appreciates the establishment
of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, vaccine access and
distribution have become one of the greatest tests to multilateralism today and pose
an existential threat to global peace and security. It ought to be the duty of this
Council to affirm this truism — there is a real and present danger that many States in
the global South will remain excluded and neglected in the face of growing vaccine
nationalism and vaccine hoarding, as well as the uneven production of vaccines.
Vaccine exclusion, coupled with the dire economic challenges confronting
African States, for instance, will impede global recovery and the return to normalcy
for everyone. We therefore fully support the African Union in advocating for
international cooperation in expanding vaccine manufacturing within the African
continent, as well as for the waiver of intellectual property rights in relation to
COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics in order to democratize and accelerate largescale production worldwide. Access to vaccines, particularly within the context of a
global pandemic, is a fundamental human right, which the multilateral system must
jealously uphold.
As the world tackles the COVID-19 crisis, terrorism and violent extremism
endure, especially on the African continent. Thus, multilateral approaches to
subdue these threats must be bolstered without delay, driven by an invigorated
consensus derived from Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1373 (2001). In this regard, Kenya persists in her demands for the listing,
without exception, of acknowledged terrorist groups, such as Al-Shabaab, under
this Council’s sanctions regimes. Without a consistent, strong, and unyielding
multilateral consensus against terrorism, we risk providing space for the expansion
of terrorist groups.
Furthermore, a firm multilateral consensus must also be established around
the nexus between international peace and security and climate change. It is no longer
tenable, in our view, to underestimate the devastating effects of climate change, both
21-0628315/39

S/2021/456

as an underlying cause and multiplier of conflicts and insecurity throughout our
world. Accordingly, this Council ought to pronounce itself unequivocally on this
matter and offer the leadership and momentum required to galvanize global action
against climate change-related risks to international tranquillity and security.
Finally, Kenya fervently believes that the success of the United Nations largely
depends on its cooperation with regional and subregional organizations, in line
with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Intensifying this inextricable interdependence,
especially in the arena of peace and security in Africa, is imperative.
Accordingly, the principle of complementarity must attain its salient place in
the Council’s vision and decision-making. Besides this, as we seek to “build back
better” in the throes and aftermath of the COVID-19 crisis, the expansion of the
permanent membership of the Security Council to reflect the diversity of our world
and to correct historical injustices is now both urgent and necessary. Multilateralism
without inclusion is unsatisfactory and limited.
Kenya affirms her commitment to a rules-based ethos, strengthened by
robust multilateralism and secured by the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

16/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex VII
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, Marcelo
Ebrard Casaubón
[Original: Spanish]
I thank you, Minister Wang Yi, for convening this timely debate, and I
acknowledge the participation of the President of the General Assembly as well as
other high-level ministers and officials.
We are still going through one of the most shocking crises in history. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has shown that international peace
and security are multidimensional, and has exposed multiple vulnerable aspects of
multilateral organizations.
Global challenges such as natural disasters, climate change, migration,
which entail suffering for many people and, of course, pandemics, like the one we
are experiencing, can affect the peace, security and the stability of States and the
international community as a whole. The lesson of this pandemic must be accepted;
science worked, but international solidarity and a sense of justice did not.
The topic that brings us together today gives us an opportunity to reiterate
the commitment of the members of the Security Council to the relevance of the
values and principles of the United Nations. For a start, Mexico reaffirms its support
for the declaration issued by the General Assembly on the occasion of the seventyfifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations (resolution 75/1). It clearly
states that multilateralism is not optional extra but a necessity and that there is no
other international institution or organization that has the legitimacy, convening
power and normative impact of the United Nations. But the United Nations, and in
particular its Security Council, must open up more; it must listen to peoples’ needs
and aspirations and, in practical terms, put people at the heart of all its actions
and decisions.
Mexico is a defender of multilateralism both as a matter of principle and
because it is in our national interest to contribute to building the robust and effective
global governance needed to manage the global public goods that we share, which
serve all countries equally, regardless of their economic status or political power.
Lasting peace, necessary for sustainable development, can be built only through
mutual understanding, cooperation and solidarity.
Multilateral forums are the ideal platform for building trust through
dialogue, respect and inclusion. My country reiterates the call for the Council to
maintain greater dialogue with all actors. The inclusion of all parties is essential
to the resolution of crises and conflicts. In this regard, the greater participation of
women and young people is now essential. Ultimately, this is the only way to ensure
the place of diplomatic dialogue as the natural method of effective and inclusive
multilateralism.
Any action leading to deadlock undermines the legitimacy of the collective
security mechanisms we have worked so hard to build, and increases the deficit of
confidence that already exists in the international community regarding the validity
and effectiveness of multilateralism. The time it took for the Council to issue its
first resolution regarding the COVID-19 pandemic (resolution 2532 (2020)) clearly
illustrates what I am talking about.
The Security Council has a special responsibility not only because of the
mandate conferred on it by the Charter of the United Nations, but also because of
the expectations it generates. We therefore believe that the Council should be more
21-0628317/39

S/2021/456

active in ensuring compliance with its decisions, but always within the framework
of international law, international humanitarian law and international human
rights law.
Mexico advocates a comprehensive reform of the Security Council, including
an update of its working methods, in order to make it more transparent and, above
all, more democratic and accountable. Pending that reform, which is obviously not
easy, we must consider measures to make the Council more transparent. Mexico has
proposed, for example, discussing the letters in which the right to legitimate selfdefence is invoked, in the light of Article 51 of the Charter, and on which the Council
seems to take no action — even when it comes to the most serious issues — since
they involve the use of force.
We also once again invite all States that have not yet done so — in particular
the permanent Council members — to join the Franco-Mexican initiative on the
voluntary restriction of the veto in cases of mass atrocities, which has already been
endorsed by 105 States.
It is unacceptable that the protection of civilians, the fight against impunity and
the provision of humanitarian assistance should be held hostage to political differences,
which, in some cases, lead precisely to inaction or paralysis in the Council.
I conclude by reiterating the call for States and international organizations —
both regional and multilateral — to join efforts for the effective implementation
of resolution 2565 (2021) and General Assembly resolution 74/274, on equitable
access to vaccines. Such vaccines must be recognized as a global public good and be
distributed without exclusion in all countries, including those in conflict.
In these complex times, the Security Council and the entire United Nations
system have both an opportunity and a responsibility to exercise leadership and
show the primacy of multilateralism right now, when the international community
needs it most.

18/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex VIII
Statement by the Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of the Niger, Hassoumi Massaoudou
[Original: French]
As this is the first time I address the Security Council in my capacity as Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of the Niger, I would like to
express my thanks and my readiness to continue to work with each of your countries.
I would also like to convey to you the sincere thanks of His Excellency Mr.
Mohamed Bazoum, President of the Republic of the Niger, for the congratulations
that your various countries have addressed to him following his election as President
of the Niger.
As previous speakers have reminded us, the United Nations is the crucible par
excellence of multilateralism and the appropriate framework for its maintenance.
Chapter I of the Charter of the United Nations, which sets forth the principles that
underpin multilateralism, and to which my country, the Niger, is firmly committed,
calls on all States Members of the United Nations to give priority to collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, with due regard for
the sovereign equality of all its Members.
That is why my country has never ceased to reiterate its firm commitment
to that ideal and to lend its ongoing support to strengthening the principles of the
Charter and to the international system, with the United Nations at its core. It was
also for that reason that my country organized a high-level debate on the same theme
during its presidency of the Council in September (see S/2020/953).
Eight months later, as we see a glimmer of hope in the wake of a pandemic
that has highlighted the inadequacies of our tools of global governance and laid bare
the shortcomings of the system, including within the Security Council, the time
has come to breathe new life into multilateralism by providing the United Nations
system with the means to adequately fulfil its tasks.
Indeed, the world as we knew it in the aftermath of the Second World War
is different from today’s world, and our instruments in their current state are no
longer sufficient to face the challenges of pandemics — as shown by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, poverty, climate change, terrorism and organized crime, and the
misuse of new technologies.
In view of all of this, allow me to make some recommendations to strengthen
international solidarity and cooperation and promote the use of multilateralism in order
to address the peace and security issues currently facing the international community.
First, there is a need to restore confidence in a system that is too often perceived
as unfair and unrepresentative of certain countries and continents. How else can it
be understood that the African continent, which accounts for more than 50 per cent
of Security Council meetings, 60 per cent of its outcome documents and 70 per
cent of its resolutions with Chapter VII mandates, has no permanent representation
on the Council? All countries, large or small, rich or poor, are full members of
the international community and, as such, are entitled to be fairly represented in
this decision-making organ. My country fully subscribes to the African Common
Position, as expressed through the Ezulwini Consensus, which calls for the full
representation of Africa in the Security Council — with at least two permanent seats
and a single status for all permanent members, including the right of the veto.
Beyond the question of reforming the Security Council, there is also the
question of the other Bretton Woods institutions, such as the World Bank and the
21-0628319/39

S/2021/456

International Monetary Fund. The time has also come to extend the scope of the
Security Council’s action to take into account other emerging challenges that could
jeopardize international peace and security. Cybercrime and so many other problems
specific to our century must be addressed judiciously and without complacency,
just as we did with the coronavirus disease pandemic and climate change, which is
another rampant pandemic. Dealing with these security risks will require a major
paradigm shift and, above all, political will and a change of mindset within the
Council. As a Council, our objective is not only to manage conflicts; we have a
fundamental responsibility to prevent them. It is therefore essential, in that respect,
to understand the causes, effects and complexities of the changes that can impact
our world.
Secondly, we must strengthen coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations. I would like to take
this opportunity to welcome the partnership that exists between the United Nations
and the African Union, which plays an eminently positive role in the promotion
of multilateralism. It is our hope to see this partnership further enhanced through
the promotion of confidence-building measures and dialogue to support conflict
prevention and resolution efforts on our continent.
And finally, the lessons learned from the serious social, economic and
political consequences of the coronavirus disease pandemic, particularly with
regard to international peace and security, must give us, as the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations have
so aptly put it, a unique opportunity for “a renaissance of multilateralism”, based on
institutions capable of acting decisively, on the basis of a global consensus for our
common welfare.
The pandemic therefore calls on us to strengthen bilateral, regional and
interregional partnerships. It also calls on us to develop better coordination with
both United Nations agencies and international financial institutions. The time has
come to strengthen the links among peace, security — in a broad sense — and
development.
In conclusion, I would like to thank China for having chosen this theme for
today’s debate today, and I reaffirm that, more than ever, the world today needs
strong regulatory institutions. While it is true that the defence of national interests
governs the foreign policies of States, those national interests are better defended
through cooperation, complementarity and solidarity, rather than through opposition
and confrontation.

20/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex IX
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Ine
Eriksen Søreide
I would like to join others in thanking Foreign Minister Wang Yi for calling
and presiding over this important meeting, as well as the President of the General
Assembly, Mr. Volkan Bozkır, for his intervention.
The Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights are keystones of modern international relations. Seventy-five years ago,
Australia’s Ambassador, Norman Makin, the first President of the Security Council,
opened the very first Council meeting with the hope that
“the Security Council will be a great power for good in the world, bringing
that freedom from fear which is necessary before we can hope for progress and
welfare in all lands.” (S/PV.1, p. 6)
It is about freedom from fear — not just for States, but for individuals in their
daily lives.
Norway is convinced that respect for, and the protection of, human rights
is a prerequisite for durable international peace and security. It is vital in this day
and age that we reiterate our common commitment to non-aggression and to the
principles of justice and international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We must safeguard and strengthen the
international order that has served us so well for 75 years. We are dependent on, and
best served by, a predictable, rules-based international order that makes the world
safer and more stable.
We are also best served by a world order where small and large States cooperate
to find common solutions, where major Powers are prevented from acting unilaterally
and where right prevails over might. In fact, the very hallmark of multilateralism is
to commit beyond one’s own self-interest.
The absence of inclusive democracy, the marginalization of minorities,
authoritarian rule and repression are the root causes of violent conflict. Conflicts
have become increasingly protracted in nature. They have a devastating effect on
civilians and civilian infrastructure and pose a threat to international peace and
security. Myanmar and Tigray are among the most recent examples.
The Security Council has played a key role for 75 years. It has prevented,
de-escalated and resolved conflicts. Some peacekeeping operations mandated by
the Council have been successful, illustrated by the United Nations being awarded
Nobel Peace Prize in 1988. Some have failed, and we must learn from those failures.
Our focus should always be on achieving concrete results for people affected
by conflict.
The protection of civilians, including children, must remain at the core of
our efforts. We must combat sexual and gender-based violence in conflict. Sexual
violence is not a side-effect of armed conflict; it is a weapon of war, and impunity
for this crime has to end.
We need to turn commitments into compliance, and resolutions into results.
The inclusion of women in peace efforts will be crucial to our success. No society
can truly succeed without the active involvement of women.
We must build on the legacy of the United Nations to confront new challenges,
including inter-ethnic and interreligious conflicts, pandemics and cybercrime,
climate-related conflicts and the rise of non-State armed actors. These are all
21-0628321/39

S/2021/456

pressing issues. Climate change has been recognized as a threat multiplier that will
aggravate existing conflicts and could lead to new ones. It is vital that the Council
have access to fact-based information on climate-related security risks in specific
country contexts when it takes its decisions. Threats that deserve more attention are
piracy, robbery at sea and related maritime crime. The Security Council can and
should authorize more robust action to make the world’s oceans safe and secure for
maritime commerce.
We need to create a more inclusive multilateralism that draws on the
contributions of civil society, business, academia and other sectors. And we must
recognize once again that no one State alone, no matter how powerful, can resolve
all the challenges that are before us.

22/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex X
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Sergey Lavrov
[Original: Russian]
First of all, let me thank Mr. Wang Yi, State Councillor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, for organizing today’s debate.
Maintaining multilateralism and the United Nations-centred international system is
as topical as ever and demands the Security Council’s constant attention.
Today the world finds itself in a critical stage of development. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has posed a grave challenge to everyone, without exception.
Normal life has been completely upended. It is difficult to predict the long-term or
deferred consequences of the crisis, although we can see some positive trends thanks
to the massive deployment of vaccines.
The pandemic broke out in a world that was already far from perfect. In recent
years, we have seen growing international tensions, as well as escalating regional
conflicts and cross-border challenges and threats. The entire architecture of global
governance created after the Second World War is being tested.
It is clear that the prospects for the international community’s sustainable and
predictable development are directly connected with our ability to find effective
solutions to common problems and our readiness to exercise collective leadership in
order for true multilateralism to prevail.
Russia, like the majority of countries, is convinced that such work must be
carried out solely on the basis of universally recognized norms of international law.
The United Nations must serve as the key platform for coordinating efforts, as it is the
backbone of the modern global order, where all independent States are represented.
Today its unique legitimacy and unique capabilities are especially needed.
The core tenets of international law, enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, have withstood the test of time. Russia calls on all States to unconditionally
follow the purposes and principles of the Charter as they chart their foreign policies,
while respecting the sovereign equality of States, not interfering in their internal
affairs, settling disputes by political and diplomatic means and renouncing the threat
or use of force. This is especially important at the current stage in the difficult
process of forming an multipolar international system. At a time when new centres
of economic growth and financial and political influence are gaining strength, it is
necessary to preserve the internationally recognized legal basis for building a stable
balance of interests that meets the new realities.
Unfortunately, not all of our partners are driven by the imperative to work
in good faith to promote comprehensive multilateral cooperation. Realizing that it
is impossible to impose their unilateral or bloc priorities on other States within the
framework of the United Nations, the leading Western countries have tried to reverse
the process of forming a polycentric world and slow down the course of history.
To that end, the concept of the rules-based order is advanced as a substitute
for international law. It should be noted that international law is already a body of
rules, but rules agreed on universal platforms and reflecting consensus or broad
agreement. The West’s goal is to oppose the collective efforts of all members of the
world community with other rules developed in closed, non-inclusive formats, and
then imposed on everyone else. We see only harm in such actions that bypass the
United Nations and seek to usurp the only decision-making process that can claim
global relevance.
21-0628323/39

S/2021/456

The well-known idea to convene a Summit for Democracy proposed by the
United States Administration is in the same vein. The establishment of a new club
based on interests, with a clearly ideological nature, has the potential to further
inflame international tensions and deepen dividing lines in a world that needs a
unifying agenda more than ever. Of course, the list of democracies to be invited to
the summit will be determined by the United States.
Another initiative with the goal of global leadership that bypasses the United
Nations is the French and German idea to create an alliance for multilateralism.
What could be more natural than discussing at the United Nations the tasks of
strengthening multilateralism? However, Berlin and Paris think differently and
issue joint documents declaring that “the European Union is the cornerstone of the
multilateral international system” and promote the conclusions of the Council of
the European Union under the heading “The central role of the European Union
and European institutions in promoting multilateralism.” Presumptuous, you might
say. The European Union does not think so, and it declares its own exceptionalism
despite all its invocations of equality and brotherhood.
By the way, as soon as we suggest discussing the current state of democracy
not just within States but on the international stage with our Western colleagues,
they lose interest in the conversation.
New, ambitious initiatives to create narrow partnerships are emerging all
the time within the alliance for multilateralism, on issues that are already being
discussed at the United Nations or its specialized agencies — for example, on cyber
security, with 65 member countries; respect for international humanitarian law, with
43 member countries; and on the Information and Democracy Partnership, with over
30 countries.
This also reveals the West’s true attitude towards multilateralism and the
United Nations, which they do not regard as a universal format for developing
solutions acceptable to everyone, but in the context of their claims to superiority
over everyone else, who must accept what is required of them.
Another example of the dictatorial methods introduced by the West is the
practice of imposing unilateral sanctions without any international legal grounds,
with the sole purpose of punishing “undesirable regimes” or sidelining competitors.
During the pandemic, such restrictions have limited the capacity of a whole range
of developing countries to counter the spread of the infection. Despite the call by
Secretary-General António Guterres to suspend such unilateral sanctions during the
pandemic, we mostly see them becoming harsher.
We believe such efforts to impose totalitarianism in global affairs to be
unacceptable. Yet we see it more and more from our Western colleagues, above all
the United States, the European Union and other allies, who reject all principles of
democracy and multilateralism on the global stage — as if to say, either it is our way
or there will be repercussions.
It is striking that, while openly undermining international law, Western leaders
do not hesitate to argue that the main task of world politics should be to counter the
attempts of Russia and China to “change the rules-based order.” Such statements were
made the other day following the Group of Seven ministerial meeting in London. In
other words, there has already been a substitution of concepts: the West is no longer
concerned with the norms of international law and now requires everyone to follow
its rules and observe its order. What is more, United States representatives freely
admit that the United States and Great Britain have had the biggest hand in shaping
these rules.
I am not saying all of this to ratchet up the confrontational rhetoric or advance
an accusatory agenda. I am simply stating facts. But if we all support multilateralism
24/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

in word, let us honestly search for ways to ensure that there is fairness in deed,
without attempts to prove one’s superiority or infringe upon another’s rights. I hope
that this approach to maintaining multilateralism and the United Nations-centred
system will guide the activities of the Secretary-General and his team.
I am convinced that the time has come to do away with medieval and colonial
habits and to recognize the reality of today’s interconnected and interdependent
world. Honest and mutually respectful cooperation based on equal partnership
among all States, guided by pragmatism and devoid of any ideology or politicization,
is what is needed now. It is the only way to improve the atmosphere in the world and
ensure predictability in the advancement of the human race. That is especially true
of such global challenges as the threat of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, climate change, new infectious diseases and protecting human
rights, starting with the most important one — the right to life.
I agree with United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken, who stressed
recently that no country can overcome such global threats to the lives of our citizens
alone, not even the United States. The permanent members of the Security Council
are called on to play a key role in fostering open and direct dialogue about the most
pressing problems of our time. According to the Charter of the United Nations, they
bear special responsibility for maintaining international peace and security. Russian
President Vladimir Putin proposed convening a summit with the leaders of the five
permanent members. We hope to make this idea a reality once the epidemiological
situation in the world stabilizes.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasise that, as the main multilateral
platform, the United Nations must keep pace with changes on the global stage. The
Organization must constantly adapt to ever-changing conditions, while continuing
to fully respect the division of labour between the main Charter bodies and
maintaining the support of all the Member States. At every stage of change, our
actions must be measured by the improvements made to the real-world effectiveness
of the United Nations.
Russia stands ready to continue working constructively with all partners who
share these approaches in order to bolster the authority and fully unlock the potential
of the United Nations as the true centre of multilateralism.

21-0628325/39

S/2021/456

Annex XI
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Immigration and
Tunisians Abroad of Tunisia, Othman Jerandi
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I would like to congratulate Wang Yi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the People’s Republic of China, on his country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to express my appreciation of his choice
to devote today’s meeting to the theme of upholding multilateralism in order to
support its effectiveness in overcoming the major challenges that humanity as a
whole faces today.
I would also like to thank Mr. Volkan Bozkir for his important briefing and to
salute his valuable efforts as President of the General Assembly to contribute to the
advancement of the United Nations system.
Last September, our President Kaïs Saïed called on the United Nations to be
more united on the basis of a new set of values suited to the modern era (see A/75/
PV.3). On the occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the establishment of our
Organization, the leaders of our countries agreed that multilateral action was not an
option but an urgent necessity and that the United Nations was the natural framework
within which to combine our efforts to build a safer, fairer, more sustainable and
resilient world.
The dire circumstances faced by the world’s peoples today as a result of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its devastating repercussions can
only reinforce our commitment to multilateralism and our conviction of the need
to rally around the United Nations and support other specialized institutions and
international organizations.
This existential challenge has highlighted the fact that our destiny is a common
one, and that we can effectively address the pandemic and its effects only by working
together, cooperating and demonstrating genuine solidarity within multilateral
frameworks. This is confirmed by the landmark resolution 2532 (2020), which was
adopted by the Security Council in July 2020 following a Tunisian-French initiative,
in keeping with the call, issued by President Kaïs Saïed when the pandemic began,
for a comprehensive understanding of international peace and security.
While we value the admittedly significant international efforts made to date,
they have yet to rise to the level of the challenge. We still have much to do to build
resilience in the face of this pandemic and the pandemics to come, as well as to
tackle other existing and emerging threats.
Our world today is not in the best of situations, confronted as it is with
the COVID-19 pandemic and numerous other, no less dangerous, complex and
interrelated challenges, including armed conflicts, declining levels of development,
growing malnutrition and human rights violations, not to mention climate change
and the spread of terrorism and violent extremism.
Recent international developments and the qualitative shift in the nature of
the challenges we face have demonstrated that no country, whatever its capabilities,
can face these threats alone and that the only way to address them is by taking
coordinated, collective international action through existing constructive multilateral
mechanisms, centred around the United Nations and led by the General Assembly
and the Security Council.
Today, we have no choice but to uphold international authority, abandon
unilateral decisions, invoke the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
26/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

comply with treaties and instruments, and commit to implementing Security Council
resolutions in order to reinforce the Council’s responsibility and bolster its credibility.
Today, we must evaluate the United Nations system and explore the ways to
develop it further so that its organs become more efficient, effective and flexible in
order to meet the aspirations of the peoples of the world to peace, security, democracy
and development, and to embody the principles and purposes of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We urgently need to translate our commitment to multilateralism into practical
approaches to address challenges, starting with ensuring rapid and equitable access
to vaccinations against COVID-19, providing the means for economic and social
recovery, and ensuring food security and universal health coverage in all countries,
especially the most vulnerable.
Since joining the United Nations in 1956, Tunisia has adhered faithfully to the
Charter of the United Nations, demonstrating its belief in the centrality of the United
Nations system as the frame of reference for the international authority and universal
values upon which multilateralism is based. To date, our country has spared no effort
to support the Organization, contribute to achieving its goals and actively participate
in its main organs.
The consensus that the role of the United Nations is central also requires
all stakeholders to engage effectively and provide greater support for the ongoing
process of reforming the various organs in order to keep pace with a changing world
and adapt as needed to meet new challenges.
In that connection, Tunisia supports the intergovernmental negotiations on
Security Council reform. We believe that the time has come to agree on a reform
that can render the Security Council more democratic, representative, transparent
and effective, which would bolster the legitimacy of that central organ and promote
confidence in the United Nations.
In conclusion, allow me to say that, in order to strengthen the United Nations
system as the primary custodian of multilateralism and ensure an effective and
more comprehensive response to future challenges, it will be necessary to support
its ability to cooperate and coordinate with other actors such as international and
regional organizations, financial institutions and economic communities, as well
as to open up to non-governmental organizations, civil society, the private sector
and academia.

21-0628327/39

S/2021/456

Annex XII
Statement by the Secretary of State of the United States of America,
Antony Blinken
Let me start by thanking China and Foreign Minister Wang Yi for initiating
this critical discussion on the future of the United Nations and the international order.
And thank you as well to General Assembly President Bozkir for his leadership.
When countries came together after the Second World War to form the United
Nations, virtually all of human history up until then indicated that might made right.
Competition inevitably led to collision. The rise of a nation or group of nations
necessitated the fall of others. Then our nations united in choosing a different path.
We adopted a set of principles to prevent conflict and alleviate human suffering,
to recognize and defend human rights, to foster an ongoing dialogue to uphold and
improve a system aimed at benefiting all people.
The most powerful countries bound themselves to these principles. They
agreed to a form of self-restraint — as President Truman put it, to deny themselves
the license to do always as they pleased — because they recognized that this would
ultimately serve not only humankind’s interests, but their own. The United States
did this, even though it was by far the most powerful nation on Earth at the time. It
was enlightened self-interest. We believed that other nations’ success was critical to
ours. And we did not want less powerful countries feeling threatened and obliged to
band together against us.
In the years since, we have faced daunting challenges, from the divisions of
the Cold War, the vestiges of colonialism and the times the world stood by in the
face of mass atrocities. Today conflicts, injustice and suffering around the globe
underscore how many of our aspirations remain unfulfilled.
But no period in modern history has been more peaceful or prosperous than
the one since the United Nations was created. We avoided armed conflict between
nuclear Powers. We helped millions of people emerge from poverty. We advanced
human rights as never before. This bold endeavour, whatever its imperfections,
has been an unprecedented achievement. It has endured because the overwhelming
majority of people and nations continue to see it as representing their interests, their
values and their hopes. But now it is in serious jeopardy.
Nationalism is resurgent, repression is rising, rivalries among countries are
deepening and attacks against the rules-based order are intensifying. Now some
question whether multilateral cooperation is still possible. The United States believes
it is not only possible, it is imperative.
Multilateralism is still our best tool for tackling big global challenges, like
the one that is forcing us to gather on a screen today rather than around a table. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has changed life as we know it across
the planet, with millions of deaths and devastating impacts on economies, health,
education, social progress. The climate crisis is another massive threat. If we do not
move swiftly to cut emissions, the results will be catastrophic.
We built the multilateral system in part to solve big, complex problems like
these, where the fates of people around the world are tied together and where no single
country, no matter how powerful, can address the challenges alone. That is why
the United States will work through multilateral institutions to stop COVID-19 and
tackle the climate crisis, and we will abide by the core principles of the international
order as we do.
We will also work with any country on these issues, including those with
which we have serious differences. The stakes are too high to let differences stand
28/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

in the way of our cooperation. The same holds true for stemming the spread and use
of nuclear weapons, delivering life-saving humanitarian assistance and managing
deadly conflicts.
At the same time, we will continue to push back forcefully when we see
countries undermine the international order and pretend that the rules we have all
agreed to do not exist, or simply violate them at will. Because for the system to
deliver, all countries must abide by it and put in the work for its success. There are
three ways we can do that.
First, all members should meet their commitments, particularly the legally
binding ones. That includes the Charter of the United Nations, treaties and
conventions, Security Council resolutions, international humanitarian law and the
rules and standards agreed to under the auspices of the World Trade Organization
and numerous international standard-setting organizations. Let me be clear: the
United States is not seeking to uphold this rules-based order to keep other nations
down. The international order we helped build and defend has enabled the rise of
some of our fiercest competitors. Our aim is simply to defend, uphold and revitalize
that order.
Secondly, human rights and dignity must stay at the core of the international
order. The foundational unit of the United Nations — from the first sentence of the
Charter — is not just the nation State; it is also the human being. Some argue that
what Governments do within their own borders is their own business and that human
rights are subjective values that vary from one society to another. But the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights begins with the word “universal” because our nations
agreed there are certain rights to which every person, everywhere, is entitled.
Asserting domestic jurisdiction does not give any State a blank check to enslave,
torture, disappear or ethnically cleanse their people, or to violate their human rights
in any other way.
And this leads me to my third point, which is that the United Nations is based on
the principle of the sovereign equality of its Member States. A State does not respect
that principle when it purports to redraw the borders of another, or seeks to resolve
territorial disputes by using or threatening force, or when a State claims it is entitled
to a sphere of influence to dictate or coerce the choices and decisions of another
country. And a State shows contempt for that principle when it targets another with
disinformation or weaponized corruption, undermines other countries’ free and fair
elections and democratic institutions or goes after journalists or dissidents abroad.
These hostile actions can also threaten the international peace and security
that the United Nations Charter obliges this body to maintain. When United Nations
Member States, particularly permanent members of the Security Council, flout these
rules and block attempts to hold accountable those who violate international law, it
sends the message that others can break those rules with impunity.
All of us must accept the scrutiny, however difficult, that comes with the
commitments we have freely made. That includes the United States. I know that
some of our actions in recent years have undermined the rules-based order and led
others to question whether we are still committed to it. Rather than take our word for
it, we ask the world to judge our commitment by our actions.
Under the Biden-Harris Administration, the United States has already
re-engaged vigorously in multilateral institutions. We have re-joined the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, recommitted to the World Health Organization and
are seeking to re-join the Human Rights Council. We are engaged in diplomacy to
return to mutual compliance with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and to
strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime. We are by far the largest contributor
21-0628329/39

S/2021/456

to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility, the best vehicle for the equitable
distribution of COVID-19 vaccines. And we are making tens of millions of doses
available to others, without political considerations.
We are also taking steps, with great humility, to address the inequities and
injustices in our own democracy. We do so openly and transparently for people
around the world to see, even when it is ugly, even when it is painful. And we will
emerge stronger and better for doing so.
Likewise, it is not enough simply to defend the rules-based order we have
now. We should improve and build upon it. We need to take into account the change
in power dynamics over the past eight decades, not only between countries but
within them. We need to address legitimate grievances, particularly unfair trading
practices, that have provoked a backlash against an open international economic
order in many countries, including in the United States. And we must ensure that
this order is equipped to address new problems — like national security and human
rights concerns — raised by new technologies from cyberattacks to surveillance to
discriminatory algorithms.
Finally, we need to modernize the way we build coalitions and who we include
in our diplomacy and development efforts. That means forging non-traditional
partnerships across regional lines, bringing together cities, the private sector,
foundations, civil society and social and youth movements.
And we must improve equity within and between our countries and close
economic, political and social gaps that persist based on race, gender and other parts
of our identity that make us who we are.
At the founding of this institution, President Truman said,
“This Charter was not the work of any single nation or group of nations, large
or small. It was the result of a spirit of give-and-take, of tolerance for the
views and interests of others.”
He said it was proof that nations can state their differences, face them and find
common ground on which to stand.
We continue to have profound differences, among the Member states of the
United Nations and within the Security Council. But the United States will spare
no effort to find and stand on that common ground with any country that upholds
its commitments to the order we founded together, and which we must defend and
revitalize together. That is the great test of this moment. Let us meet it together.

30/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex XIII
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam,
Bui Thanh Son
I thank you and the Chinese presidency for convening this important meeting.
Let me also thank the President of the General Assembly for his insights.
During the first Vietnamese presidency, in January 2020, the Security Council
adopted a presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/1) reaffirming its commitment
to multilateralism and to the Charter of the United Nations and an international
order based on international law, which the Council recognized as the foundation
of a more peaceful, prosperous and just world. At no other time are these words
more relevant, given the current state of the world. And I commend the Chinese
presidency for holding this open debate to reinforce our commitment once again to
multilateral cooperation.
Indeed, multilateralism has asserted itself as the rightful course to be pursued
and embraced by our community of States. As described by Dag Hammarskjöld,
since its founding, the United Nations has been a new Santa Maria, sailing its way
through storms and uncharted waters and bringing us all together in the quest for
peace, stability and development.
Today multilateralism offers the most effective solutions for emerging and
complex global challenges. The arms race, the proliferation of weapons of mass
disruption, terrorism, transnational crime, climate change and, in particular, the
current coronavirus disease pandemic are but a few examples that global challenges
can be addressed only through vigorous and effective multilateral cooperation. We
are stronger together and, by working together, we are making progress. Moving
forward, I wish to underline three critical issues.
First, in the words of Secretary-General Guterres during the open debate
on upholding the United Nations Charter in January 2020: “At this time of global
divisions and turmoil, the Charter remains our shared framework of international
cooperation for the common good.” (S/PV.8699, p.3).
Upholding international law and the United Nations Charter is increasingly
urgent and important, as they lay the solid foundation for the consolidation and
flourishing of an international order and a multilateral system that serve the common
interests of the international community. In other words, we must foster a culture
of compliance with international law and stand against the use of force, coercion,
power politics and unilateralism in international relations.
Secondly, regional organizations and the United Nations are embodiments
of multilateralism at different levels, which greatly complement each other in
maintaining international and regional peace and security. That was the main
thrust of the discussion at the open debate convened by Viet Nam last month (see
S/2021/394). The presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/9) adopted by the Council
also highlighted the importance of expanding collaboration between the United
Nations and regional organizations in confidence-building and dialogue for conflict
prevention and resolution. In our region, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
has affirmed its centrality in the regional security architecture and in addressing
regional and international issues.
Thirdly, multilateral institutions must be reformed and must work in synergy
so that they can function in an ever more effective and responsive manner and adapt
with the evolving international environment to better serve the interests of Member
States on the basis of equality, mutual benefit, inclusiveness and leaving no one
behind. The Security Council is no exception. To fulfil its primary responsibility
21-0628331/39

S/2021/456

for the maintenance of international peace and security, the Council needs to be
reformed in order to enhance transparency, democracy, representativeness and
effectiveness and improve its working methods.
On this day 67 years ago, our victory at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu marked
the end of colonial rule in Viet Nam and the wider region. It contributed to the
decolonization process that led to the rapid expansion of the membership of the
United Nations and multilateral United Nations-centred cooperation in general.
Today, as a non-permanent member of the Council but a permanent Member
of the United Nations, Viet Nam reaffirms its commitment to contributing to
multilateral endeavours, global solidarity and partnership so as to achieve the
ultimate goals of sustainable peace and development.

32/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Annex XIV
Statement by the
Vardhan Shringla

Foreign

Secretary

of

India,

Harsh

I congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May and appreciate your initiative in organizing this highlevel meeting on the topic of “Maintenance of international peace and security:
upholding multilateralism and the United Nations-centred international system”.
Given the high expectations from the United Nations and the multilateral system,
particularly at this time when the world is confronted by several global challenges,
not least the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, such a discussion
is indeed relevant and timely. I also take this opportunity to thank His Excellency
Volkan Bozkir, President of the General Assembly, for sharing his insights.
Envisioned with the noble objective of saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, the establishment of the United Nations in 1945 heralded a new era of
international relations, committed to maintaining international peace and security,
upholding international law, respecting obligations arising from mutually negotiated
treaties and promoting fundamental freedoms for all humanity.
Founded on the principle of sovereign equality for all its Members, the United
Nations today is the most universal and representative international organization.
The United Nations has been credited with largely keeping the peace over the past
seven and a half decades and for contributing in many ways to the betterment of
the lives of the world’s humanity. At the same time, it has been found wanting in its
ability to garner a concerted response to tackle the world’s most complex challenges.
Several contemporary global challenges have come to the fore, such as
terrorism, radicalism, pandemics, climate change, threats from new and emerging
technologies, growing asymmetric threats, the disruptive role of non-State actors
and intensified geopolitical competition, all of which call for a robust multilateral
response. While the United Nations has addressed most of those issues somewhat
partially and intermittently, our collective effort has nonetheless fallen short in
providing effective and enduring solutions, primarily due to the infirmities within
the multilateral system. The year 2021 is a watershed moment in the history of the
world, providing a timely opportunity to reflect on the effectiveness of the United
Nations in achieving the goals and objectives that its founders set out 75 years ago.
The multitude of challenges of today’s dynamic and interdependent world
cannot be addressed with outdated systems that were designed to deal with the
challenges of the past. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has sharpened
our awareness of the depth of global interdependence and of the fact that the world is
only as resilient as the least resilient country. The events of the past year have clearly
demonstrated how imperative it is for all countries to coordinate responses to the
various challenges that the pandemic has brought to the fore.
It is the lack of a coordinated global response that has exposed the vulnerabilities
and weaknesses of the multilateral system as it stands today, providing a timely
reminder of the pressing need for comprehensive reform. While the pandemic
exposed the fault lines from unreliable global supply chains to inequitable vaccine
distribution, it has also underlined the need for global solidarity and strengthened
multilateralism. The reimagined post-pandemic world will make profoundly
different demands of the multilateral system, which must evolve accordingly so as
to be fit for purpose and capable of inspiring confidence in its ability to effectively
meet those demands.
At the core of India’s call for reformed multilateralism lies the reform of the
Security Council, reflective of the contemporary realities of today. When power
21-0628333/39

S/2021/456

structures continue to reflect the status quo of a bygone era, they also start reflecting
a lack of appreciation of contemporary geopolitical realities. Multilateral institutions
must be made more accountable to their membership; they must be open and
welcoming to a diversity of viewpoints and cognizant of new voices. The Council
must be made more representative of developing countries if it is to continue to
engender trust and confidence in its ability to provide leadership to the entire world.
It can deliver effective solutions only if it gives a voice to the voiceless, rather than
zealously guarding the status quo of the mighty.
Today the United Nations has 193 Member States, nearly a four-fold increase
since 1945. The narrow representation and privileges of a few in the primary decisionmaking organ of the United Nations pose a serious challenge to its credibility and
effectiveness. How can we explain the contradiction of Africa not being represented
on the Security Council in the permanent category even though African issues
dominate its agenda?
Speaking on the occasion of the seventh-fifth anniversary of the United Nations
last year, the Prime Minister of India gave a clarion call for United Nations reform:
“Reform in the responses, in the processes, and in the very character of
the United Nations is the need of the hour.
“It is a fact that the faith and respect that the United Nations enjoys
among the 1.3 billion people in India is unparalleled...
“For how long will India be kept out of the decision-making structures of
the United Nations?” (A/75/PV.12, annex I)
As a founding Member of the United Nations, India has consistently displayed
its commitment to upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter. We remain
committed to upholding the rules-based international order, underpinned by
international law, premised upon respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all Member States, the resolution of international disputes through peaceful
negotiations and free and open access for all to the global commons.
India stood at the forefront during the United Nations tumultuous years of
struggle against colonialism and apartheid. During our eight terms as a member
of the Security Council, we have always endeavoured to be a voice of reason and
understanding, a voice of the underrepresented developing word and a bridge-builder
for narrowing divides and fostering consensus. We have been the leading advocate
for the concerns and aspirations of developing countries and the creation of a more
equitable international economic and political order.
India has contributed immensely to maintaining international peace and
security as a leading troop-contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping
missions, having sacrificed the highest number of lives in that noble endeavour.
We have also fostered global socioeconomic development through transparent,
viable, sustainable and demand-driven partnership programmes. On climate action,
India is today one of the few countries that is on track to meet its mitigation
commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We have also taken
the lead in launching important multilateral initiatives on climate action, such as the
International Solar Alliance and the Coalition for Disaster Resilient Infrastructure.
Over the past year alone, we have provided COVID-19 vaccines,
pharmaceuticals and medical equipment to more than 150 countries across the world.
In that same spirit of friendship and solidarity, we extend deep appreciation to those
that have come forward to provide us with some priority requirements to battle the
second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic.
34/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

India has also worked with South Africa and other partners in the World
Trade Organization to seek a relaxation in the norms of the Agreement on TradeRelated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights so as to ensure quick and affordable
access to vaccines and medicines for developing countries during the COVID-19
pandemic. That waiver will be an important step for enabling the rapid scaling-up
of the manufacture and timely availability of affordable COVID-19 vaccines and
essential medical products on a global basis.
In conclusion, we believe that a renewal of vows towards a reformed United
Nations-centred multilateral system will require genuine efforts on behalf of all
Member States. For its part, India has always sought to strengthen the forces of
cooperative multilateralism. With the objective of reforming and strengthening
multilateralism, we remain committed to seeking responsible and inclusive
solutions to global challenges, guided by dialogue, cooperation, mutual respect and
commitment to international law.

21-0628335/39

S/2021/456

Annex XV
Statement by the Minister of State for Tourism, French Nationals
Abroad and Francophonie, attached to the Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs of France, Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne
[Original: French]
We thank the Chinese presidency for having convened this meeting. We also
thank the President of the General Assembly for his briefing.
The multilateralism that France supports is a strong multilateralism, based on
the rule of law, in particular for the maintenance of international peace and security.
It is also an effective multilateralism, producing results to overcome the challenges
of our time. That is the whole purpose of the Alliance for Multilateralism, which
France initiated together with Germany in 2019. I am saying that there is no hidden
agenda because, for us, everything is clear and everything is on the table. It is
simply a question of promoting a multilateralism that is based on a solid foundation
— that of international law. International law is not selective. The Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the 1966 International
Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and the Geneva Conventions enshrine universal principles and values. It is their full
respect that constitutes the only alternative to the law of the strongest.
International law thus provides a framework for action, within which the
spirit of cooperation is essential in order to achieve results. Moreover, it is that spirit
of cooperation that has enabled multilateral diplomacy to succeed. I am thinking
of the Iranian nuclear agreement and of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
at the twenty-first session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.
It has to be said that that spirit of cooperation has sometimes been lacking in
the Security Council in recent years. Too often, the use of the veto has paralysed our
work. We can say things to each other. How can we justify our collective inability to
act in response to the appalling conflict in Syria?
That is why France, together with Mexico, is promoting an initiative that
provides for a joint voluntary framework for the use of the veto by the permanent
members of the Security Council in the event of mass atrocities. I am pleased that
105 Member States have already given their support to that initiative. We call on
all the members of the Security Council, in particular the other four permanent
members of the Council, to join it.
The foundation that underpins multilateralism also means the good governance
of international organizations. As we know, organizations face organizational,
logistical and financial challenges, which have been exacerbated by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) crisis. Such organizations are too often criticized or used to
promote national interests. That is not the spirit in which we wish to work.
International organizations must be recognized for their true value and must
be able to carry out their work in a transparent, rigorous and open manner. Again, the
law and respect for good practices within the United Nations system are essential.
Secondly, to be effective that multilateralism must also be inclusive. It is not
a moral imperative to be inclusive, but rather a guarantee of sustainable outcomes.
When women fully and actively participate in political processes, agreements are
more sustainable. When young people and civil society are heard, everyone’s rights
are better defended.
When we work hand in hand with regional organizations under the provisions
of Chapter VIII of the Charter, we can propose more appropriate solutions. I am
36/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

thinking of the international community’s efforts in the Sahel. I am also thinking
of the European Union military operation in the Mediterranean, which helps to
implement the arms embargo in Libya.
Effective multilateralism is also multilateralism that is committed to finding
concrete solutions to common challenges. The COVID-19 is a tragedy for too many
people. It is also a test for our international community and for the United Nations.
France promotes collaborative solutions to overcome the pandemic because they are
the only ones that work.
I am thinking of the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator initiative, which
France initiated. We were among the first to donate doses of vaccine acquired for
our own use to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access. I am also thinking of the
efforts of the Security Council to call for a ceasefire in all conflicts in order to allow
humanitarian access and the delivery of vaccines. I commend the Tunisian party that
was working with us.
The Security Council must not remain idle in the face of the consequences
of climate change either. That is why we have proposed that the Secretary-General
report regularly to the Council on this specific subject, so that we can put in place
the necessary preventive measures. I invite the members of the Security Council to
follow up on this proposal.
Finally, multilateralism can be effective only if it knows how to be reformed.
France supports the reforms implemented by the Secretary-General, whose efforts in
that regard we commend. We strongly support the Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
which enhances the performance and security of peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council, as has already been said, must also be reformed to
be more representative of today’s world. Our position is well known — France is
in favour of expanding the Security Council in both categories of permanent and
non-permanent members. France supports the Group of Four members in obtaining
a permanent seat and an increased presence of Africa, including among the
permanent members.
Lastly, France is particularly committed, together with its European partners,
to promoting a reform of the multilateral health architecture, with the World Health
Organization at its centre, which will allow for a better response to current and future
health crises. The resolution on preparedness and response to health emergencies,
which the European Union will submit to the next World Health Assembly in a few
days, will be an essential step in this reform.
In conclusion, Mr. President, in the face of these many challenges, France
wishes to be a force for constructive proposals in the service of a result-oriented
multilateralism. We know that our success in the face of the changes of our time will
not come from turning inward, but from strengthened cooperation.

21-0628337/39

S/2021/456

Annex XVI
Statement by the Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the
United Nations and South Asia of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon
Mr. President, State Councilor, good to see you and thank you for convening
this important debate today. And also my thanks to President Bozkir for sharing your
thoughts and, indeed, aspirations.
The United Nations remains the cornerstone, rightly so, of the international
system. As we look at the United Nations history, it has mitigated dozens of conflicts.
It has saved hundreds of thousands of lives through humanitarian action. It has
promoted and protected human rights and freedoms, and safeguarded the principle
of sovereign equality and the right to self-determination of peoples.
Seventy-five years on, our world faces new and complex challenges.
International peace and security is challenged by threats that do not recognize
borders: climate change, pandemics, famine, organized crime and terrorism, to list a
few. This calls for a response that crosses borders, just the same.
We must remain true to the universal founding principles of the United
Nations and, indeed, the Security Council. The core values of the Charter of the
United Nations — peace and security, development and human rights — are equally
important and interdependent. To ensure the future we all desire, the future we all
want, we must be guided by them, and we must defend them.
With these principles in mind, we must also acknowledge that the United
Nations needs to adapt and reform in order to respond. Existing and new global
threats and challenges, including climate change, global health, weapons of mass
destruction, technology and artificial intelligence, are really testing coherence
within the United Nations system.
Therefore, to provide a truly effective response, these areas of our expertise
must be fully joined up with humanitarian, development and human resolutionights
efforts right across the system.
The Secretary-General’s sustaining peace agenda lays the foundation for an
integrated, coherent United Nations system that works better together to address the
drivers of conflict and build lasting and sustainable peace.
Reform is at the centre of the Secretary-General’s agenda for the United
Nations, and we should all be working to support its implementation. Reform, as I
am sure we all agree, is not a one-time action, but rather a permanent attitude that
needs to prevail. We must all support the United Nations in becoming more efficient
and more productive while it continues to increase transparency.
The United Nations human rights system also has a key and pivotal role to
play. Human rights are the heart of the Charter of the United Nations, and we must
support them as strongly as peace, security and development. We know that States
that respect human rights, territorial integrity and their obligations to their own
people are more prosperous and more resilient. In an international order that is
sometimes fragmented and characterized by intensifying competition over interests,
norms and values, the United Kingdom will continue to place the promotion and
protection of human rights at the top of our international priorities.
The transnational challenges I mentioned threaten all of our prosperity
and resilience, and need a coordinated approach. United Nations peacekeeping
exemplifies this. Since the first mission in 1948, you will know that the Security
38/39

21-06283

S/2021/456

Council has now mandated over 70 peacekeeping operations in more than 50
locations across the globe.
Alongside the many other contributing Member States, the United Kingdom
is proud to play an active role, most recently in deploying 300 troops to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali.
Even more broadly, as the President of the twenty-sixth Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change this
November, the United Kingdom will aim to boost international cooperation and
global climate finance for the benefit of us all.
We have already pledged over $15 billion of international climate finance
over the next five years, and we will spend a significant proportion of that building
resilience in the most vulnerable countries.
Lastly, I would like to touch on the important issue of sanctions. We have
been proud to introduce our independent sanctions measures. The United Kingdom’s
measures advance our national security and foreign policy priorities. They hold
accountable those responsible for a range of activities, including human rights
violations and abuses, and, indeed, corruption. They are legally robust and carefully
targeted in scope to minimise any wider impact.
Where we have been unable to agree in the Security Council, the United
Kingdom has pursued sanctions against the likes of the Syrian regime, the Myanmar
junta, perpetrators of sexual violence in Libya and those working to support the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear programme. We have worked in
concert with others, together, to stand up as a force for good in the world.
As many other colleagues have already reflected, we are still in the midst of a
pandemic. The coronavirus disease affects us all. It continues to require an inclusive,
global response.
And as you said, Mr. President, at the current time, we all come together to
stand in solidarity and friendship with India. But, as we have often heard over this
past year, it is important to exemplify the key point that none of us is safe until we
are all safe.
Therefore, upholding the values of the Charter of the United Nations is the key
to our effective, united, collaborative response to the quite extraordinary challenges
our nations share.
And finally, for all our peace and security, we must absolutely work together,
collaboratively and inclusively, in a strong, functioning, multilateral United
Nations system.

21-0628339/39
