UNITED NATIONS

r&&j

SECURITY CO
OFFICLQL IWCORD~‘Sn
THIRTY-EIGHTH

.YEAR

2475*”

MEETING:

NEW

-IItQfh~

12 SEPTEMBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. ... ... ... ... ... ... .. ... .... .. .. .... ... ... .. ...

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2475/Rev.
Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 9 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15974) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2475

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date,

2475th
Held

in New

York

President: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

on Monday,

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, .Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2475/Rev.l)

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 9 September 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15974)

The meeting was called to order at 12.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 9 September 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15974)
1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. T&i
took a place at the Council table.

(Lebanon)

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today in
response to the request contained in the letter dated 9
September from the representative of Lebanon to the
President of the Council. I should also like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to the following
documents: S/15953, containing a letter dated 2 September from the representative of Lebanon to the SecretaryGenera!; S/15956, containing the report of the SecretaryGenera! on the situation in the Beirut area.

MEETING
12 September

1983, at 11.50 a.m.

3. The first speaker is the representative of Lebanon. I
should like to acknowledge the presence at the Council
table of the Special Envoy of Lebanon, Mr. Ghassan
Tutni, on whom I now call.
4. Mr. TUENi (Lebanon): Mr. President, it is always
reassuring to find a familiar face in the Chair when the
Council meets to consider dramatic events. I should like
to thank you, and members of the Council, for the
prompt response to our request to consider the question
of Lebanon and also for allowing me to speak. Though I
am an outsider now, I pray that the Council will accept an
added expression of congratulations
on your able and
wise handling, during your presidency, of the extremely
sensitive issues which have put United Nations solidarity
and efficacity to a most strenuous test. May I also add
that my year of absence since we last worked together on
the Lebanese question has not diluted my feeling of appreciation for your persona! support and your country’s concern in those most dramatic days-and
nights as we!!.
5. Tragedy is still hovering over Lebanon. It is now the
eighth or tenth year of violence, bloodshed, murder and
destruction in a small country that refuses to die. The
Council is a!! too familiar with the facts and I shall not,.
while introducing the debate, burden members with a
lengthy exposition of details. Allow me therefore to concentrate on a few points that have been the focus of discussions here since the Government of Lebanon wrote to
the Secretary-Genera!
on 2 September, bringing the case
again to the Council’s attention [S/Z5953].
6. First, what is at stake in Lebanon and what the Council is now called upon to consider is the fate of a country,
of a Member State-a founding Member-of
the United
Nations. Can Lebanon survive; will Lebanon survive; will
Lebanon be allowed to survive? That is the question.
7. Our answer, the answer of the Lebanese, is yes, an
emphatic and unequivocal yes. Yes, Lebanon will survive,
independent, unified and sovereign; yes, Lebanon will
overcome tragedy, occupation and destruction; yes, Lebanon will overcome even the bloody wars that are now
causing an everyday holocaust of land and people.
8. But Lebanon needs the support of its friends and the
confidence of the international
community.
Lebanon
needs to be left alone, alone to itself, to its unique character as a pluralistic society of Moslems and Christians, the
only such polity in the world, democratic, liberal and
peace-loving.

16. Fourthly, the future of. Lebanon must be freely
determined by the Lebanese and by the Lebanese alone,
the Lebanese of all parties and of every community.
17. In his first message to Parliament after he was sworn
in, the President of the Republic, Mr.. Amin Gemayel,
invited each and all to share in a reform of the system. That
invitation became a pressing call, which President Gemayel
has been reiterating constantly, in very specific and unequivocal terms, speaking of revising the “political, social and
economic structures” of the State. The President also specified the persons and groups that should be associated with
him in this design. On 25 August he invited, for the third or
fourth time, the leaders of the opposition, one by one, to
join hands with him in assuming the “national responsibilities” that were awaiting us all in this task. But he also said
that reform should take place within the constitutional
process and through the democratic institutions. That was
weeks-and then only days-before the latest round of
battles. Yet the President’s pressing call did not prevent the
outbreak of hostilities at precisely the hour that had been
announced from abroad.

9. Secondly, Lebanon is determined to see to it that all
non-Lebanese forces leave Lebanon immediately. Lebanon is determined to see to it, with the help of the Council, that all non-Lebanese forces, whoever and whatever
they are, leave Lebanon immediately.‘For
a decade now,
and probably more, Lebanon has been harbouring foreign forces that are now all equally unwelcome and all
equally illegitimate.
10. Through resolution after resolution the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the League of Arab
States, to which we belong, the Movement of NonAligned Countries, the Council of Europe and almost
everybody else; all have asserted our right and recognized
our determination.
11. What is happening in Lebanon now is a consequence of this multiple occupation of a peace-loving country which over the years has become the arena of
everyone’s war and everyone’s revolution as well.
12. The quantity and quality of armaments is in itself
testimony to the fact that this is not a war of Lebanese
against Lebanese. There are tanks of all sizes and shapes,
ground-to-ground
missiles, heavy-the
heaviest imaginable-artillery
and all the ammunition that is required.
By no stretch of the imagination can one think that such
instruments of destruction are freely available to political
parties or, even less, to religious communities.

18. Surely no one can expect us to believe that the issues
at stake, which are related to the development of greater
harmony in greater unity, can best be settled by the carnage that is now taking place, or that the deep scars that
will be left, the miseries of destroyed cities and endless
nights of terror and crime-the miseries of war with all its
horror-will
leave the Lebanese unaffected. Could it not
be that by the same sombre design it is division, and not
unity, which is sought, and partition rather than liberation which will be the outcome-the
partitioning of Lebanon among the various multiple occupying forces?

13. but that is not all. The occupying armies-for there
hardly can be a different name-friends
and foes alike,
have allowed military action of a highly visible and destructive nature to be conducted from areas under their
control. Armaments and ammunition were freely crossing
lines of occupation and check-points, and so were organized militias, highly trained and supported by nonLebanese forces of various nationalities, a fact which
none of the participants is really and seriously interested
in denying, through their pronouncements or their behaviour, and which has been proved ‘conclusively by
photographs-which
I can place at the disposal of the
Council-tapes
of instructions, prisoners and, alas, by the
identity of casualties left on the terrain.

19. As the Council meets here, many are those who,
with us, are working to save Lebanon. I refer particularly
to efforts to mediate and achieve a cessation of hostilities,
which will enable the Lebanese to resume a national dialogue. At this very hour, as the Council meets, there are
prayers in every church and every mosque in Lebanon:
prayers for the dead, but also prayers for the Lebanese,
for the living, whatever their religion. In one church in
particular, the church of Ant&as, there are prayers also
for the future of Lebanon. This is a church where 130
years ago a covenant was concluded between Christians
and Moslems, particularly Druses, for the establishment.
of a democratic Lebanon, unified and free from foreign
domination and foreign intervention.

14. Thirdly, the non-Lebanese dimension of the conflict
is accentuated by the fact that violence was triggered, predictably, by Israel’s withdrawal from the Shouf after a
series of moves that had set the stage for the bloodiest
confrontation. Strenuous efforts by friendly Governments
have not succeeded in preventing what was predicted and
announced.
15. May I add here that it is indeed impossible to expect
any confiict in any country to be internal or domestic, as
is said, when there are three foreign armies confronting
one another and the Government’s own armed forces, let
alone thousands of heavily armed and equipped so-called
volunteers from far-away lands-and
I shall not name
any at this stage-who stand ready to militate for causes
that are surely unrelated to Lebanon’s constitutional or
organic reforms.
Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

00300

20. Then, as it does today, Lebanon needed a framework
of international-I
dare say universal-legitimacy
to overcome the projection of external conflicts into its internal
structures. That is precisely what we are now asking for,
through the necessary, unavoidable first step: a cease-fire,
an immediate and effective cessation of all hostilities and
the withdrawal of all illegitimate foreign forces.
21. Lebanon and the Lebanese want to be left alone.
They want to be left free, free to unite again, to live in
peace, to bury their dead and to bury their feuds as well,
free to reconstruct their Government and their cities.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
90-60205-November

1991-2.050
