V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _l_37

fied by the General Assembly at its sixth 65 and seventh 66
special sessions, in the relevant decisions adopted at its
twenty-ninth and subsequent sessions, and in the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 67 taking into consideration the
statements on the programme of work of the Institute
made at the current session;
4. Takes note of the clarification provided by the Executive Director on the mandate and the future role of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research as
they relate to the mandates and roles of other institutions
active in tbe Institute's field of competence, and notes with
satisfaction the efforts being made to strengthen co-operation with those institutions; 68
5. Calls upon all States that have not yet contributed to
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to
do so, and urges once again all donor countries, especially
those that are not contributing at a level commensurate
with their capacity, to increase their voluntary contributions in order to meet the urgent financial needs of the
Institute during the biennium 1984-1985;
6. Again requests all States to continue to announce
their contributions to the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research early and, if possible, not later than
the annual United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, and to speed up the payment of their
voluntary contributions to the Institute.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1984

39/179.

United Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December
1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of6 December 1973, 3313 (XXIX)
of 14 December 1974, 3439 (XXX) of9 December 1975,
31/117 and 31/118 of 16 December 1976, 32/54 of 8
December 1977, 33/108 of 18 December 1978, 34/112 of
14 December 1979, 35/54 of 5 December 1980, 36/45 of
19 November 1981, 37/143 of 17 December I 982 and 38/
178 of 19 December 1983,
Having considered the report of the Council of the
United Nations University on the work of the University ,69
Noting with appreciation the continuing interest of the
Government of Japan in, and its support for, the University in regard to the construction of a permanent headquarters building,
Noting decision 5.2.1 adopted on I 8 October I 984 by
the Executive Board of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its one hundred
and twentieth session,
I. Notes with satisfaction, as the United Nations University reaches the middle of its medium-term perspective
(1982-1987), the progress achieved by the University in
realizing the main objectives set forth in the perspective, 70
namely, developing and implementing the University programme focused on five themes relevant to the pressing
global problems of human survival, development and welfare that are also the concerns of the United Nations and
the specialized agencies, and embarking on a new phase of
institutional development, with emphasis on establishing
65 See resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

66 See resolution 3362 (S· Vil).
6 7 Resolution 35/56, annex.
68 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Thtrty-ninth Sessum, Supplement No. 14 (A/39/14), paras 3-22.

the University's own research and training centres as
called for in its Charter;
2. Welcomes the reports of external evaluation teams
indicating the positive results of the United Nations
University's research, institutional relations and postgraduate training, particularly the advanced training of
University Fellows who have returned to their home institutions, in collaboration with the University's associated
and co-operating institutions in both developing and
industrialized countries;
3. Welcomes also the progress made in setting up the
World Institute for Development Economics Research, 71
the United Nations University's first research and training
institution, at Helsinki, and expresses its appreciation for
the leading role and invaluable support of the Government
of Finland in establishing the Institute by providing financial and other forms of support;
4. Notes with satisfaction the advance made towards
establishing the proposed Institute for Natural Resources
in Africa 72 and an international programme in biotechnology in Venezuela; 73
5. Emphasizes the continuing need of the United
Nations University to strengthen the capacity of existing
scholarly and scientific institutions in developing
countries;
6. Notes the need to further continue, expand and
intensify co-operative activities of the United Nations
University with the United Nations, its bodies and the
specialized agencies, on the one hand, and with the international academic and scientific community, on the other,
which enhance the responsiveness of the University to global issues and problems and bring its work into closer relation with the concerns of the United Nations system and
the world academic community in regard to global issues
and problems;
7. Recognizes that the United Nations University
needs to intensify its fund-raising efforts to build up its
Endowment Fund and Operating Fund and to ensure the
development of its activities in a well-co-ordinated manner in accordance with its Charter;
8. Earnestly appeals to all Member States to take cognizance of the progress made by the United Nations University and the relevance of its work to the concerns of the
United Nations and to contribute urgently and generously
to its Endowment Fund and, additionally or alternatively,
to make operating contributions to the University to
enable it to fulfil its mandate effectively, in accordance
with its Charter and with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December I 984

39/180.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the Central African
Republic

The General Assemhfr.
Recalling its resolution 35/87 of 5 December 1980, in
which it affirmed the urgent need for international action
to assist the Government of the Central African Republic
in its efforts for reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country and invited the international commu6'i /hid .. Supplement l,o. 3 I A/39, 3 I).
711 ihtd.. l'htrt\'-seventh Sess1,111. Supplement No. 31 (A/3 7-'3 I), sect. Ill.
71 Il•1d .. Th,rt_\'·ntnth Session. Supplcmem /Vo. 3 I (A/39/J l ). para. I06.
7
' J/,1d.. para 108.
7
' ll•ttl para I 09

138

General Assembly~ Thirty-ninth Session

nity to provide sufficient resources to carry out the programme of assistance to the Central African Republic,
Recalling also its resolutions 36/206 of 17 December
1981, 37/145 of 17 December 1982 and 38/211 of 20
December I 983, in which it noted with concern that the
assistance provided had not been adequate to meet the
urgent needs of the country,
Recalling further its resolution 38/ l 95 of 20 December
1983 on the implementation of the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s for the Least Developed
Countries, 74
Considering that the Central African Republic is landlocked and is classified as one of the least developed
countries,
Taking note of the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation of the Central African Republic on 11 October I 984, 75 in which he
described the economic problems of concern to the Central
African Republic and stated that, because of the lack of
financial means, external aid continued to be essential to
the country,
Also taking note of the statement made by the representative of the Central African Republic on 6 November
1984, 76 according to which, despite an incipient economic
recovery, his country continued to be faced by enormous
difficulties in implementing its socio-economic development programmes,
Particularly concerned that the Government of the Central African Republic is unable to provide the population
with adequate health, educational and other essential
social and public services because of an acute shortage of
financial and material resources,
Taking account of the losses suffered by the Central
African economy following the great drought of I 9821983,
Noting with satisfaction the considerable efforts exerted
by the Government and people of the Central African
Republic for national reconstruction, rehabilitation and
development, despite the limitations confronting them,
Also noting the intention of the Central African Government to organize, with the assistance of the United
Nations Development Programme, a round-table conference of donors in 1985,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-GeneraF 7 submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 38/2 I I.
to which was annexed the report of the review mission
sent to the Central African Republic in June 1984,
Also taking note of table 7 of the annex to the report of
the Secretary-General, 77 according to which substantial
additional assistance for the special programme of economic assistance is needed to finance projects which have
only been implemented in part and others for which
finance has not yet been obtained. including new highpriority projects specified therein,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the efforts he has made to mobilize resources for carrying out the programme of assistance to the Central African
Republic;
2. Reiterates its appreciation to States, international,
regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their contribution to the
programme of assistance to the Central African Republic:

3. Notes with concern, however, that the assistance
provided under this heading continues to fall far short of
the country's urgent needs;
4. Urgently draws the attention of the international
community to table 7 of the annex to the Secretary-General's report, which indicates the projects still in need of
financing;
5. Reiterates its appeal to all States to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, to the
reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the
Central African Republic;
6. Urges all States, organizations and financial institutions to participate in the round-table conference of
donors scheduled for 1985 and to contribute to the financing of the projects to be submitted;
7.. Requests the appropriate programmes and organizations of the United Nations system - in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Food Programme. the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations
Fund for Population Activities and the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization - to maintain their
programmes of assistance to the Central African Republic,
to co-operate closely with the Secretary-General in his
efforts to organize an effective international programme of
assistance and to report periodically to him on the steps
they have taken and the resources they have made available to help that country;
8. Invites regional and interregional organizations and
other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a
programme of assistance to the Central African Republic
or. where one is already in existence, to the expansion and
considerable strengthening of that programme with a view
to its implementation as soon as possible;
9. Urges all States and relevant United Nations
bodies - in particular the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the World Health Organization,
the United Nations Fund for Population Activities and the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization to provide all possible assistance to help the Government
of the Central African Republic to cope with the critical
humanitarian needs of the population and to provide, as
appropriate, food, medicines and essential equipment for
schools and hospitals, as well as to meet the emergency
needs of the population in the drought-stricken areas of
the country;
10. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund, the World
Food Programme, the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations,
the World Bank and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development to bring to the attention of their
governing bodies, for their consideration, the special needs
of the Central African Republic and to report the decisions
of those bodies to the Secretary-General by 15 July 1985;
11. Again draws the attention of the international community to the special account opened by the SecretaryGeneral at United Nations Headquarters, in accordance

74 Report of the Umted Nation; Conference on the Least Developed
Countries, Paris. /-14 Septemher /9/i I (United Nations publication. Sales
No. E.82.1.8), part one. sect. A

' 5 Official Records o/ rhe G,•neral Assembly, Thinv-ninth Sessum. Plenarr
Meetings. 31st meeting. paras. 104-138.
•
•
76 Ibid .. Second Commi/lee. 37th meeting, paras. 43-45 .
• 'A1 W/384.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committe_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _l_39

with General Assembly resolution 35/87, for the purpose
of facilitating the channelling of contributions to the Central African Republic:
12. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue his efforts to organize a special emergency assistance programme with regard to food and
health, especially medicaments. vaccines, hospital equipment, generating sets for field hospitals, water pumps and
food products in order to help the vulnerable populations;
(b) To continue also his efforts to mobilize necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to the Central African Republic:
(c) To ensure that the necessary financial and budgetary arrangements are made to continue the organization of
the international programme of assistance to the Central
African Republic and the mobilization of that assistance;
(d) To keep the situation in the Central African Republic under constant review, to maintain close contact with
Member States, specialized agencies, regional and other
intergovernmental organizations and the international
financial institutions concerned and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at its second regular session of
1985, of the status of the special programme of economic
assistance for the Central African Republic;
(e) To report on the progress made in the economic situation of the Central African Republic and in organizing
and implementing the special programme of economic
assistance for that country in time for the matter to be considered by the General Assembly at its fortieth session.
103rd plenary meeting
I 7 December I 984

39/181.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Equatorial Guinea

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 35/105 of 5 December 1980.
36/204 of 17 December 1981 and 3 7/ 133 of 17 December
1982,
Recalling also its resolution 38/224 of 20 December
1983, in which it appealed to all Member States to respond
generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, to
the reconstruction and development needs of Equatorial
Guinea as presented at the International Conference of
Donors for the Economic Reactivation and Development
of Equatorial Guinea, and called upon regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, as well as international
financial and development institutions, to give urgent consideration to the establishment of a programme of assistance to Equatorial Guinea or, where one was already in
existence, to its expansion in accordance with the programme established by the International Conference of
Donors,
Recalling further that Equatorial Guinea is one of the
least developed countries,
Having considered the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral, 78 submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 38/224,
Noting with concern that Equatorial Guinea continues to
be beset by serious economic and financial difficulties, and
continues to suffer from a food situation made precarious
by the absence of large-scale food-crop production projects,
78 A/39/392, sect. VI.

Recognizing once agam the essential role of both shortterm and long-term international assistance in support of
the efforts of the Government of Equatorial Guinea in the
difficult task of reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of the country,
'
Bearing in mind the statement made by the Minister of
State in charge of External Affairs and Co-operation of
Equatorial Guinea, on 11 October 1984, 79 on the progress
achieved in the sphere of regional co-operation,
Reco1;nizing the efforts made by the Government and
people of Equatorial Guinea towards the internal economic recovery and the social development of the country,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 38/224 and other relevant
resolutions and calls for their implementation;
2. Takes note of the summary report of the SecretaryGeneral:
3. Fxpresses its thanks to the Secretary-General for his
efforts to organize and mobilize the necessary resources for
an effective programme of assistance to Equatorial Guinea:
4. Reiterates its appeal to all Member States to continue to respond generously, through bilateral or multilateral channels, so as to meet, in full, the needs indicated in
the 1982-1984 three-year programme presented in 1982 at
the International Conference of Donors for the Economic
Reactivation and Development of Equatorial Guinea;
5. Notes the entry of Equatorial Guinea into the Central African Customs and Economic Union and the Bank
of Central African States;
6. Expresses its thanks to States and international,
regional and interregional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations for their assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
7. Earnestly calls upon all Member States and international and regional organizations and other intergovernmental organizations, as well as international financial and
development institutions and appropriate programmes of
the United Nations system, especially the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, to establish, maintain and
expand their programmes of assistance to Equatorial
Guinea. particularly in the areas of public administration
and public finance in which a general transformation is
required as a result of Equatorial Guinea's entry into the
Central African Customs and Economic Union and the
Bank of Central African States;
8. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To intensify his efforts to mobilize the necessary
resources for an effective programme of financial, technical
and material assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
(b) To keep the situation in Equatorial Guinea under
review, to maintain close contact with Member States, the
specialized agencies, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations and competent international financial institutions and to apprise the Economic and Social Council, at
its second regular session of 1985, of the status of assistance to Equatorial Guinea;
(c) To submit to the General Assembly at its fortieth
session a report on the economic situation of Equatorial
Guinea and the progress made in implementing the present resolution;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to include in his
report, in close collaboration with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, information on
79

0/!inal Records o( the Gmeral 4ssemhlv. Thirtv-mnth Session. Plenarv
3 I S1 meeting, para, 1-34
•
•
•

Weet1ng1
