S/PV.9012

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9012

th meeting
Thursday, 7 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Ms. De Souza Schmitz
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Koumba Pambo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Parihar
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2022/278)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31165 (E)
*2231165*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9012

positions of the Malian Defence and Security Forces
and of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), caused the
deaths of at least 40 civilians and the displacement of
approximately 3,640 households. In response to those
incidents, MINUSMA stepped up its patrols in the town
of Ménaka, allowing the Malian Defence and Security
Forces and signatory groups to more robustly mobilize
to respond to the situation.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2022/278)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and
Ms. Bouaré Bintou Founé Samaké, President of Women
in Law and Development in Africa in Mali.
Mr. Wane and Ms. Samaké are joining this meeting
via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/278, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to update the Security Council.
(spoke in French)
Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.8945), the
overall situation in Mali has remained extremely
worrisome. Civilians face immense suffering. There
has been no significant progress in the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Moreover, despite considerable efforts to that end, there
is yet no consensus on the duration of the transition.
I would like to start with an overview of the security
situation. In addition to the incidents noted in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/278), the month of
March saw several deadly attacks perpetrated by the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, in the Ménaka
region and south of Gao. The clashes in the Ménaka
region, which occurred 200 kilometres from the closest
2/23

07/04/2022

South of the Gao region, elements of the Islamic
State continued their attacks against Tessit, including
against a camp of the Malian armed forces on 21 March.
On the same day, the Islamic State also attacked the
commune of Talataye, causing significant population
displacement and the deaths of several civilians.
In coordination with Malian armed forces,
MINUSMA deployed three units of its mobile task
force in the area between Ansongo, Labezanga and
Tessit. From 21 March, a unit has patrolled between
Tessit and the Niger border, on the west side of the
Niger River; another does the same between Ansongo
and Labezanga, on the east side of the river; and a third
unit has been deployed to Ansongo. It is in that context
that, on 22 March, a Malian armed forces helicopter
taking part in a deterrence operation near Tessit opened
fire near one of our patrols. Fortunately, the incident
caused no casualties or injuries. An investigation is
under way to clarify the circumstances of the incident.
The same patrol continued to monitor the area around
Tessit and, on 24 and 27 March, forced armed groups to
abandon their equipment and flee the area.
In response to the attack on Talataye, the
MINUSMA force redeployed a mobile task force unit
from Ansongo-Labezanga to Talataye on 31 March,
followed by the redeployment of another in the same
area on 1 April. Those units have contributed to
stabilizing the security situation.
Even if the trigger for the resumption of violence in
the tri-border area seems to be linked to local trafficking
and related dynamics, it should be noted that such
incidents occur in the context of the withdrawal of the
forces of Operation Barkhane and Task Force Takuba.
Facing less pressure, terrorist groups enjoy greater
leeway, posing increased danger to both civilians and
our operations.
Given such challenges, it is imperative that the
level of our capabilities and troops be maintained. It
is equally important that adequate responses be found
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

to the challenges related to our capability shortfalls,
as well as to the national caveats of troop- and
police-contributing countries.
(spoke in English)
As announced by the Malian authorities to the
Council during its October visit, Malian forces have
stepped up their counter-terrorism efforts in the centre
to break the chokehold of extremist groups over large
swaths of the region. While it is still too early to assess
their long-term impact, those operations appear to have
contributed to a decrease in armed clashes between
community defence forces and terrorist groups,
vehicle hijackings, abductions and attacks on people’s
livelihoods and local infrastructure.
Last week’s offensive by the Malian armed
forces against Katiba Macina elements in Moura
village, south of Mopti, falls within the scope of those
operations. In a communiqué issued on 1 April, the
Malian armed forces asserted that they had neutralized
scores of terrorist elements controlling the area. At
the same time, MINUSMA also received reports of
serious human rights abuses committed against large
numbers of civilians during the operation. The Mission
sought access to the area and was able to conduct
a reconnaissance overflight on 3 April. Until now,
authorization for the sending of an integrated mission
has not been issued despite extensive engagement
with the national authorities. While the announcement
last night by the Prosecutor of the Mopti military
tribunal of the opening of an investigation, including
the deployment to the field of the required personnel,
is a welcome initiative, it is also imperative that the
Malian authorities extend the necessary cooperation
for MINUSMA to have access to the site of the alleged
violations, in line with its mandate.
More generally on human rights, MINUSMA
has opened 17 investigations into allegations of
indiscriminate attacks against civilians, extrajudicial
arrests, mistreatment, forced disappearances and
extrajudicial killings in central Mali since the beginning
of this year. We are currently finalizing an update on
the human rights situation, which will cover the period
from January to March of this year.
While military and security operations are an
absolute necessity in combating terrorism, experience
has time and again shown that such an approach alone
cannot bring about long-lasting stability, especially in
an environment as complex as the one prevailing in

S/PV.9012

central Mali. First, the operations need to be conducted
in ways that minimize, to the full extent possible,
civilian harm and uphold human rights and international
humanitarian law principles. Secondly, they have to be
complemented by practical and sustained steps focusing
on the root causes of conflict and violence.
In that respect, the finalization by the Malian
Government of its strategy for the centre and its
effective implementation are a must for the stabilization
of the region. In the meantime, MINUSMA continues
to carry out important tasks linked to the protection
of civilians, as in Ogossagou and along the DouentzaPetaka road in the central part of Mali, the protection
of physical infrastructure and related livelihoods in
the strategic axis linking Sévaré to Bandiagara and
local reconciliation agreements. In the same vein, we
recently launched a pilot project in the Douentza region
to improve relations between the Malian Defence and
Security Forces and the communities.
During the period under review, no tangible
progress was made in the peace process, a situation
compounded by the fact that the Agreement Monitoring
Committee has not met since October last year,
depriving the parties and their international partners
alike of the much-needed platform to collectively
assess the challenges at hand and seek a consensual way
forward. Instead, the past three months were marked
by worrisome actions and rhetoric, not in line with the
spirit of the Agreement.
Furthermore, despite the efforts made, tensions
remain between the Government and signatory
movements over the issue of the Cadre stratégique
permanent — the structure put in place by the latter with
the stated aim of reconciling northern communities.
Against that backdrop, the Mission, in coordination
with Algeria as the leader of the international mediation,
has continued to engage the parties, encouraging
them to move forward with the long-delayed highlevel decision-making meeting expected to facilitate
consensus on the critically important issues of global
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
institutional reforms. I note that the Government has
shared with the signatory movements the draft terms of
reference for the meeting.
The current status quo carries huge risks for the
future of the peace agreement and deprives local
populations of the peace dividends for which they are
yearning, while also increasing the threats facing our

22-311653/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

peacekeepers deployed in northern Mali, especially
in locations such as Kidal, Aguelhok and Tessalit. In
that context, the Council may wish to urge the parties
to take advantage of the synergies that exist between
the recommendations of the Assises nationales de la
refondation and the peace agreement to reverse the
cycle of recurring conflict in the north.
Council members will recall that the political
transition in Mali was to conclude in March, in
accordance with the initial 18-month timetable
negotiated by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) after the August 2020 coup
d’état. The non-completion of the transition within the
agreed timelines led ECOWAS to impose economic
and financial sanctions last January in addition to
the individual measures decided a month earlier. The
impasse has unfortunately persisted, exacerbating
tensions between Mali and ECOWAS and adversely
impacting its relations with other international actors.
As part of the local transition follow-up committee,
which includes ECOWAS, the African Union and
MINUSMA, the Mission has worked to arrive at an
acceptable timetable for the holding of elections. The
technical discussions that took place in February and
March paved the way for the return to Bamako on two
occasions of the ECOWAS mediator, former President
Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria.
While some progress was made, with Mali
requesting an additional 24 months to bring the
transition to an end, that was deemed to still be too
long at the Extraordinary Summit of the Heads of
State and Government of ECOWAS held in Accra on
25 March. The Summit emphasized the urgency of
reaching an agreement, given the deteriorating security
and humanitarian situation in the country. It endorsed
the proposal of 12 to 16 months put forward by the local
follow-up committee as a basis for negotiation and
mandated the mediator to return to Bamako to conclude
a deal that would also ensure the gradual lifting of the
sanctions levied on Mali.
No effort should be spared to achieve an agreement
regarding the transition. That would make it possible
not only to lift the sanctions, a critical measure in view
of the prevailing humanitarian situation, but also to
create a more propitious environment for the pursuit
of the other processes fundamental to the country’s
stabilization. In the coming days, in conjunction with
the other members of the local follow-up committee,
4/23

07/04/2022

we will continue to engage with the Malian authorities
and other stakeholders to help to find a solution to
the impasse.
In the past 12 months, I had the privilege of
crisscrossing our area of deployment. On several
occasions, I travelled to the locations of Tessalit,
Aguelhok and Kidal in the far north, the city of
Timbuktu, as well as in Ber and Goundam, to the
towns of Mopti, Dounetza, Bandiagara and Segou
in central Mali and to the north-eastern part of the
country, from Gao to Ansongo to Menaka. Everywhere
I went, I interacted extensively with local communities
and officials.
While in all those places, as well as in Bamako,
there is a clear frustration at the prevailing insecurity
and, understandably, criticism at the shortcomings of
the actions taken over the past decade or so, what I also
heard and noticed was a strong yearning for peace and
better governance, which was also expressed during the
Assises nationales de la refondation. Malian political
stakeholders need to collectively internalize that
yearning and live up to the expectations of their people.
For the sake of the Malian people, MINUSMA,
which embodies the international solidarity that Mali
so deserves and is entitled to in its hour of need, should
also be given all the resources it requires to close the
gap that continues to exist between what the Mission is
mandated to do and what it can actually do.
The President: I thank Mr. Wane for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Samaké.
Ms. Samaké (spoke in French): It is an honour and
a pleasure for me to address the Security Council as
part of this briefing on the security situation in Mali.
I sincerely thank Council members for the opportunity
they are giving, through me, to Malian civil society.
I am Ms. Bouaré Bintou Founé Samaké. I am a
lawyer by training, the President of Women in Law and
Development in Africa in Mali and the former Minister
for the Promotion of Women, Children and the Family.
The organization that I represent, Women in Law
and Development in Africa in Mali, is a pan-African
network for the promotion and protection of women’s
rights. It is a non-governmental organization (NGO)
that signed a framework agreement with the Republic
of Mali and brings under its umbrella 25 organizations
and NGOs for the promotion and protection of women’s
rights. We are a member of the Gender, Climate Change
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

and Security Coalition. We have noted that women are
disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate
change, which is why we established the network,
which analyses the traditional roles of women as
consumers and managers of natural resources, which
climate change can significantly affect. I would like
to underscore that currently in Mali we have people
who have been displaced as a result of climate change.
This Coalition also brings together approximately 20
associations and NGOs working throughout Mali.
The briefing I am delivering at this meeting is the
result of a compilation of the views and analyses of
those organizations and NGOs and individuals on the
ground in the north, south and centre of Mali.
What is the current context in Mali? In addition
to what was said by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, I will add that Mali is currently
facing a multidimensional crisis, characterized by
political, security, cultural, identity and institutional
challenges in an unstable environment and a very
difficult economic situation. Insecurity in Mali is
multifaceted and involves many actors and has had a
very negative impact on the population and on human
rights organizations. In that connection, I would like to
recall some recent political and security developments
in Mali that need to be taken into account when making
decisions concerning Mali.
First, the holding of the Assises nationales de la
refondation and the formulation of 516 recommendations,
including the extension of the transition period and the
institutional and political reforms, are an expression of
popular will.
Next, there is the will to change, advocated by the
Malian authorities, when it comes to cooperation on
defence and security, which led to a change of position
vis-à-vis the international community following the
authorities’ decision to diversify that cooperation.
There is also the issue of the withdrawal of
Operation Barkhane. This situation has led to
apprehension among Western countries with regard to
probable cooperation with the Wagner Group, which
the Malian authorities refute.
Added to that is the failure to provide a timeline for
the elections and for the transition, which has pitted Mali
against its European partners, notably France, but also
its African neighbours in the Economic Community of
West African States.

S/PV.9012

As the Secretary-General indicated, there has
also been intense fighting between the Malian armed
forces and armed terrorist groups in central and
northern of Mali. That has been increasing recently, as
underscored in the places where those conflicts took
place. However, most people support the Malian armed
forces in its counter-terrorism operations. And that
support can be seen at all levels. The overwhelming
majority of civil society supports the increased power
of the Malian armed forces, but remains concerned
about the breakdown of international cooperation, in
particular the European and subregional cooperation,
and the consequences that that breakdown could have
on the civilian population.
Those facts have an impact on the work of NGOs
on the ground. What difficulties are we facing? It is
difficult to move around and to gain access to certain
areas. It used to be possible — even during the period
of insecurity — to move around with the support of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), but
restrictions have been placed on access to the logistical
means of MINUSMA.
There is a limitation on certain fundamental
freedoms — the freedom of expression, the freedom
of movement and access to justice. In that context of
insecurity, one cannot say just anything, which means
that the freedom of expression is often limited. I can say
that today prominent people are speaking out against
the restrictions on expression in Mali.
There are few financial resources and partners.
Partners basically left Mali. It is deserted. In the most
remote locations, it is no longer possible to find partners
to help local organizations carry out their work.
There are also a growing fundamentalist trends,
which are undermining all efforts with regard to
gender-related issues. There is a widening of the gender
inequality gap in all areas.
Moreover, the policies and programmes that could
alleviate the plight of populations, especially women
and children, are not being implemented. We have in
place an action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. That
plan has been delayed, and few commitments have
been implemented. Poverty among women, especially
women in rural areas, is increasing. That context is very
difficult for rural women, who find it very difficult to
trade or move about and have to face sexual violence.

22-311655/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

07/04/2022

There are additional challenges facing Mali,
including a common understanding of the mandate of
MINUSMA by the people. Each time it is renewed,
we believe that a communications programme on the
mandate should be established so that we can reach a
common understanding thereof.

We must put to good use our human resources, meaning
young people, because 60 per cent of the population
of Mali are young people and have no employment
prospects. Concerning Mali’s natural resources, we
have the sun; indeed, today it is 44 degrees in Bamako.
We also have wind, water and land.

Another challenge is the consensual implementation
of the agreement. Woman fought for the signing of
a peace agreement and to create mechanisms for
its implementation. In the beginning, we had noted
that women were not involved in those agreement
implementation mechanisms. Here I wish to congratulate
MINUSMA, which provided us a great deal of support
in our endeavours to ensure the involvement of women
in the peace agreement implementation. Today, thanks
to those efforts, nine women from civil society are
members of the Agreement Monitoring Committee on
the implementation of the agreement emanating from
the Algiers process.

How to overcome those challenges? First, we have
noted that the security context compounds inequalities
and widens the gaps that must be overcome in order for
women and young people to gain access to resources
and governance. Civil society, in the face of those
challenges, is planning to coordinate the efforts made
by the Security Council and the Government of my
country and promote a legal framework and resources
conducive to building a more inclusive, effective,
transparent, sustainable and responsible security sector
that would serve the people of Mali.

Another challenge is the lifting of sanctions.
Every time the Economic Community of West African
States comes to Mali for a meeting, we have hope. But
every time such meetings end in failure, and those
failures have a negative effect on the people in general,
particularly women. As long as no such agreement
has been reached, the transition will not have begun.
We are awaiting with impatience and concern an
agreement on the lifting of sanctions and the return of
constitutional order.
Next is the issue of inclusivity with respect to
governance actors. Today in Mali we have a law that
states that 30 per cent of decision-making posts need
to be allocated on the basis of gender. However, such
inclusivity does not exist in terms of governance.
We must also deal with residual insecurity. We do
not always have the same understanding of that combat
against insecurity and terrorism as does MINUSMA.
We who work with MINUSMA understand the
position of the Blue Helmets, and we are familiar
with their mandate. But for the majority of people,
MINUSMA’s role is to combat terrorism. I am saying
that, and it can be put in quotes if so desired, but that
is how most of the people understand it, as they do
not grasp that MINUSMA does not have a mandate to
combat terrorism.
The fight against impunity for abuses, war crimes
and acts of sexual violence linked to conflict is another
challenge, as well as the fight against gender inequality.
6/23

Second, it is also endeavouring to strengthen gendersensitive language as used in MINUSMA’s mandate on
security-sector reform, including by consulting Malian
women prior to the mandate renewal, so as to ensure
that their needs, perspectives and priorities are included
therein. In the current mandate, the issue of gender was
taken up, but no specific decision was taken to make
that point more clear and specific in the mandate.
Third, we need to provide specific orientations and
key actions to be undertaken by the Mission to support
what the Government is doing in order to ensure more
gender-sensitive security services.
Fourth, we need to strengthen women’s
empowerment by enabling them to overcome the
political, legal and institutional obstacles that hinder
their recruitment, retention and promotion in the
security sector.
Fifth, the low percentage of women in the security
sector affects their capacity to prevent violence, protect
defenders of women’s human rights and provide
services. Currently, in the context of our relations with
MINUSMA, with respect to tackling issues relating
to gender-based violence, we note that there are few
psychologists in their ranks. Few women are working
in humanitarian operations within the Mission. Those
women, when they are present, reassure other women
that their issues can be effectively managed in the
context of the services provided by MINUSMA.
Sixth, we wish climate change to be mentioned in
the mandate of MINUSMA as a key element affecting
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

the security of the population, specifically women and
children. Indeed, many intercommunal conflicts are
linked to a lack of resources and to climate change. So
that is a key element that impacts violence and conflict.
Seventh, effective accountability mechanisms
need to be put in place in order to end impunity for all
forms of violence against women and groups that are
underrepresented within security institutions.
Eighth, we must transform into an opportunity
potential sources of energy such as wind, the sun,
water and space. I wish to underline that when I was
in Tessalit, I saw solar panels in public places. At night
the children would come and learn their lessons under
those panels, and the men would come play pétanque.
That sort of thing helps people to change their mindsets,
coexist and be able to chat and relax a bit, because
we know that those places can often be very hostile,
especially if there is no electricity.
Ninth, we need to promote the inclusion upstream
of women in the security sector and civil-society
organizations in negotiations on the provisions of
security arrangements and Malian peace agreements,
national security policies and military expenditure.
Here I underline that those women who have joined the
Agreement Monitoring Committee have changed the
course of discussions within that institution. So I would
say that the presence of women in decision-making
institutions should be viewed as an opportunity
and encouraged.
Tenth, we need to undertake an assessment
of the barriers that exist in the way of women’s
participation in the security sector, in particular in
decision-making instances. I did not include figures
because we must be wary of figures in Mali, as we
lack statistics. Nevertheless, the presence of women in
decision-making bodies truly represents an opportunity
for us.
I would be happy to clarify or explain or answer
questions on any of the issues I discussed.
The President: I thank Ms. Samaké for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Ms. Samaké for their briefings.

S/PV.9012

France is very concerned about the situation in
Mali — the increase in violence against civilians in
the centre of the country since the beginning of the
year, with total impunity, and reports of human rights
violations by elements of the Malian armed forces,
accompanied by Russian mercenaries from the Wagner
Group. France, the European Union and the countries
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) expressed their concerns in December,
when the Wagner Group was deployed.
I refer in particular to the abuses that caused
the deaths of hundreds of civilians in the village of
Moura. France extends its condolences to the families
of the victims and calls for national and international
investigations to be opened rapidly. That will make
it possible to prosecute the perpetrators of those
acts, some of which could constitute war crimes. We
take note of the opening of an investigation by the
prosecutor in Mopti and look forward to the follow-up.
It is essential that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
also be able to conduct its own investigation, without
hindrance and with total independence, in order to
establish the facts and report back to the Council. In
addition, it is essential that MINUSMA use all the
means at its disposal to protect civilians. We call on the
Malian authorities to guarantee the Mission’s freedom
of movement.
The fight against terrorism can succeed only
if it is supported by the people. It can never justify
indiscriminate violence against civilians, which only
strengthens the terrorist groups. In that respect, we
note with concern the offensive carried out since the
beginning of the year by the Islamic State in the Greater
Sahara in the tri-border area.
This deterioration in the security situation comes
at a time when the war waged by Russia in Ukraine
is aggravating an already critical food situation. We
reaffirm our solidarity with the Malian people and
those of the Sahel.
The coming months will be crucial for Mali. We
call on the transitional authorities to focus on three
political objectives.
The first is the implementation of the Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. As a
member of the international mediation, we consider that
this is still the appropriate response to ease tensions
between the armed groups that signed the Agreement

22-311657/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

07/04/2022

and the authorities in Bamako in a sustainable manner.
However, no progress has been made for several
months. A new start is needed.

period. We strongly condemn those attacks and call
upon the Malian authorities to bring the perpetrators of
such heinous crimes to justice.

The second objective is to propose a concrete
strategy to deal with the crisis in the centre and protect
civilians. In that regard again, results are expected.

Terrorists
have
been
increasingly
using
asymmetrical means such as improvised explosive
devices to target security forces and peacekeepers.
MINUSMA has also recorded several instances of the
use of drones by hostile elements to watch activities
and movements of peacekeepers. We reiterate our
call for the expeditious implementation of the
provisions of resolution 2589 (2021), on protecting the
protectors, adopted last year by the Council in order
to enhance accountability for crimes against United
Nations peacekeepers.

The third objective is the finalization of the
political transition and the return to constitutional
order. We hope for a rapid agreement between Mali and
ECOWAS to organize elections as soon as possible. We
support the efforts of ECOWAS, and we condemn the
infringement of civil liberties, which serves only to
further strain the political climate.
In order to achieve those three objectives,
MINUSMA remains necessary. More than 30 troopand police-contributing countries are participating
under extremely difficult conditions. We pay tribute to
them. We are counting on the members of the Council
to renew the Mission’s mandate for three months.
For its part, France has decided to end its
military commitment in Mali. That is a decision
we took in consultation with the Sahel countries
and their neighbours, as well as with international
partners. However, we intend to maintain our support
for MINUSMA. We will also continue to provide
humanitarian and development aid for the direct
benefit of the Malian population. We will also remain
committed to the fight against terrorism in the Sahel
region and are considering strengthening our support to
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea. We will come back
to the Council shortly with further details.
Mr. Parihar (India): I would like to thank
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) for his briefing on the recent
developments in Mali and the activities of MINUSMA
in implementing its mandate. I also thank Ms. Bouaré
Bintou Founé Samaké, President of Women in Law and
Development in Africa in Mali, for her insights.
At the outset, allow me to express our deepest
condolences to the families of the two Egyptian
peacekeepers who lost their lives in an attack on a
MINUSMA convoy in Mopti on 7 March, as well as to
the Government of Egypt. We also offer our condolences
to the families of Malian security forces and civilians
who were killed in several attacks during the reporting
8/23

The security situation in Mali, particularly in the
northern and central regions, has remained grim, as
terrorists belonging to local affiliates of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida, such as the
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and Jama’a Nusrat
ul-Islam waal-Muslimin, continue to target civilians,
security forces and MINUSMA peacekeepers. The
security challenges are likely to aggravate with the
restructuring of the international security presence in
Mali. We also note the reported recent advances made
by the Malian armed forces against terrorists.
The political and security situation in Mali saw no
significant progress during the reporting period. The
stakeholders in Mali have not yet reached an agreement
on the modalities of, or any meaningful time frame
for, the transition, despite the continuing engagement
between the transitional authorities of Mali and
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which is playing a key role in the process.
The multidimensional nature of the challenges faced
by Mali is rooted in the long-standing imbalances in its
constitutional, administrative and security set-up that
have been left largely unaddressed for decades. There
cannot be a quick-fix solution for such a complex crisis.
Mali’s challenges need to be addressed through
a comprehensive approach, incorporating the
implementation of the 2015 Peace Agreement in
particular, along with political-electoral reforms and
the strengthening of security institutions in order to
be able to provide security to the Malian people amid
the growing threat of terrorism in the region. The
international community can ignore terrorism in Mali
and the Sahel at its own peril. The genuine demands of
national and regional authorities to undertake counter22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

offensive measures against armed and terrorist groups
need to be addressed urgently. In that regard, noting
the critical role of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, in coordination with MINUSMA
in Mali and the Sahel, we reiterate our call for robust
support to the Joint Force by the Council and the
international community.
A lasting solution can be achieved only through
a Mali-owned and -led process that is considered by
the people of Mali to be inclusive and representative.
We continue to encourage dialogue between Mali and
ECOWAS towards reaching an agreement at the earliest
about an acceptable timeline for political transition and
elections, leading to the return of the constitutional
order. Such agreement will also set the scene for the
lifting of sanctions against Mali, thus shielding the
people of Mali from further impact and stabilizing
Mali’s relations with its neighbours.
We commend the efforts of MINUSMA in assisting
the Malian authorities. MINUSMA remains one of the
most challenging of the peacekeeping missions. It is
therefore important that MINUSMA be provided with
adequate resources to implement its mandate. We also
call for better coordination between MINUSMA and
Malian armed forces.
India remains closely engaged with Mali in
the sphere of development partnerships, which is
reflected in such critical infrastructure projects as
the ongoing construction of 393 kilometres of a highvoltage double-circuit transmission line from Bamako,
Mali’s capital city, to Sikasso, the country’s second
largest city. India is also assisting Mali in capacitybuilding through scholarships for higher-studies and
professional-training programmes in India, including
in defence- and security-related areas. India remains
steadfast in supporting the Malian people in their quest
for lasting peace, security and development.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council, namely, Kenya, Gabon and my
own country, Ghana (A3).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/278) and thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General El-Ghassim Wane for his
comprehensive briefing and insightful perspectives
on the situation in Mali. We commend him for his
continuous engagement with the regional actors and the
Malian authorities and appreciate his efforts in resolving

S/PV.9012

the challenges in the country. We also welcome the
participation in this meeting of Ms. Bouaré Bintou
Founé Samaké, who spoke on behalf of the Malian
branch of Women in Law and Development in Africa,
and commend her for her unique perspective.
The people of Mali are yearning for peace in their
country, and so are Member States in the region. A
swift return to constitutional order is what we believe
will give the elected Government the legitimacy to lead
the process of the comprehensive implementation of
the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
resulting from the Algiers process.
The A3 acknowledges the efforts of the
international community aimed at addressing the
situation in Mali and particularly notes the SecretaryGeneral’s engagement with the transitional authorities
and regional actors to adopt a consensual approach to
dealing with the peace and security challenges in Mali
as well as the reforms set out by the Assises nationales
de la refondation. We also acknowledge the critical role
being played by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in the country.
We pay tribute to the MINUSMA personnel who
have recently lost their lives in the line of duty, and
we stand with the gallant personnel who continue to
risk their lives for the cause of peace and stability in
Mali. We welcome the mediation role of MINUSMA
and the use of its good offices in supporting the Malian
peace process, including for the provision of training
and technical and humanitarian assistance. We look
forward to the renewal of the MINUSMA’s mandate
in June with elements that would enhance its logistical
capabilities and effectiveness in dealing with the
challenges in Mali.
Despite ongoing efforts, the A3 continues to
remain concerned about the complex and dire political,
security and humanitarian situation in Mali. We
therefore wish to highlight the following four issues
of concern. First, on the political front, we remain
concerned by the slow progress of the implementation
of the peace accord and the absence of a finalized
timetable for the return to constitutional rule. We
believe that the most sustainable way of addressing
the situation in Mali is for the transitional authorities
to adhere to the Protocol on Democracy and Good
Governance adopted by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and by agreeing to a

22-311659/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

credible timetable for a swift return to constitutional
order. We welcome the decision taken by the Authority
of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS at its
extraordinary summit held in Accra, Ghana, on Friday,
25 March 2022, urging the transitional authorities to
adhere to the additional transitional period of 12 to 16
months. We note the ongoing discussions between the
transitional authorities and the ECOWAS Mediator to
finalize the chronogramme.
Secondly, terrorism remains one of the greatest
threats to stability in Mali and the region at large. We
deplore the upsurge in extremist attacks, including
the use of improvised explosive devices against
civilians, the military and MINUSMA personnel,
which have exacerbated the security situation as
evidenced in 103 security incidents recorded during
the first three months of 2022, including 69 civilian
deaths. While acknowledging the investigations that
are being conducted into circumstances leading to the
firing of rockets close to elements of MINUSMA on
22 March, we wish to encourage more engagement and
information-sharing between the Malian armed forces
and MINUSMA to ensure that such incidents, which
undermine the safety of personnel, are curtailed.
We are also concerned by the impact of the
uncontrolled exit of foreign fighters and mercenaries
from Libya into the Sahel, which, coupled with the
proliferation of arms, calls for a durable and holistic
solution. The withdrawal of these extremist groups
requires close monitoring and coordination to ensure
a financed and effective programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration in close coordination
with neighbouring States and relevant regional and
subregional mechanisms.
In the light of these security concerns, we believe
that it is important to urgently address the challenges
placed in the way of police- and troop-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) in rotating their personnel from
the theatre, including several West African TCCs/PCCs,
such as Senegal, Liberia, Côte d’Ivoire, Nigeria, Benin,
Togo and Ghana, which have troops in the theatre that
have remained beyond the recommended deployment
in the Mission. This disturbing situation has morale,
disciplinary and operational implications for the troops
and the Mission, and we call on the Malian authorities
to facilitate the required rotation without further delay.
We also look forward to the outcome of the planned
meetings of the Sahel Coalition as well as the African
Union-United Nations Joint Strategic Assessment on
10/23

07/04/2022

Security in the Sahel, with a view towards building a
synergistic counter-terrorism network for the Sahel and
coastal West Africa, comprising the Accra Initiative and
the Multinational Joint Task Force, with the requisite
sustainable funding.
Thirdly, the deteriorating human rights situation
resulting from attacks by extremist groups and
intercommunal conflicts requires greater attention.
We condemn the abuses perpetrated against women,
girls and children, including abductions, arbitrary
detentions, sexual exploitation and abuse. These attacks
constitute a violation of international human rights law.
We urge the transitional authorities to intensify their
investigations to ensure that the perpetrators of these
atrocities are arrested and swiftly prosecuted.
We encourage additional support for Mali’s Truth,
Justice and Reconciliation Commission to enable it to
execute its mandate effectively. We express concern over
the deteriorating humanitarian situation characterized
by forced displacements and the increase in the number
of people who need humanitarian assistance. The A3
therefore endorses the Secretary-General’s call for
donors to respond more generously to the humanitarian
appeal for Mali. The exacerbating impact of climate
change and the coronavirus disease pandemic on the
humanitarian situation also requires careful attention.
Fourthly, we welcome measures aimed at addressing
the developmental challenges in Mali. In this regard,
we commend the Peacebuilding Commission for its
interventions in the country and believe that its role
remains critical in addressing the underlying challenges
there. We welcome the investment of $8.4 million
from the Peacebuilding Fund into initiatives targeting
youth, women, agricultural self-employment and
electoral-violence reduction, and we encourage more of
such efforts, including an increase in contributions to
the Fund to enable it to achieve its mandate.
In concluding, the A3 believes now more than
ever that a quick return to constitutional rule and a
comprehensive implementation of the peace accord is
the surest way of bringing lasting peace to Mali. Time
is of the essence, and the national political will and
international support for such a course of action must
be mobilized now.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane
for his comprehensive briefing. We also listened
carefully to Ms. Bintou Samaké, and we welcome
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

the participation of His Excellency Ambassador Issa
Konfourou, Permanent Representative of Mali, in
today’s meeting.
At the outset, the United Arab Emirates affirms
the need to intensify efforts to achieve stability and
security in Mali, especially in the light of the current
deteriorating political and security situation.
On the political front, we encourage intensifying
national efforts to set a timetable for elections as soon
as possible and in line with the aspirations of the people
of Mali. In that context, we note the encouraging
engagement currently taking place between the
transitional authorities in Mali and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which
includes an openness for dialogue, the efforts of the
Special Envoy, Mr. Goodluck Jonathan, and those of the
joint technical team of ECOWAS, the African Union
and the United Nations. In addition, Security Council
support for national and regional efforts remains
necessary at this critical juncture.
We believe that long-term stability in the country
will also require a recommitment to the key tenets of the
2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
and to ensuring its implementation by local authorities
in cooperation with regional and international partners.
Given the need to focus on the situation in central Mali,
which is experiencing critical security developments,
we look forward to finalizing the comprehensive
political strategy to support stability in the region.
In that context, we stress the importance of promoting
the effective, meaningful and equal participation of
women in all ongoing political processes, and we
commend the efforts made in that regard, including
to increase the number of women on the Agreement
Monitoring Committee and its subcommittees.
With regard to the security situation, we express
concern over the threats that terrorist groups pose to
the security and stability of Mali and the wider region.
Those groups continue their attempts to extend their
control and expand the scope of their operations
despite the national, regional and international efforts
to combat them. We once again condemn the targeting
of peacekeepers by such groups, including the recent
attack in Mopti, in central Mali, which claimed the lives
of Egyptian peacekeepers. We express our condolences
to the Arab Republic of Egypt and to the families of
the victims. Such critical conditions and developments
serve to highlight the need to intensify efforts to counter

S/PV.9012

extremism and terrorism in line with international law,
including by ensuring the more efficient implementation
of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
and by providing appropriate support to the Group of
Five for the Sahel.
Given the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Mali, which has disproportionally affected women and
children, the international community must continue
to provide humanitarian aid and basic services for the
7.5 million people who are in urgent need of assistance.
In that regard, we highlight that addressing the
security threats associated with climate change in
Mali would help to ensure food and water security
and contribute to achieving stability and development
in Mali.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates affirms its
continued support for development efforts in Mali and
its path towards achieving prosperity and sustainable
peace. We also take this opportunity to express our
support for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and its efforts.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): My delegation thanks Special Envoy Wane
and Ms. Samaké for their briefings. We welcome the
representative of Mali here among us today.
We once again note the extreme complexity of the
situation in Mali, its widespread impact on the entire
Sahel region and the need to seriously reflect on the
relevance of our approach to date to contribute to the
stabilization of the country. I will focus my statement
on three aspects that Mexico believes crucial at
this juncture.
First, we recognize the renewed efforts that the
Malian security forces have made in recent months to
combat terrorist groups. We are aware that the main
cause of the violence affecting the civilian population
and hindering the establishment of State authority
throughout the country is precisely the activity of such
groups. It therefore remains imperative to put an end to
their scourge in order to ultimately achieve sustainable
peace in Mali.
At the same time, the legitimacy of the fight against
extremism does not in any way exempt the State from
its responsibilities and obligations in terms of human
rights and respect for international humanitarian law.
Mexico therefore expresses its grave concern about
reports of civilian casualties in the operation recently

22-3116511/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

carried out in Moura, and we call on the transitional
authorities to cooperate closely with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali to shed light on what happened. A rigorous,
independent and impartial investigation is essential in
order to strengthen the population’s trust in its armed
forces and to enable the latter to fulfil their mandate,
while fully respecting the rule of law.
Secondly, we urge the authorities to continue
working with the Economic Community of West
African States and the African Union to reach an
agreement as soon as possible on an electoral timetable
that puts an end to the protracted transition and allows
the State to address the many pending reforms with the
indispensable backing of the legitimacy granted by the
popular vote.
Mexico regrets that the attention of all political
actors in the transition process, in the absence of a
decision regarding the elections, has unavoidably led
to serious delays in the implementation of the Algiers
Peace Agreement, whose follow-up bodies have not
met for months, as we heard this morning. We must
remember that there remain many tasks pending
in order to meet the commitments agreed by the
signatories of that agreement, from the decentralization
of public administration to the necessary disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
Thirdly, Mexico believes that, in order to neutralize
the violence in Mali, the fragile and very worrisome
economic development situation must be addressed;
the historical exclusion of certain groups from the
national political scene must end; and impunity must be
combated through a credible, effective and independent
justice system.
Regarding that last point, Mexico would like to
reiterate its appeal to the Malian authorities to take into
account the recommendations made in the report of the
International Commission of Inquiry issued in 2020
(see S/2020/1332, annex). The work of the Commission
must be harnessed to deliver justice to the victims and to
break the cycle of violence that feeds on the grievances
accumulated over years of conflict.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Wane and Ms. Bintou Founé
Samaké for their briefings today.
I appreciated Ms. Samaké’s insightful emphasis
on the critical role of women under the Algiers
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and
12/23

07/04/2022

in peacebuilding in Mali. We fully endorse her call for
the meaningful inclusion of women and women-led
civil society organizations in the peace process. That
should include younger women as appropriate. They
are the rising generation. We also urge the transitional
Government to make progress on the Algiers accord
and to ensure the full and safe participation of women
throughout the elections process in Mali, including
ensuring that women are on the ballot, are registered to
vote and have an opportunity to participate at all levels
of the electoral process.
We welcome the efforts of Special Representative
Wane and the brave peacekeepers of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) to fulfil the Council’s broad and
robust mandate to support the Algiers accord between
the Malian authorities and the signatory armed groups,
protect civilians and support the political transition.
The United States expresses its deepest condolences
and sympathy to the families and friends of the three
Egyptian peacekeepers killed in attacks against
MINUSMA last month.
The United States joins others on the Council in
strongly condemning all attacks against peacekeepers,
and that includes the disinformation campaigns that
have hindered MINUSMA’s ability to carry out its
Security Council mandate. As mandated by the Council,
those involved in planning, directing, sponsoring or
conducting attacks against MINUSMA peacekeepers
or those planning, directing or committing acts in Mali
that constitute human rights abuses or violations may
be subject to Security Council sanctions. We call on the
transitional Government to carry out transparent and
credible investigations into attacks on peacekeepers
or those who commit human rights abuses, and to hold
those responsible accountable.
Like others, the United States is deeply troubled
by developments in Mali since the Council last met on
Mali on 11 January (see S/PV.8945).
First, the past three months have been marked
by alarming accounts of human rights violations and
abuses against civilians by terrorists armed groups and
the Malian Armed Forces, with individuals linked to the
Kremlin-backed Wagner Group. These reports must be
investigated and those responsible held accountable. We
are following closely the extremely disturbing accounts
of hundreds of people killed last week in the village of
Moura, in the Mopti region of Central Mali. The Malian
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

people deserve answers about what happened in Moura
the week of 28 March and what led to the gruesome
execution-style killing of over 35 people on 2 March in
the Ségou region and about who was responsible.
We note that the Malian authorities have announced
that they will launch an investigation into the events in
Moura. We urge the authorities to also grant MINUSMA
immediate access to both locations to conduct rigorous
investigations — a task mandated by this very Council.
This increase in reports of human rights abuses
is exactly why the United States continues to warn
countries against partnering with the Kremlin-linked
Wagner Group. Wagner forces have been implicated in
human rights abuses, including execution-style killings
in the Central African Republic and elsewhere. Wagner
Group forces will not bring peace to Mali, will divert
resources away from the fight of the Malian Armed
Forces against terrorism, and will ultimately undermine
the stability of the region.
Malian authorities are also responsible for the
actions of their security partners. Operations that
inflict harm on civilians and abuse human rights in the
name of counterterrorism will backfire. I agree with my
French colleague that these actions can drive some to
actually join or support violent extremist organizations
instead of neutralizing the threat.
Secondly, the United States is deeply concerned
by the Malian authorities’ disregard for the status-offorces agreement with MINUSMA and the restrictions
on the Mission’s movements, especially in central Mali.
The 22 March incident involving the Malian forces
firing six rockets near peacekeepers in eastern Mali is
unacceptable. It is an affront to all those who serve in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. The transitional
Government is responsible for ensuring the safety,
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel and assets. Restrictions limit MINUSMA’s
ability to anticipate, deter and effectively respond to
threats to civilians, including from violent extremist
groups, and will only lead to more attacks against
civilians and Malian forces. These restrictions must
end so that MINUSA can fulfil its mandate to protect
civilians and foster peace.
Thirdly, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the transitional Government
have yet to agree on an acceptable electoral timetable.
We, along with fellow Council members, welcomed the
strong action of ECOWAS in defence of democracy in

S/PV.9012

January. We call for continued dialogue that produces
an acceptable electoral calendar so that the international
community — but more importantly, the Malian
people — know what to expect of the transitional
Government. We share the deep disappointment of
ECOWAS with the lack of political will the transitional
Government has shown towards organizing elections,
as it committed to do following the August 2020 coup
d’état, which is now over 18 months ago. We urge
the transitional Government to keep its pledge to the
Malian people to return their country to democracy as
soon as possible.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wane for briefing the Council and commend the
excellent work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
I also extend my thanks to Ms. Samaké for bringing an
important civil society perspective. We support her call
to include more gender language in the next mandate.
At the outset, we would like to express deep
concerns for the hundreds of people reported to have
been killed during a counter-terrorism operation in
Moura. We express our condolences to the families.
We urge credible and impartial investigations by the
Malian authorities into these unclear circumstances,
the facilitation of independent investigations by
MINUSMA and immediate access for the Mission.
Today’s discussion is particularly timely, as
February should have marked a close to the transition
period and a return to constitutional order in Mali.
Instead, we have witnessed a severe escalation in
security threats, a dire humanitarian situation and a
dramatic shrinking of civic space, as the briefers just
noted. Mali is also facing its worst food and nutrition
crisis in a decade and the war in Ukraine is worsening
the situation.
The rapid expansion of terrorist attacks in Mali
today presents a serious concern over the proliferation
of armed Islamist groups. The lack of State presence
is creating a security vacuum conducive to non-State
actors to further expand towards the south of Mali and
the wider coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea.
The recent Human Rights Watch reports document
disturbing attacks against civilians and local
communities by the Malian army and armed groups.
Albania strongly condemns the reported violence and
calls for human rights and international humanitarian

22-3116513/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

law to be upheld by all and under all circumstances.
In this context, we remain deeply worried about the
methods adopted by the Wagner Group operating in
Mali and the wider region.
As the Security Council, we need to maintain
a strong and articulated commitment in Mali,
strengthening our support for the population in order
to foster development and strengthen the resilience of
local communities. However, it is the responsibility of
the Malian authorities to take ownership and finalize
a comprehensive, politically led strategy to reach a
durable solution to the conflict and restore democracy
and stability.
Albania calls on the Malian authorities to guarantee
the freedom of movement and action of MINUSMA
in order to allow the fulfilment of its mandate. We
commend MINUSMA for facilitating progress in this
challenging environment, including by launching
projects in cooperation with the local population,
enabling thousands of people to have access to drinking
water. We look forward to the mandate’s renewal
in June.
The political crisis and lack of commitment have
contributed to severe delays in the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call on the Malian
stakeholders to reach a consensus and build on the
reforms articulated by the Assises nationales de la
refondation for the implementation of the agreement,
focusing on those related to the holding of elections.
In this regard, we stress the need for all activities to
be gender-responsive and build the capacity of women
and girls.
Albania stands with ECOWAS and the African
Union and fully supports their efforts to overcome the
political impasse in Mali and preserve the democratic
model in the region. We urge the Malian authorities
to engage constructively with ECOWAS, MINUSMA
and international partners in expediting the transition
process and setting out a calendar for holding elections
to return to constitutional order in a timely manner.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I too wish to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for
his reminders of the fundamental contributions that
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continues
to bring to Mali and to the stability of the region. I also
warmly thank Ms. Samaké for providing us with her
14/23

07/04/2022

real-world experiences, including on the nexus between
gender, climate change and security in Mali.
We hope that the appointment of 15 more women to
the Agreement Monitoring Committee can move such
aspects even higher up on the agenda.
Let me now address the political transition. We
are encouraged by the seemingly reduced distance
in positions between Bamako and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on the
transitional timeline. ECOWAS should be commended
on its persistence in pursuing dialogue. We urge Mali’s
transitional leaders to maintain a constructive dialogue
with ECOWAS and to fulfil their promises of a swift
return to constitutional order.
A year and half after the military took power by
force in Mali, the security and humanitarian situations
show few signs of improving. We remain especially
concerned by the inability to protect Mali’s youngest
and most vulnerable, given the increasing reports of
the recruitment and use of children in armed conflict,
closed schools and the severe risk of acute malnutrition.
As we know, recent months have also seen a drastic
increase in human rights violations and abuses. We
underline the State’s primary responsibility to ensure
accountability and fight impunity in relation to any
external actor that the transitional authorities have
hired, including the Wagner Group.
We also reiterate the call from the Malian National
Human Rights Commission and others for independent
investigations of the horrific allegations of human
rights violations and abuses in Moura. Let me be clear:
in order to fulfil its mandate, MINUSMA must be given
full access to investigate all allegations.
I want to again pay tribute to every single person
within MINUSMA for their professionalism and
tireless efforts. We remember the brave peacekeepers
and others who recently lost their lives in the service of
peace in Mali.
Let us not forget that part of the responsibility to
ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers falls
on the Council. There are considerations that we must
pay extra attention to in the current changing security
environments, including as Operation Barkhane and
the Takuba Task Force start to depart.
But in addition, there are certain conditions and
safeguards that only the host country can ensure. Those
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

responsibilities should not be taken lightly and must
start with a fundamental respect for MINUSMA and its
mandate. MINUSMA has the mandate and know-how
to support the political transition, the implementation
of the peace agreement, respect for human rights, the
rule of law and the protection of civilians. We therefore
urge the transitional Government to continue to engage
constructively with the Mission.
In conclusion, during the critical time ahead, we
ask the Secretary-General to keep the Council closely
informed about any added challenges or threats that may
affect MINUSMA operations and our peacekeepers
in Mali.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wane for his briefing and also listened carefully
to the statement by Ms. Samaké. We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Mali
in this meeting.
Recently Mali’s transitional authorities have made
great efforts to improve the security situation and ease
the humanitarian crisis, but they also face multiple
challenges. The international community should bear
in mind the overall situation in terms of maintaining
regional stability, actively provide help and support,
and make additional efforts that are conducive to peace
and stability in Mali.
In connection with the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/278), I would like to make the
following observations.
First, recently the Economic Community of West
African States, the African Union and the Malian
transitional authorities have been in continuous
communication on the issue of a political transition,
striving to narrow their differences. China commends
those efforts and hopes that the parties will reach an
agreement as soon as possible to push the political
process forward on the right track.
Making arrangements for the transitional period
and the general election is only the first step. The
key is to help Mali achieve long-term security and
stability. The international community should support
the transitional authorities of Mali in accordance with
the consensus reached at the national reconstruction
conference to advance the reform process, implement
the peace agreement, formulate and implement a
comprehensive strategy for the central region and help

S/PV.9012

Mali embark on the development path that best suits its
national conditions.
Secondly, Mali is an important force in counterterrorism operations in the Sahel region. Recently the
Malian Government carried out a series of counterterrorism military operations in the central and
northern regions that have severely crippled terrorist
and extremist forces, ensured the safety of local people
and helped displaced persons return to their homes,
which is conducive to the stability and development of
those regions. Those efforts should be acknowledged.
Meanwhile, terrorist forces remain entrenched in
the central and northern regions, and the withdrawal
of foreign military forces also provides them with an
opportunity to take advantage of the chaos and seek
expansion. There should be no slack in the fight against
terrorism. We should continue to support the Malian
Government’s efforts to combat terrorism and maintain
stability, help it step up its capacity-building and respect
its right to international security cooperation.
China has noted the concerns in some media reports
about human rights violations in the counter-terrorism
operations in the Moura region. The Malian side has
already made clarifications, emphasizing that the
relevant actions were aimed at rescuing the local people
and that they have always respected human rights and
were willing to conduct the relevant investigations.
China hopes that all sides will exercise restraint and
refrain from making groundless accusations before any
conclusion is reached by the investigation.
Thirdly, the economic and humanitarian situation
in Mali is daunting. Foreign trade, employment,
production and investment have declined to varying
degrees. Indeed, 42.7 per cent of Malians live in extreme
poverty, 7.5 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance, and 960,000 children under the age of 5
suffer from severe malnutrition.
The international community cannot forget about
the difficulties faced by African countries such as
Mali. African development issues should not be
marginalized. As a good friend of African countries,
China will continue to stand by them, accelerate the
implementation of the Global Development Initiative
and outcomes of the Forum on China–Africa
Cooperation, and continue to support Mali and other
African countries in their economic recovery.

22-3116515/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

Fourthly, the security risks faced by MINUSMA
have continued unabated. It is heartbreaking that two
Egyptian peacekeepers were killed in an attack last
month. Improvised explosive devices are one of the major
causes of casualties among MINUSMA peacekeepers.
The Secretariat should take concrete measures in
the light of the relevant recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s independent strategic assessment.
It is essential to have an in-depth assessment of the
impact of the withdrawal of foreign military forces on
the work of MINUSMA and to identify weak links in
medical support, intelligence-gathering and security
so as to ensure that MINUSMA is not affected in the
implementation of its mandate and to ensure the safety
of peacekeepers.
On 22 March, a security incident occurred between
the Malian security forces and MINUSMA. Fortunately,
there were no casualties. China notes that both sides
have launched investigations and hopes that they will
work together to find an appropriate solution based on
the findings of the investigations so as to prevent any
recurrence of similar incidents in future.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for
his briefing this morning and for the continued work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in an
increasingly challenging environment. The Mission’s
work on the protection of civilians and human rights
monitoring and reporting has never been more vital. I
wish also to send my thanks to the Economic Community
of West African States and the African Union for their
continued work in pursuit of lasting peace and stability
in Mali. I also welcome Ms. Samaké’s presence here as
a strong advocate for women in Mali and thank her for
her important and informative briefing.
As we have heard, by almost every metric the
situation in Mali continues to deteriorate at an alarming
rate. We are deeply disturbed by the increasing reports of
killings of civilians, human rights violations and abuses,
and violations of international humanitarian law. Unrest
and humanitarian need, including an unprecedented
food crisis, continue to grow as the transition process
and the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali remain stalled.
The reports of a massacre in the village of Moura
last week following a counter-terrorism operation by the
Malian Armed Forces are frankly horrifying. We offer
our sincere condolences to the families of those killed.
16/23

07/04/2022

There must be a thorough and transparent
investigation into those allegations. We note the
intention of the public prosecutor of the Mopti military
court to open an investigation. Nonetheless, MINUSMA
must be granted unfettered, timely and safe access to
Moura in order to conduct a full investigation and to
take action to ensure the protection of civilians. Those
responsible for those and other violations and abuses
must be brought to justice, regardless of affiliation
or nationality.
As others have said today, human rights violations
serve only to drive radicalization and contribute to the
growth of terrorism and violent extremism. We call on
the Malian authorities to tackle impunity and to ensure
that measures taken to combat terrorism comply with
international law.
We are also increasingly concerned about reports
of the presence of the Wagner Group in Mali. Their
presence can only serve to fuel existing tensions,
increase instability and violence and impede
MINUSMA’s efforts to protect civilians and provide
support to the Malian armed forces.
We are also seriously concerned by the increase
in civilian casualties as a result of attacks by armed
extremist groups in the tri-border area and welcome the
investigation of those attacks by MINUSMA.
There can be no doubt that civilians, including
children, are bearing the brunt of sustained political
tensions and insecurity in Mali. The 57 per cent
increase in violations against children documented
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/278) is
simply unconscionable.
It is also deeply troubling that violations and abuses
against women and girls, including conflict-related
sexual violence, persist at a high rate and continue to be
underreported. We urge holistic and integrated action
in order to address gender equality and, in particular, to
address the stigma of sexual and gender-based violence
and deliver justice to survivors.
We condemn the ongoing and totally unacceptable
attacks against peacekeepers by all parties.
MINUSMA must be allowed to do its job to protect the
Malian people. We call on the authorities to create a
protective environment for civilians and MINUSMA,
including by ensuring that all security actors operating
on Malian territory respect the status-of-forces
agreement and ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel.
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

We are convinced that the 2015 peace agreement
remains a critical framework for ensuring lasting peace
and stability in Mali. We are concerned about the slow
progress of implementation of the agreement and urge
all parties to accelerate action in that regard.
Finally, we call on the transitional authorities
to agree on an acceptable timeline for the return to
constitutional order and the holding of elections.
Immediate action must be taken on essential reforms
in order to facilitate a rapid return to democratic
governance and lay the foundations to guide the long
term stability and sustainable development that the
Malian people so richly deserve.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative ElGhassim Wane for his briefing on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the situation in the country.
We listened very carefully to Ms. Bouaré Samaké,
and we welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Mali in this meeting.
We are convinced that overcoming the existing
challenges in Mali will be possible only if there is
internal political stability in the country. We can see
that the transition authorities are serious about their
intention to gradually resolve the accumulated issues.
Restoring constitutional order is, of course, one
of the priority issues. During the reporting period,
we heard the Malian authorities repeat that Bamako is
committed to gradually achieving this goal. The fact
that the Malian authorities are conducting a broad
national process to prepare for elections and the fact
that they have created an extended working group for
that purposes, as well as a dialogue group to relaunch
negotiations with the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), show
their constructive approach and make it clear that they
do not have a hidden agenda.
We hope that, in the near future, the negotiations
between Bamako and ECOWAS will bear fruit. We
call upon both sides to continue dialogue and on the
mediators to continue their efforts. We share the
concern expressed by the Malian authorities with
regard to the worsening situation in the northern areas
of the country. The withdrawal of the French military
presence creates a security vacuum there.

S/PV.9012

We hear from Bamako that, as was the case last
autumn, the decision to fully withdraw Operation
Barkhane forces was taken without consultations
with the Malian side. That is a violation of the
bilateral agreements, and we think that it is
extremely irresponsible.
We also share the assessments made in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/278) with regard
to the negative consequences for the implementation
of the MINUSMA mandate and, more specifically, the
security of peacekeepers, of actions taken by France
and its European Union partners. It is also unclear what
impact the withdrawal of Operation Barkhane and the
Takuba Task Force will have on combat readiness for
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, who
are to be on the front lines of fighting terrorism in the
Sahara and the Sahel.
At the same time, I would like to recall that what
is happening in Mali and the Sahel in general is a
legacy of the intervention of Western countries in
Libya in 2011. Since then, the region has become a
target for banditry and terrorism. The fact that in 2013
our Western partners decided to lend assistance is
certainly commendable, but upon taking a closer look
of the outcome of that assistance, it is apparent that the
situation did not improve from that time until 2021. And
now, without having accomplished anything, they are
dropping Mali on a trumped-up pretext, even though
everyone agrees that it is a key country for stability and
security in the Sahel region.
As Mali is left alone to face serious cross-border
challenges, the transitional authorities are trying to
protect their people on their own and through interaction
with partners and organizations from other countries.
The Malian authorities have a sovereign right to decide
who they want to work with.
We welcome the intensification of counterterrorism operations by the Malian armed forces and the
successes in that regard, as a result of which a number
of settlements in the centre of the country have been
freed. We also pay tribute to the Malian armed forces
and express our condolences to the families of those
who perished — both military and civilian — and, of
course, the United Nations peacekeepers.
We call upon one and all to respect the memory of all
victims of terrorism. At the same time, we note that the
general staff of the Malian armed forces are committed
to human rights and international humanitarian law and

22-3116517/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

that Bamako is making efforts to investigate allegations
of human rights violations. We view the information
campaign about the so-called “Russian mercenaries” as
part of a sordid geopolitical game.
We would like to point out that cooperation between
Russia and Mali has a long history and tradition. Russia
has been extending assistance to Malian armed forces
on the basis of bilateral agreements. We are working to
increase their combat readiness and train the military
and law enforcement. There are currently approximately
200 Malian military personnel and nine police officers
being trained in Russia.
We are convinced that the stabilization of Mali is
not being helped by the regional sanctions imposed on
it, or by the restrictions imposed by a number of Western
countries. Those sanctions can serve only to compound
the already very difficult situation, not to mention
that they worsen the living conditions of ordinary
Malians, as well as that of the people in other countries
of the region. Under such conditions, Bamako and its
neighbours will find it increasingly difficult to address
the country’s challenges, chief among them terrorism.
We once again heard accusations against Russia
today, stating that we are supposedly provoking famine
in the Sahel. Let me recall that, some time ago, climate
was the culprit responsible for everything. Now it
is Russia. At the same time, Mali has had numerous
sanctions levied on it. The borders are closed, the
trade routes are blocked, and the people of the entire
region are suffering. They do not have even the most
basic income. But if we take a look at the slogans that
ordinary people are voicing when they come out to
protest, they mention Russia, but not at all in the way
that Western countries would like to see. In that regard,
I would like to note once again that the consequences
of unprecedented anti-Russian sanctions, which have
resulted in the disruption of all logistical and financial
links and chains across the world, show most countries
of the world, including those in Africa, how important
it is to defend one’s own political independence and
financial capacities so as to overcome the legacy of
colonialism and give up any neo-colonial mechanisms
that remain.
In conclusion, I would like to say that Russia
will continue to extend support to Malians, including
through collective efforts aimed at helping to stabilize
the situation in their country. At the same time, we
ask Bamako to have a balanced approach to crisis
18/23

07/04/2022

settlement. In the original version of my statement,
I was going to say that we hope that the traditional
partners of Mali will take the opportunity to reject
the logic of sermonizing, acting with superiority and
using the language of sanction and work within the
framework of respectful dialogue with Bamako to
find a way of overcoming differences. But, having
heard the discussions today, I am compelled to admit
that this is probably not something that will happen,
and the Western countries will once again fail to
heed the appeal for equitable, mutually beneficial and
respectful cooperation.
Ms. De Souza Schmitz (Brazil): At the outset,
let me thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Wane and Ms. Samaké for their briefings and
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Mali to this meeting.
Recent reports of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali document a worrying dynamic, the
persistence of high levels of violence and limited
progress in the political process. It is painful to note
that this trend was accentuated in the period covered
by the latest report (S/2022/278). Of particular concern
are accounts of serious human rights violations and a
significant increase in the number of grave violations
against children.
Brazil understands the seriousness of the terrorist
threat in the Sahel and supports the efforts of the Malian
transitional authorities in coordination with the Group
of Five for the Sahel Joint Force in the fight against
terrorist groups. But the human rights of the Malian
population must not be compromised in the name of the
fight against terrorism.
We take note of the decision by the Malian
transitional authorities to launch an investigation into
reports of summary executions of civilians in Moura
allegedly carried out by members of the Malian armed
forces with the support of foreign fighters. If the
allegations are confirmed, it is essential that those
involved answer for their actions in order to ensure that
such abuses do not happen again. It is also important
to note that the presence of foreign mercenaries on
the ground is not a solution, much less a sustainable
solution, to the security situation, and it might increase
the risk of human rights violations, illegal exploitation
of natural resources and political instability, as has
been observed in crises unfolding elsewhere.
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

The current level of violence is directly related to the
near-paralysis in the implementation of the Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali resulting from
the Algiers process. Further, the postponement of the
return to the constitutional framework and the absence
of an acceptable time frame for elections threaten the
credibility of the reconciliation process in a scenario that
becomes more complex with the presence of terrorist
groups and signs of a worsening humanitarian situation.
We encourage the transitional authorities and other
political forces in Mali to fulfil their commitments
set forth in the peace agreement and accelerate
the implementation of its provisions, such as the
reintegration of former combatants. We also support the
holding of elections within an acceptable and realistic
time frame so that the transitional period does not last
longer than necessary.
The violence of recent weeks and the stagnation
of the political process must not make us lose sight of
the root causes of the conflict. The eventual success
of stabilization and reconciliation efforts depends on
addressing Mali’s development needs, especially in the
north and the centre of the country. Accordingly, Brazil
urges the Malian transitional authorities to finalize the
comprehensive politically led strategy for the centre
and highlights the importance of expediting progress
on the development zone in the northern regions of
the country.
We urge the transitional authorities to collaborate
with the Economic Community of West African
States so that sanctions imposed in response to the
postponement of the elections may be lifted in the near
future. Mali is already suffering from the negative
impact of other conflicts on food prices, and there is
a real risk that the current situation will turn into a
humanitarian catastrophe. We must highlight the plight
of the more than 960,000 children under the age of five
who are at risk of acute malnutrition.
In June, the Council will discuss the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Recent developments, which include the withdrawal of
troops from Operation Barkhane and the Takuba Task
Force, have significantly altered the conditions on the
ground. Brazil considers that it is essential to ensure
that MINUSMA has the necessary resources to support
the implementation of the peace agreement and the
political transition, as well as to protect civilians and

S/PV.9012

support the restoration of the authority of the Malian
State in the centre.
Finally, Brazil welcomes MINUSMA’s initiatives
to improve communication with the Malian population
about its mandate and activities. MINUSMA’s strategic
communications capabilities should be strengthened
in order to maintain its ability to achieve its political
protection and humanitarian goals. Brazil welcomes the
commitment of the Secretary-General to mainstreaming
strategic communications into both planning and dayto-day operational decisions of missions, including
MINUSMA, as he stated in his Action for Peacekeeping
Plus plan.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I want to start by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Wane for his remarks today and,
through him, pay tribute to all members of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), whether civilians or in
uniform, serving the United Nations in Mali.
I also want to thank Ms. Samaké for her briefing.
Her words are a clear reminder of the invaluable
contribution women make, including in societies
affected by conflict and poverty. We must ensure the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
the pursuit of lasting peace.
I also welcome the representative of Mali to
our meeting.
Like other Security Council members, the United
Kingdom is horrified by reports indicating that
hundreds of people were killed in Moura last week
following a counter-terrorism operation carried out by
the Malian armed forces with the alleged involvement
of the Wagner Group. This needs an urgent, transparent
and impartial investigation to bring those responsible
to justice. The Government must grant MINUSMA full
access to Moura without further today.
The latest reports from Moura follow a clear trend in
a surge of human rights abuses since the Wagner Group
deployed to Mali, as also highlighted in the deeply
concerning Human Rights Watch report in March. We
know that, as of early 2022, around a thousand Russian
mercenary personnel have been stationed across Mali.
Just as the presence of Russian mercenaries drove an
increase in human rights violations and abuses in the
Central African Republic last year, we fear we are now
seeing the same in Mali. This underlines the extent

22-3116519/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

of Russia’s malign activity globally, which serves
to damage efforts to address peace and security in
contexts beyond Ukraine.
With the threat to communities in Mali growing, it
is vital that MINUSMA be able to carry out its human
rights tasks. We thank MINUSMA for its continued
efforts to investigate, document and report on all
allegations. We encourage the publication of human
rights findings in full and at the earliest opportunity.
We note with concern the increasing restrictions
imposed by the Malian authorities on MINUSMA
operations. MINUSMA’s freedom of movement and
its status-of-forces agreement must be respected. Only
last month, United Kingdom peacekeepers came under
fire from a Malian armed forces’ helicopter. We look
forward to receiving the outcome of the United Nations
investigation into that concerning incident as soon
as possible. We were deeply saddened to learn that
three Egyptian peacekeepers were killed last month
in improvised explosive device attacks. On behalf
of the United Kingdom, I would like to extend my
deepest sympathies.
On the political transition, the United Kingdom
continues to support the Economic Community of West
African States’ dialogue with the Malian authorities
regarding a revised timeline for elections so that the
sanctions can gradually be lifted and attention turned
towards election preparations. We recognize the
sincere desire of many Malians for substantive reform.
However, we believe that it is only through elections
and a return to constitutional, democratic rule that
long-term reform can be driven forward, with the
support of partners.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
supporting those most in need in Mali, and we
provided more than $16 million in humanitarian aid
in 2021. However, the mobilization of resources by the
international community must also be accompanied by
unimpeded, safe and sustained humanitarian access,
including in those areas that are hardest to reach.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): The
Government of Mali takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/278). I thank my brother,
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Head of the United Nations
20/23

07/04/2022

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing.
on behalf of the Government of Mali, I would now
like to respond to the Secretary-General’s report and
to the Council’s observations, to which I have listened
to carefully.
I begin with the need for a return to constitutional
order in Mali, which was mentioned by the SecretaryGeneral in his report and by several members of the
Security Council. As the Council is aware, this issue
is one of the priorities of the transitional Government,
because Malians are committed to democracy.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the
political and institutional instability that has become
chronic in Mali is rooted in poorly organized elections
and bad governance. The transitional Government is
therefore keen to make some major reforms aimed in
particular at ensuring the stability of institutions and a
better future for the Malian people. It is also necessary
to create minimum security conditions to allow for the
holding of elections.
In that respect, the Malian Government remains
committed to dialogue with the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), including on
the duration of the transition. Furthermore, the
Government of Mali calls for the immediate lifting of
the unjust, illegal, illegitimate and inhuman sanctions
imposed by ECOWAS and the West African Economic
and Monetary Union (WAEMU). In that regard, I recall
that, by an order of 24 March, the WAEMU Court of
Justice ordered a stay of execution of the sanctions
imposed by the WAEMU Conference of Heads of State
and Government.
The Government of Mali notes with regret that,
despite being notified by both Mali and the Court, and
despite the human and social impact on the population,
the Economic Community and the Conference of Heads
of State have declined to execute the order, which is
nevertheless effective immediately and not subject
to appeal.
There is reason to wonder whether this is not a policy
of double standards, motivated by a determination to
suffocate the Malian people. That attitude is influenced
by thinly veiled external agendas and pressures to
punish a people for its political choices and achieve
regime change.
On the security front, the Government continues
to intensify its efforts to recruit, train and equip the
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

Malian Defence and Security Forces, with a view
to strengthening their operational capacities. Those
actions are producing very encouraging results on
the ground.
Since December 2021, the Malian Defence and
Security Forces have continued their large-scale
offensives across the country, inflicting heavy losses
on extremist groups, including the neutralization
of terrorist leaders. Such operations have led to the
destruction of several terrorist bases, a number of
arrests and the recovery of a large quantity of war
material. They have strengthened the population’s sense
of security, leading to the return of more than 80,000
internally displaced persons to their places of origin.
We are determined to continue and intensify
those military actions, with the ultimate objective
of protecting our people and their property and
gradually re-establishing the authority of the State and
basic administrative and social services throughout
the country. That will help to create the necessary
conditions for the holding of credible and inclusive
elections. I salute all partners that support Mali in
achieving such an objective.
I would like to take this opportunity to respond
to certain members of the Council who, without
justification, accuse the Government of Mali of
utilizing a private security company, as I heard at the
previous meeting (see S/PV. 8945). I forcefully reiterate
that Mali has made no such commitment. Mali has
maintained a relationship of State-to-State cooperation
with the Russian Federation since 1960. It is thanks to
that cooperation that Mali continues to obtain military
equipment for its security and that Russian trainers and
instructors are currently in Mali to advise and train the
Malian military in the use of the equipment obtained by
Mali from the Russian Federation.

S/PV.9012

refondation in December 2021, which recommended,
inter alia, the drafting of a new Constitution that
would set up, among other things, the Senate, and the
acceleration of the process of decentralization and
deconcentration of the State. I would like once again to
salute Algeria’s active role in this and the support of the
international mediation team.
With respect to the participation of women in the
peace process, I am pleased to inform the Council that
the Government has shared a list of 15 additional women
to be included in the Agreement Monitoring Committee
and its four subcommittees. Despite the Government’s
ambitious and concrete proposals, the Agreement’s
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration/
reintegration process is experiencing some difficulties.
In this regard, the Malian Government is waiting for
the list of signatory movements to allow the reinsertion
of former combatants to begin.
With regard to the development issues addressed in
the Agreement, and contrary to the assertions made by
the Secretary-General, the Malian Government remains
committed to implementing development programmes
in the northern regions. By way of illustration, I am
delighted with the launch of the 16 projects selected
within this framework on 21 October, despite the
difficult economic situation in my country following the
economic and financial blockade decided by ECOWAS
and WAEMU. I hereby appeal to all of Mali’s partners
to contribute to the financing of this specific strategy
for development of the northern regions of Mali.

That said, Mali remains willing to cooperate with
all its traditional partners. We are open to all our
partners that are willing to help us to restore peace
and security, while respecting the sovereignty, national
unity and territorial integrity of Mali.

The Secretary-General and several members of
the Security Council have expressed concern about
the human rights situation in Mali. I would like to
emphasize that the Government remains very committed
to respecting and ensuring respect for human rights by
national and international forces alike, in accordance
with our historical values enshrined in the 1236
Kouroukan Fouga Charter of Emperor Soundiata Keita.
Until January 2012, Mali was cited as an example for
its respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

All Council members mentioned the need to
expedite implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process. I would like to emphasize how fully committed
the Government remains to its diligent and intelligent
implementation of that Agreement. This commitment
was reinforced by the Assises nationales de la

The complex crisis that we have been enduring
for 10 years and the loss of control of certain parts
of the national territory have, unfortunately created
conditions for the violation of human rights. However,
there is no deliberate will on the part of the Malian
authorities to grant impunity in proven cases of human
rights violations.

22-3116521/23

S/PV.9012

The situation in Mali

Thus, the Malian justice system is systematically
seized each time cases of human rights violations are
reported. A session of the Court of Assizes specially
devoted to cases of terrorism and serious violations
of human rights was held in Bamako in October 2021.
Previously, on 30 June 2021, the Court of Assizes
of Mopti had condemned 12 individuals accused in
connection with the Koulogon-Peul attacks, in the
Bankass district, which had caused the death of 37
people. This demonstrates the commitment of the
Government of Mali, despite the many challenges, to
sparing no effort to fight impunity. Other assize sessions
will take place this year to give appropriate follow-up
to several ongoing investigations and proceedings, in
accordance with the laws of the Republic of Mali.
It is true, however, that the security conditions on
the ground, the absence of competent State services in
certain localities and the lack of resources and expertise
in certain areas do not favour the rapid outcome of open
procedures. This is an opportunity for me to plead for
a strengthening of international cooperation with Mali
in order to help it meet the challenges in that regard, in
terms of training, equipment, expertise and adequate
funding. The Government of Mali reiterates its appeal
to its partners to help restore State authority throughout
its national territory — an essential condition for
improving the human rights situation in the country.
Regarding the ongoing military operations in the
Moura area, 17 kilometres north-east of Kouakourou in
the Djenné district of the Mopti region, it should be noted
that they follow very specific information that made
it possible to locate the holding of a meeting between
different katibats. This allowed the neutralization of
203 combatants of armed terrorist groups. After the first
hearings carried out by the national gendarmerie, those
arrested were transferred to the specialized judicial
unit, responsible for investigating terrorism cases.
Received yesterday, 6 April, by the Prime Minister,
the President of Tabital Pulaaku, the representative
association of the Peul community, underlined that
Moura was indeed a terrorist sanctuary, before affirming
bluntly that the allegations made against the Malian
Armed Forces are false. In this regard, I would like to
recall that respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law remains a priority in the conduct of
operations by our armed and security forces. The same
applies to the opening of an investigation each time
allegations are made against the Malian Armed Forces.
22/23

07/04/2022

Regarding the specific case of the Moura events and
following the allegations of alleged abuses committed
against civilians in the period from 23 to 31 March
in that area, the military prosecutor decided to open
investigations by the national gendarmerie to carry out
in-depth investigations in order to shed light on these
allegations, despite the ongoing military operations.
A judicial transport will be carried out very soon on
the site in Moura by the military prosecutor, exercising
his judicial police powers. He will be accompanied by
a forensic pathologist, a technical and scientific police
team and investigators. The public will be kept regularly
informed of the progress of these surveys, the results of
which will be made public. Pending the conclusions of
this investigation, we call on all stakeholders to exercise
restraint, to avoid any talk of massacres, allegations and
other unfounded accusations made against the Malian
Armed Forces, with an ulterior motive.
Furthermore, the Government of Mali remains
concerned about the continuing deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in Mali. The humanitarian
situation has been further exacerbated by last year’s
poor rainy season, the negative impact of ECOWAS
and WAEMU sanctions on the populations, as well as
insecurity in the central regions of the country, which
are our most productive regions. To alleviate their
suffering, the Government is working, with the support
of bilateral and multilateral partners to provide the
necessary assistance to our compatriots in situations
of vulnerability.
In conclusion, I will say that the crisis in Mali,
which has had a major impact on the stability of the
entire West African and Sahel regions, remains complex
and difficult. Its lasting resolution is the primary
responsibility of Malians. The Government of Mali
remains determined to play its full part for the return
of peace and security throughout the national territory
by using political and security levers, socioeconomic
development, justice and reconciliation.
However, the achievement of this ambitious project
requires the understanding and support of all of Mali’s
partners. That is why I would like to ask here for
the understanding of our partners and to request the
immediate lifting of the sanctions, which are affecting a
country already weakened by several years of political,
security, economic and health crisis, especially at a time
when our Malian Armed Forces are gaining confidence
and winning victories on many fronts.
22-31165

07/04/2022

The situation in Mali

The people and the Government of Mali reiterate
their appreciation and their thanks for the enormous
contribution of the United Nations to the ongoing
stabilization efforts in my country, particularly
through MINUSMA.
I pay tribute to the memory of all the victims of
this crisis — civilians and soldiers, foreigners and

S/PV.9012

Malians — who have fallen on the field of honour
in Mali.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

22-3116523/23
