OFFICIAL

RECORDS

1957th

MEETING:

30 SEPTEMBER 1976

NEW’ YORK

CONTENTS
ProvisionaI agenda (S/Agenda/l957)

P(I@)
1
. . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . . ., . , ,. . . . . . . . . . . .

Statement by the President . . . , . . . . . , . . , , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda ................................................

I

The situation in Namibia ...............................................

1

SIPV.1957

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with Figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in
quarterly Sr~ppl~~nfs
of the Qffic’itrl Recueils (,$ tlw Swrtrity Cormcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rewhti«ns
rrntl
Lkcisions
of thc Swrrrity
Corrnd.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1957th MEETING
I-Icld in New York, on Thursday, 30 Septembcr 1976, at 3 pm.
~,~e~+lellt: Mr. Mansur Rashid KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic).
pr~,~~,rt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, &IY~IIIR,
Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Social& Republics, United Kingdom
afareat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of’fanzania, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l957)
1. Adoption of the agenda

the Yemen Arab Republic and Yugoslavia, in which
they ask also to be invited to participate in the debate
without the right to vote. 1 therefore propose, in
accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote,
4. 1 shall invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they Will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when it is theit
turn to speak.

2. The situation in Namibia

Statelnenl

by the President

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like on behalf of the
Council to welcome the presence at the Security
Council table of the Foreign Minister of Remania.
Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to draw attention
to document S/12206 which reproduces the text of
a letter to the President of the Security Council from
the representative of the United States of America.

The situation in Namihia
2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisiens previously taken [/95#//1 ~/IL/ 1956th /~wti/~,~s],
l shall now invite the President and the other members
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, and the
representatives of Kenya,
M;~l;~gascar,
Malawi,
Mauritius and Morocco to participate in the Council’s
discussion without the right to vote.

6. The first speaker is the Commissioner for External
Affairs of Nigeria. 1 welcome him, and 1 invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
7. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): Mr. President, permit me
to join the speakers who have preceded me in congratulating you on your assumption of the important
and responsible office of President of the Council for
the month of September.
8. This is a momentous period in the history of
Africa. Ail over the continent, and particularly in
southern Africa, currents and cross-currents are
flowing in several directions. I believe that it would
be fundamentally defeatist if we did not accept that
these currents could be synthesized into one positive
force for the solution of the problem before us.

3- The PRESIDENT:
11~addition, 1 have received
letters from the representatives
of Algeria, Cuba,
Democratic Kampuchea,
Egypt, Ghana, Guinea,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Saudi Arabie, Sierra Leone,

9. However, these currents are gathering momentum:
some aspects are healthy. some rather ominous. OUI
sincere hope, therefore, is that this series of meetings

of the Council Will contribute in no small measure
towards consolidating
those currents most likely to
sweep us away from turbulence and lead us towards
the final solution of this problem, which has been
rightly called a plague.

the international
community
on Namibia
but for
dubious involvement in the issues of Zimbabwe. This
“good Will” and “benevolence”
of South Africa
should more logically be directed towards compliance
with these wishes.

10. The continent of Africa has indeed been bedevilled for the past three centuries by one plague
after the other: man’s inhumanity to man, exploitation
of man by man on the basis of colour, power and
imposed privilege. Once it was slavery and colonialism;
now it is the inhuman and criminal
usurpation of
power by a privileged few.

15. In its resolution 385 {1976) the Council took
definite
decisions on Namibia
and called for
specific action by South Africa. The South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the authentic
representative of the Namibian people, has called for
a number of conditions to be laid down for negotiations for independence,
self-determination
and
sovereignty: first, that SWAPO be a primordial factor
in any negotiations regarding the future of Namibia;
secondly, that there should be supervision and control
by the United Nations; thirdly,
that South Africa
should release all Namibian political prisoners. In their
magnanimity, SWAPO and all African States directly
seized of this problem have not insisted on other
conditions already determined by the United Nations
-namely,
the withdrawal of South African troops and
the predetermination
of a date for independence and
SO on, before a meeting could be held with South
Africa.

1 1. Suffice it to recall the Council’s debate in January
of this year and resolution 385 (1976), which called for
the application by South Africa of all the legal, human
and moral values which the international
community
holds dem in determining
the future of Namibia.
Colonialism
is anachronistic and unacceptable.
The
usurpation of the United Nations mandate by the
Vorster régime is even more unacceptable.
In their
performance Vorster and his racist régime in Namibia
have been completely oblivious to their responsibilities
and obligations and have been unresponsive
to the
wishes of the international community.
12. It is hardly necessary for me to attempt to evoke
here the enormity of the evils of the particular
situation we are concerned with today. After all, this
body, as well as the General Assembly,
has been
seized of the problems of Namibia since 1946. Thirty
years! We need to celebrate our achievements!
13. The recent scenario, in a nutshell, is as follows.
In 1967, almost 10 years ago, the General Assembly
in all solemnity-but
with innate hypocrisy on the part
of many-pronounced
itself on and established the
Council for Namibia. It appointed the United Nations
Commissioner
for Namibia, charged with administering Namibia
following the termination
of the
Mandate of racist South Africa over that Territory.
By some classic exercise in see-saw diplomacy
braced with inconsistency, we continue to take decisions and refuse to implement
them. This is not out
of moral weakness. It is because of the total lack of
morals in many of us. We have all contributed to these
phantom United Nations institutions in a manner that
reflects a unique exercise in hypocrisy-or
is it selfdeceit? On the other hand, we continue to take no
practical steps to pressure South Africa out of business
in Namibia.
14. In January of this year, when the Security Council adopted its resolution 385 (1976), my Government
thought that we were at last all determined
to apply
the final pressure to accomplish the objectives of the
international
community in Namibia. This we thought
was the umpteenth but final resolution.
We regret
to note that today we are back to appeasement and
to glorifying and according respectability to the Vorstei
régime, not for moves towards meeting the wishes of

16. But what has been South Africa’s response to
these requests? An independence forecast for December.1978-of
course, as Vorster’s Government put it,
only “with reasonable certainty”,
whatever that is
supposed to mean, and an expression of, and here
1 quote again, “a firm desire to maintain South West
Africa as a unit” [S//?/SO, tr~ne.r]. This, we all
realize, is camouflage for the perpetration of the plan
to maintain Namibia as a part of the South African
commonwealth.
17. 1s this really the kind of response the Council
deserves? Even South Africa’s more moderate critics
have viewed this latest statement of intention as very
much less than a modest step forward.
18. In the mean time, business goes on as usual in
Namibia. South Africa continues to consolidate ils
military presence, especially along the Caprivi Strip
close to the Angolan-Zambian
borders. Regular incursions are made into Zambia, as is well known to this
Council. In Mal-ch 1976, the illegal administration
condemned two Namibian patriots to dent11 and passed
various prison sentences on others. Barely four days
ago the United Nations Council for Namibia heard
from MI-. Bill Anderson a report on some of the
atrocities and inhuman treatment of the defenceless
people of Namibia.’
19. Another grave concern of the Government of
Nigeria bears on South Africa’s militarization
of
Namibia, a fact well documented by Comrade Sam
Nujoma in his very noble and restrained statement
before the Council two days ago [/YShth 111wti~~~1.
More particularly, we deplore the use of Namibia DIS
a front-line position for aggression against neighbouring
African countries.

20, Nigeria continues to uphold its policy that the
,lo,rt,j;l/l~,~ of the South African rncist régime in any
settlement in southern Africa is suspect. Judging by
,,a,. own decisions in the Council, the South African
régime, which has illegally occupied the Territory,
htrs ao right in any way to influence the destiny of
Namibia or to interfere with the exercise of the right
,,f self-deterrnination by the people of Namibia. The
cnly matters for discussion with that régime are the
aa&llities for the termination Of itS illegal occupation
r,ad for its total withdrawnl frorn the international
Territory of Namibia.

Namibia. We have called for basic action to pressure
South Africa into yielding to universaI values of human
dignity and human rights. South Africa is the prop
of all the evils and problems of southern Africa. We
know that what we have called for is a matter of
right in Namibia. I do not need to recall this. Yet,
we do not demand much. All we wish for is the
recognition of SWAPO as a primordial element in any
negotiation on Namibia; the release of illegally held
national leaders by the usurper régime; the recognition of the supervision and control by the United
Nations of the processes of self-determination
by all
the people of Namibia and the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of the State of Namibia.

21, We recognize red herrings. We Will not accept
any dialogue with the racist regime of South Africa
without its renouncing the policy of (/p(/l’t/~oi~/ in
Namibia. We refuse to yield to any attempt to pull the
waol over OUI’ eyes. The racist régime of South Africa
canaot, on the one hand, prelend to contribute
tawards a settlement in Zimbabwe while, on the other
hand, it ignores the realities of Namibia and continues to consolidate its r~p~rrthcitl system in that
Territory, which it continues to occupy illegally.

26. The deadline of 31 August this year given for
South Africa to comply with resolution 385 (1976)
is past. The response of the Pretoria régime-through
the mockery of a constitutional
conference in
Windhoek-is
an insult to the international
community. It is not worth commenting on here, as we
all know the facts already. We must now move
forward in the spirit of resolution 385 (1976), in the
absence of any indications of Pretoria’s wish to
respond to the demands of the Council.

22, While we debate Namibia

here, bantustanization,
theapogee of theql(/1’t/rtJil/ system, continues unabated
in South Africa and in Namibia. Six to seven million
blacks have already been forcibly moved from their
normal abodes into 200 scattereed locations in South
Africa that Will be constituted into about eight Bantustan states. Nineteen million owners of the land Will
in this process lose their citizenship to about 3.5 million
whites and Will be settled in 13 per cent of the land.
We must not allow our attention to be diverted from
these realities of the situation in southern Africa.

27. In this connexion, we believe it is time to consider introducing mandatory sanctions against South
Africa. In addition, in the face of the escalation of the
state of war in southern Africa, Nigeria totally
endorses the view universally held in the United
Nations that the situation in Namibia constitutes a
threat to international peace and security and that the
Security Council must exercise all its responsibilities
in this regard within the framework of Chapter VII
of the Charter.

23. While we deliberate here, we are certain that
many more innocent children are meeting their death
at the hands of well-trained but unfortunately bigoted
so-called officers of the Iaw in South Africa.

28. We on our part are determined to give every
possible support to SWAPO in its heroic struggle
to exercise its right to self-determination
and to
achieve genuine independence. On this, there cannot,
and never Will, be a compromise.

24. 1 cannot end this statement without recognizing
the dL;nrn~*k~.s undertaken by certain Western commaaities, particularly by the United States Secretary
af State, MI-. Henry Rissinger. As 1 stated earlier,
aad on the basis of experience SO far, my Government
bas no confidence in any dialogue with Vorster,
Rawever, it is not my intention to prejudge any
diplomatie initiative taken by any Government in the
Pursuit of its own national policies and interests. We
wacld wish to see these bilateral initiatives falling
within the ambit of United Nations resolutions and not
leading to the emasculation
of United
Nations
authoritY and prestige. Put simply, my Government
will support such initiatives
only as long as they
reiaforce the resolutions and decisions of this international forum and do not go back on them. We wait to
be Proved right or wrong.

29. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the next
speaker, 1 would like, on behalf of the Council, to
welcome the presence at the Council table of thd
Foreign Ministers of Japan and Guyana,
30. The next speaker is the representative of the
Yemen Arab Republic, whom 1 invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
31. Mr. SALLAM (Yemen): Mr. President, it gives
me great pleasure and it is a great honour to extend
to you, on behalf of my delegation and on behalf of
the Arab Group, which my country, Yemen, has the
great honour of representing as Chairman for the
month of September, my warmest congratulations
on the assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of September. 1 should like to tel1 you
how proud the Arab Group feels at seeing you
presiding over the Council at this very difficult time.

2s* As We see it, the Securjty Council js faced with
an iaescapable challenge to its authority, and must
act to discharge its solemn obligation to the people of
3

My delegation is particularly happy to see you, a
distinguished son of Africa, presiding over this debate
on the question of Namibia. The Arab Group is very
confident that these deliberations under your wise
guidance and leadership Will be crowned with great
success.

Arab Group, requests that the Council take into
consideration the resolution contained in document
S/12188, which was adopted by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-aligned
Countries, held in Colombo from 16 to 19 August
1976.

32. In resolution 385 (1976), the Council voted
unanimously to condemn the continued illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia by South Africa.
It condemned the illegal and arbitrary application by
South Africa of racially discriminatory and repressive
laws and practices in Namibia. It condemned the
South African military build-up in Namibia, and the
utilization of the Territory as a base for attacks on
neighbouring countries. The Council demanded that
South Africa withdraw its illegal administration
from
the Namibian Territory, transfer power to the people
of Namibia under the auspices of the United Nations,
and put an end to its policy of bantustans and socalled homelands. The Council resolution, likewise,
called for free elections in Namibia under the supervision and control of the United Nations,
and
demanded that South Africa comply fully with the
provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights; release all Narpibian political prisoners; and
accord unconditionally
to ail Namibians currently in
exile for political reasons full facilities for return to
their country without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation or imprisonment.

37. We listened very carefully this morning to the
statement made in the General Assembly by Mr. Kissinger, the United States Secretary of Stateaz The
Arab Group welcomes all sincere and genuine initiatives towards attaining the self-determination
and
independence of Namibia. The South African régime
Will never heed the appeal of mankind unless it is
denied the collaboration of some States which give it
a false sense of security. Being God’s most intelligent
but not noblest creature, man, throughout his long
history, has been mentally occupied with his instinctive behaviour, the domination and subjugation of
other species, as well as his own. It is only through
an Organization like this, and through the implementation of its aims and Princip]es, that man cari establish
and enjoy a world order of genuine peace based on
equity, justice and human dignity.
38. Mr. WILLS (Guyana): Mr. President, may 1 say
first of all how pleased 1 am to address the Council
at a time when you are President for the month of
September. Your guidance of our deliberations based
on your vast experience Will, 1 feel sure, be an asset
in relation to the present item on the agenda. May
1 also be permitted to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Abe of Japan, for the able manner in which
he presided over the Council’s deliberations during
the month of August.

33. None of those demands has been met SO far.
On the contrary, the racist régime of South Africa
bas manipulated all its power to remain in Namibia,
despite the General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, and despite its condemnation
by the
world community.

39. There is no continent on the globe where there
are two internationally
condemned illegal régimes,
no continent, that is, except Africa. This CounEil
today is faced with one of the most blatant examples
of disregard for internationally accepted opinion since
the end of the Second World War. Despite our manY
resolutions and our many exhortations,
the illegal
occupation of Namibia by the racist minority régime
in South Africa continues. African nationalism bas
won outstanding victories in the last decade, and now
has successfully reached the Cunene and the Limpopo.
There has been a contraction of the boundaries of
the racists. The valiant people of Namibia and Azania
have become the front line of resistance to crprrrlhcid. The catalogue of oppression in Namibia is cruel
and long. We have corne to the point where the
wcurtkampts in South Africa consider the land to be
their Sudetenland and where the grandfather of the
late Hermann Goering decimated the Herero tribe
and reduced its members from 85,000 to 15,000 in one
savage campaign. The victims of the raging on the
continent of Africa are not limited to its present-daY
inhabitants. The assault on freedom on the continent
of Africa is the concern of lovers of freedofl
everywhere.

34. The military buildup of the South African racist
régime in Namibia and the eternal tribal talks in
Windhoek, which are intended only to divide Namibia
into many tribals States under hand-picked
tribal
puppets, are new manifestations of the real intention of
the Pretoria régime to perpetuate its occupation of
Namibia.
35. The text of the statement issued on 18 August
by the so-called ConstitlJtional
Committee
of the
South West African Constitutional
Conference in
Windhoek [S//Z/SO, CIIIIIPX] reaffirmed the declaration
of intent whereby December 1978 could be fixed as
the date of independence for Namibia. That statement made no mention of SWAPO as the sole representative of the Namibian people, and did not even
approach the requirements for genuine self-determination based on free elections under United Nations
supervision and control.
36. It is therefore essential that the Council, with a
view to implementing its resolutions, take the necessary measures provided by the United
Nations
Charter. The delegation of Yemen, on behalf of the
4

40, We who sit around this table and have had
occasion to discuss this problem trt/ ir$i/ritu/ll-and
1 may say, td ~r~~~~.sc~~m--areall agreed on the objectives, South Africa is trespassing in Namibia and
must go. Namibia must achieve independence as a
uaitary State and must not be fragmented and balkanized into capricious and whimsical geographical
divisions based on false interpretations of archaeology
and of history. Where we do differ is on the question
cf what tactics are to be used and what strategies
are t. be devised to achieve these objectives.

reahzation of freedom in southern Africa. The Lusaka
Manifesto4 posited peaceful negotiations where such
negotiations could be meaningful and likely to produce
resuhs. In the alternative, armed resistance would be
pursued until the achievement of final victory.
44. Speaking before the Council on Tuesday, 28 ,September [1956th mvtirr,y], the President of SWAPO,
Comrade Sam Nujoma, reaftïrmed the very reasonable
conditions under which the liberation movement is
prepared to negotiate the future of Namibia. SWAPO
is willing to talk with South Africa on the transfer
of power in Namibia. SWAPO insists that these talks
must be held under the auspices of the United Nations.
SWAPO demands that Namibian political prisoners
languishing in the fascist torture cells must be
released before any discussions cari be initiated. And
finally, SWAPO demands the commitment that the
armed forces of South Africa be withdrawn from the
illegally occupied international Territory of Namibia.
The Guyana delegation endorses and supports these
demands made on behalf of the Namibian people by
SWAPO.

41, In January 1976, the Council adopted resolutien 385 (1976), which resolved, inter uliu, that South
Africa should end forthwith its policy of bantustans;
release aIl Namibian political prisoners, including a11
those imprisoned OI detained in connexion with
effeaces under so-called security laws; abolish the
application of racially discriminatory
and politically
repressive Iaws and practices, and accord unconditionally to all Namibians
currently in exile fat
poktical reasons full facilities for return to their
country without any attendant risk of detention,
arrest, intimidation or imprisonment.
Above ah, we
decided to remain seized of the matter and to meet
on or before 31 August 1976 in order to review South
Africa’s compliance with the terms of that resolution
and to consider appropriate
measures under the
Charter, should intransigence and obduracy continue.

45. It is in this context that Guyana sees a potential
in the recent efforts of the Secretary of State of the
United States to prevent a bloodbath in southern
Africa and to enlist in the interests of justice and
freedom the possibility of an acceptable negotiated
solution. We, however, recognize that when dealing
with an intransigent tyrant, the use of the sword
bas often induced a climate favourable to negotiation.
The tragedy in southern Africa is that the racists.
have never yielded an inch or an eh without a
considerable expenditure in blood. We in Guyana
have no confidence that any dialogue with Vorstei
would reach a tneaningful result. Past experience has
led us to this position of bitterness. My delegation
hopes that the alternative option under the Lusaka
Manifesto, reaffirmed at Dar-es-Salaam in 1975, might
yet not be fully exercised. No right-thinking person
wishes to pursue violence for its own sake. However,
very littie time remains. It may well be that the period
for debate is closed and that we have renched the
stage where, as Thomas Paine noted in 1776, “arms,
as the last resource, decide the contest”.

42. In the mean time, the racists in Pretoria continued a posture of constitutional
advance in a socalled conference at Turnhalle. This slim gesture to
international pressure has been rightly condemned
not only by SWAPO, the legitimate representative of
the people of Namibia, not only by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, but also by all those States
which hold dear the right of the Namibian people to
pursue its destiny as a free people in a unitary
State. Thus, this Council’s modest and reasonable
ProPosaIsfor action on the part of the illegal occupiez
&rd trespasser have been met with non-compliance,
non-co-operation and arrog:mt contempt.
43, The South African intentions in Namibia have
the merit of being constant and determined. In 1964,
the Odendaal Commission” recommended the division
of Namibia into bantustans based on the concepts of
ethaicity which dictate the perceptions of Pretoria.
From this they have never varied, they have nevei
wavered, and their recent activities nt Turnhalle are
basedon this assumption. With deliberate design, they
bave, however, also held that the Caprivi Strip must
sot he responsible to the authorities in Windhoek but
must he directly responsible to the Government
in
Pretoria. This, of course, puts a premium on militarism
krndbetrays the intention to remain a permanent threat
t” Pe:rce in the area. My delegation bas never been
strtisfied with the /X)/I~/ fr,/rs of the South African
régime in its alleged attempts at co-operation for a
sokJtion in Namibia.
At a momentous
meeting at
Lusaka in 1969, a strategy was outlined for the

46. The Council must now maximize its use of the
little time that, as 1 said, remains. It must crown its
efforts, made over long years on behalf of the people
of Namibie, by endorsing the recommendations. put
forward by SWAPO and applying those provisions of
the Charter which would make a reality of those
proposaIs. The disadvantaged people of Namibia cari
hardIy
wait any longer. That is our task; those are our
obligations.
47. Guyana believes that liberty has no substitute and
that freedom has no frontier. We are committed to
making our contribution in the Council. It is a commitment that we are taking very seriously, and we are
very honoured and pleased to be able to take part in
this debate today.
5

48. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. 1 invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

own interested purposes to conduct a virulent,
malicious and completely biased campaign in regard
to the Territory.”

49. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Allow me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. We
are convinced that your persona1 abilities and talents
have been and Will be a great asset for the Council
in discharging its duties. Allow me also to express
our thanks, through you, to all the members of the
Council for having made it possible for us to present
Egypt’s position on the very important
question
which is now before the Council.

54. With reference to South Africa’s attitude to positions taken by the Unired Nations, the South African
letter stated:
“On the question of South Africa’s withdrawal
from the Territory according to the wishes of the
inhabitants, my Prime Minister stated: ‘We do not
occupy the Territory. We are there because the
peoples of the Territory want us there. We do not
force ourselves upon the peoples of the Territory
and in this regard we take cognizance only of the
wishes of the peoples of South West Africa.’ ”

50. The Council is meeting once again to considel
the question of Namibia. The purpose of its meeting
this time is to review South Africa’s compliance with
the terms of resolution 385 (1976), which was
unanimously
adopted at the end of the Council’s
debate on Namibia in January 1976. The terms of that
resolution are well known to all of us; it is equally
well known to everyone around this table whether
the racist régime of South Africa has in fact complied
with any of those terms.

55. In other parts of that letter the representative of
the ~rptr~h~~itl régime had the audacity to boast that
South Africa had never been a colonial Power.
56. That was the response of the racist régime of
South Africa to the Council’s debate on Namibia in
January 1976. It was crystal clear that South Africa
had no intention whatsoever of changing its longstanding policy of challenging the United Nations and
fiouting its resolutions.

SI. But before going into’ the provisions of that
resolution, one may wonder whether it was realistic
to cherish any hope and expect from the racist régime
of South Africa any degree of compliance with a
Council resolution. The first response from the South
African régime was quite significant in that respect
and was evident from the outset in the debate
preceding the adoption of the resolution. lt was contained in a letter from the representative of South
Africa to the Secretary-General, dated 27 January
[S/llY48 lf/l(/ Add./]. With the Council’s permission,
l should like to quote from that letter.
52.

57. What was the response of the racist régime of
South Africa to resolution 385 (l976)? It was a statement dated 18 August 1976 [S//Z/SO, ~~II/Io.Y], published
at Windhoek by the so-called Constitutional
Conference, calling for the establishment
of a puppet
régime in Namibia under the guise of a new constitution and for a fake independence by the end of
1978.
58. No one was fooled by that thinly veiled trick
aimed at getting around clear and unequivocal United
Nations decisions and conditions for the genuine
liberation and inde’pendence of Namibia.
The SOcalled proposals of the trptrrtlwid
régime were rejected
by the African and non-aligned countries, and by the
United Nations Council for Namibia. In the introduction to his report on the work of the Organization,
the Secretary-General
has stated the following in
connexion with those so-called proposals:

On the issues of law, the letter stated:

“It is conveniently forgotten that there is no
legally binding instrument or determination
giving
the United Nations a right of supervision of the
administration over the Territory. Nor is there any
legaily binding decision giving the General Assembly
or the Security Council the right to impose its Will
on the administration
of the Territory or on the
peoples of the Territory.
Neither the General
Assembly nor the Security Council cari arrogate to
themselves such a power.”
53. With regard to United Nations supervision,
South African letter stated:

“1 feel obliged. to say... that it is a matter of
regret that these proposals fall far short of the
essential conditions stipulated by the United Nations
and do not, therefore, constitute an adequate
response to the needs of the situation. At this late
hour it is essential that South Africa co-operate
fully with the United Nations in resolving this
matter to the satisfaction of the people of Namibia
and of the international community.“”

the

“The South African Government does not recognize and has never recognized any right on the part
of the United Nations to supervise the affairs of the
Territory.
Moreover, the Government
cannot be
expected to agree to United NationS supervision of
any electoral process as long as the majority of
Members of the United Nations continue for theit

59. If there is still need to review the developments
during the last nine months as to the compliance
of the racist régime of South Africa with the provisions of resolution 385 (1976). it is no secret to anybody
6

t,,al net ;, Sing/e provision of that resolution bas been
implen,ented by South Africa. lt sttll continues its
of Namibia.
lt continues
to
il&]] occupation
milit;irize the Territory
of Namibia and to utilize it
in t, base for its aggression and military incursions
African
countries.
Zambia’s
agsinst neighbouring
co,-,-,plaintto the Council last JUly
[s//2/47]
is still
f,.& in the minds of a]! of US. The racist régime of
South Africa continues to resort to its brutal methods
of racial segregation in Namibia, persecution assassination of freedom fighters, and torture of innocent
wnmen and children. In the United Nations Council
for Namibia we heard, only a feW &I)fs ago,’
a mOSt
a formel
shocking accouru by Mr. Bill Anderson,
memberof the armed forces of South Africa stationed
in Namibie, who wus an eyewitness
of those brutal
practices and who informed the Council for Namibia
ilbout the collaboration between the racist régime of
South Africa and Israel.

Non-Aligned
Countries in Colomboh which, called
upon the Council to live up to its resolution 385
(1976) and, in the event of the non-compliance
of
South Africa with the provisions of that resolution,
to consider appropriate measures, including recourse
to C%apter VII of the United Nations Charter,
64. 1 should like to conclude my statement by quoting
from the speech delivered by President Sadat at the
Conference I have just mentioned:
“The second case is that of the struggle of the
African people against the racist minority régimes
in Zimbabwe, South Africa and Namibia. Certainly
the escalating struggle of the ,brotherly
African
people which are carrying the burden of direct
confrontation
with these terrorist-racist
régimes
should be met with a definite commitment on our
side to support the right of our brothers in those
territories to a decent free life. Unless the aggressors
feel that the non-aligned coontries’ denunciation of
their attitude Will be translated into action and
political and military measures, they Will think that
they cari continue with their aggression without
having to pay the price for it,”

60. South Africa is still going on with its sinistei
plan aimed at dismantling the unity of the people of
Namibia and breaking up the territorial
integrity of
Namibia through the sa-called constitutional
talks,
where it dreanis of using its puppets as a caver to
perpetuate its domination
over the Territory
of
Namibia.

65. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

61. The Security Council’s inability to take effective
measures up till now against the racist régime of
South Africa bas encourage&
and Will no doubt
encourage, that régime to continue its oppression of
the people of Namibia, and therefore Will prolong the
suffering of the Namibian people in their struggle
for freedom. In such circumstances
the struggle of the
African people in Namibia Will continue under the
leadership of SWAPO,
the authentic
liberation
movement of the Namibian
people. Their struggle
Will continue until they achieve their freedom and
getrid of the illegal occupation of the aptrrtheitl
régime
andattain théir rightful independence,

66. Mr. RAHAL
(Algeria) (i,ltP,prPlnfion
,fhm
Frcnc~h): 1 should like first of all to express my
pleasure and that of my delegation at seeing you,
Mr. President, presiding over the meetings of the
Council at a time when, once again, it is dealing with
the question of Namibia. It was particularly fitting
thal this debate, which is of such importance to the
African
countries,
should be opened under the
guidance of one of the representatives
of Africa in
the Council. But in our view it is more significant
that it is precisely a representative of northern Africa
who is presiding over a debate on a problem of
southern Africa, Of course, this is simply a reflection
of a reality which cari no longer be disregarded,
namely, the mobilization of all African countries in a
struggle which is of paramount concern to the future
and the destiny of their peoples. In that struggle, we
are familiar with the role played by the Libyan Arab
Republic and the active support which it unswervingly
gives to ah liberation movements on our continent.
You yourself, Mr. President, have participated in that
support, and the honour conferred on you of guiding
this debate is a just tribute to the militant of the past
as well as to the politician and diplomat of the
present.

62, Egypt, as an African country and as a member
of the non-aligned movement,
bas always wholeheartedly supported,
and Will continue to support,
theheroic struggle of the Namibian people to achieve
their inalienable right to self-determination
and
iadependence.
63. ‘fhe area has become an acute hot-bed of tension
and a real threat to peace in the African continent
and it is the duty of the Security Council, as the
Organ entrusted
with
the responsibility
for the
maintenance of peace and security, to act accordingly.
TheCouncil should go beyond the simple condemnatien ef the racist régime of South Africa, which has
acciJmulated a’ shameful record of condemnations
reminiscent only of Israel the racist régime’s ally and
‘“PPorter. The Council should act in a responsible
mannerby imposing effective sanctions on that international recidivist, 1 should like to refer here to the
resolution adopted by the Summit Conference of the

67. The problem of Namibia is one of the problems
which have for SO long recurred on the agenda of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council, that
we are justified in feeling that its elements are no
longer a mystery to anyone. In fact, the evolution
of this question is SO well known and there is such
7

general agreement among the members of the Council
on the key to its solution that we might well wonder
why it has been SO difficult until now to arrive at a
solution, concerning which there is no lack of Council
resolutions. These decisions have always declared the
presence of South Africa in Namibia illegal. They have
thus requested the Pretoria régime to withdraw its
administration
and its army from the Territory and to
transfer the power which it illegally exercises there
to the people of Namibia, with the assistance of the
United Nations. The future of Namibia was then to be
determined
by free elections under the supervision
and control of the United Nations.

71. We feel that this is one of the difficulties which
have complicated the search for a solution to the
Namibian problem up to now. We also feel that, by
using the close relation 1 have pointed out between
the problems of Namibia, Rhodesia and South Africa,
we could accelerate the process of a comprehensive
solution, since any progress achieved in one problern
must necessarily have repercussions on the others,
It seems that we have now embarked on this course
and, while we are certainly gratified at this, we feel
that all the efforts made should be geared towards
keeping to this course and perhaps even clarifying it
further, because we cannot over-emphasize that, in our
opinion, it would be illusory to ,try to resolve the
problem of Namibia, or that of Rhodesia, without
tackling most energetically and resolutely the problern
of the system ofoptrrtkeicl on which the South African
régime is based.

68. The Council, through its decisions and within the
framework of its responsibilities
towards the people of
Namibia, has not failed on many occasions to explain
its threefold concern: to safeguard the territorial
integrity of Namibia, which must be restered to its
people in its totality; to protect the political unity of
Namibia by refusing any measure aimed at leading to
a parcelling out of Namibia, especially through the
creation of bantustans; and, finally, to oppose any
extension in Namibia of the trprr~thei~l régime which
the long-standing
administration
of South Africa
might be tempted to establish there.

72. This analysis would be very naive if it did not
also make mention, among the elements which add
to the complexity of the question of Namibia, those
which are based on considerations or interests of a
strategic, political, economic or commercial
nature
and which introduce extra-African factors in to any
future development
of the situation.
We do not
want to recall once again the links which exist between
South Africa and the great Western Powers and which
have undeniably contributed to maintaining the trpor’fheitl
régime. We have learned to our cost that international relations are determined by a balance of interests
perhaps even more than by a balance of forces.
Therefore, it should no longer be necessary for us to
wonder about the intentions
underlying
political
attitudes, but we cari no longer be fooled by them,

69. South Africa’s resistance to complying with decisions as universally approved as these does not suffice
to explain the persistence of this problem and the
difficulties which have for many years been preventing
the implementation
of a solution.
70. It must be acknowledged that, for better or for
worse, the problem of Namibia is part and parce1 of
the situation throughout
southern Africa and, in
particular, of the situation in Rhodesia and also of the
,. persistence
in South Africa of a system based on
trpartheid
and determined to ensure its survival if need
be against all the rest of Africa. The maintenance of
Namibia under the control of South Africa is part of
the defence strategy of the Pretoria régime, just as is
the consolidation
of a white racist minority régime
in Rhodesia. Any solution of the question of Namibia
necessarily has implications
with regard both to the
situation in Rhodesia and to the capacity for resistance
of the rrpcrrrlz~id system. Inversely, it is impossible
seriously to consider a solution of the Namibian
problem while ignoring thls context, in which all these
questions are placed and SO closely,related.
This has
become particularly
obvious lately, but 1 am taking
great pains to stress it precisely in order to refute the
reasoning that might be put forward by some according
to which, going from the simple to the more complex,
it would be useful to consider the different questions
separately and temporarily to set some of them aside
in order to achieve success in others. This would no
doubt be recognizing the components of a situation
which is certainly extremely complex, but it would
also be disregarding their effects on each other, which
condition their combined development.

73. The international
situation has never been SO
favourable to a solution-so
long awaited-to
the
question of Namibia. That is no doubt a result of
the struggle of the people of Namibia themselves,
who, under the leadership of SWAPO, have shown
their determination
to regain their freedom and take
their fate into their own hands. It is clear also that the
problem of Namibia is now in an entirely new context
because of the liberation of the former Portuguese
colonies, because of the progress in the struggle of the
Africans in Zimbabwe and, finally, because of the
revolutionary
movement
against rrp«rtheiti
now
developing in South Africa. The situation in southern
Africa as a whole obviously poses genuine threats to
pence in that region and in the world, because it bas
developed to a point where it could bring into plaY
factors that are much more important to the international balance. The very interests that have bec?
linked to the survival of apru~thAd
and the strengthening of the Pretoria régime are now being shaken bY
the deep changes that are on the horizon, changes
which are gaining more and more momentum.
74. SO it is not just by chance that the problems Of
southern Africa are now at the forefront of international concerns. We are following with attention and
8

a great deal of interest the initiatives of the United
States Secretary of State. Of course, they cari be
judgedonly by their reSUltS. Nevertheless, we feel that
they bave the merit of taking into account the close
link between the various problems which exist in the
regionand which, as 1 have already said, are actually
due t. the persistence of the system Of (1po/‘thcit/ in
South Africa. The success of these initiatives thus
dependson their final effeCt On the situation in South
Africa itself. This means that, in OUI’ opinion, these
effortswould be completely undermined if they were
designed
only to obtain an additional respite for the
which
l~~d~eid régime or to delay the time-limit
Pretoria must necessarily accept. In the last analysis
it is for the Africans themselves, and above all those
whoare directly concerned in these questions, to see
t. it that their true objectives are not sacrificed to
immediate but illusory advantages.

resolution 385 (1976). Thus, what the Council has
to do today is to consider how far South Africa has
implemented the decisions of the Council and, in the
event Of non-compliance to envisage the appropriate
measures to take under the Charter.
78. The situation developing in southern Africa.and
the various diplomatie activities undertaken there
cannot, in our opinion, change the significance of this
debate. On the contrary, it is through the Council’s
decisions, through the measures it Will take, that it Will
be possible to ensure the success of these initiatives,
to keep them directed towards the genuine purposes
they should pursue and to see to it that they take into
consideration all the elements of a complex situation,
a situation that it would be dangerous to approach
only through some of its parts.
79. It is, in fact, up to the Council to provide the
central impetus towards the harmonious development
of the solution of all the questions of southern
Africa, and, since in the last analysis it is on the
Pretoria régime that the decisions of the Council must
be imposed, this debate is more necessary than ever,
since it Will enable the Council to decide upon the
measures it must take in exercising the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the Charter. We therefore we
urge the Council fully to assume its responsibilities.
At a time when it should be more active and vigilant
than ever, we expect it to use its authority and all
the possibilities which Chnpter VII of the Charte1
places at its disposa1 to force the Pretoria régime
finally to implement the resolutions on the solution
to the Namibian problem which have been SO often
reaffirmed.

75. As to Rhodesia, it appears that we are moving
towardsthe convening of a constitutional
conference
that would make it possible for the African representativesand the representatives of the white minority to
workout the arrangements for establishing a system
ofgovernment by the majority. It may perhaps be as
well to recall that this is a long-standing demand of
the African countries, who made a suggestion to that
effectin the Security Council itself. As the African
countries requested, this conference Will be placed
underthe responsibility of the United Kingdom, which
Will thus again assume its prerogatives as administrating Power. If my information
is correct, ou1
colleague Ambassador Richard-who,
fortunately,
has just returned to the Council chamber-will
preside at the conferencc. Thc responsibility
just
entrusted to him is no doubt a very heavy one, but
it is an expression of the high esteem in which
Ambassador Richard is helcl. This appointment
is a
tribute to him for the qualities that we here have had
theopportunity of appreciating, and it is an honour to
the United Nations diplomatie corps, 1 should like to
digressa bit from the subject of this statement and
cxtend to him my person::l congratulations
nnd tell
him how rnuch hope we place in the success of his
task.

80. The PRESIDENT:
The .next speaker is, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya. I welcome him,
and 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
81. Mr. WAIYAKI
(Kenya): MI-. President, first
1 wish to thank you and the members of this Council
for inviting Kenya to participate in this important
debate. May 1 also express to you my delegation’s
pleasure and satisfaction at seeing you, a son Of
Africa, presiding over the Security Council when this
body is once again taking up the question of Namibia,
a country of our great continent. Libya, a country
with which we bave cordial relations, has been in the
forefront in the liberation of Africa. Your personal
experience and skill in international matters Will Il0
doubt be invaluable in the current debate.

76, %t SUC~~~S, we are sure, will bave immediate
effectsin Namibia, where everything still remains to
be done. There the United Nations still has full
responsibility, and whatever initiatives may be tnken
t0 (lefine possible solutions should not in any way
&~~Se the Organisation
from its obligations.
We
Iherefore think that the time bas corne for the United
Nations Council for Namibia and the United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia to play a more active role
in the events now taking place, and that it is up to
rhem to reaffirm their powers and their duties as
representatives watching over the interests of the
peoPle of Namibia.

Although not now a member of the COlmCil,
Kenya wishes to co-operate in this debate to help the
Council corne up with a concrete and, we hope,
immediate solution to the vexing problem of Namibia.
82.

33.

17. The purpose ol’ this series of Security Council
nle%s is clear and precise. It was defined in the

lion

Whcn
the
in N;Lmibia

Council
last met tu cliscuss the
it unnnimously ndopted
resolution

(1976)~ in paragraph
9

12 of which it decided

situn385

“to

remain seized of the matter and to meet on or before
31 August 1976 for the purpose of reviewing South
Africa’s compliance with the terms of this resolution”.
The Councii therefore has a duty to consider the
matter impartially
and to decide whether South Africa
bas complied with the various demands that were made
in that very important resolution.

conducted and supervised by the United Nations,
There is no mention by the South African authorities,
SO far as we are aware, that the so-called constitutional
talks were to lead to free elections, let alone of their
being supervised by the United Nations. This we
consider to be another violation and a rejection of
the demands made on South Africa by the Council.

84. In the view of my delegation, the Council made
five demnnds on South Africa relating to the Territory
of Namibia.

87. The third demand made on South Africa by the
Council was that it immediately
cesse applying its
racist policies of creating bantustans or the so-called
homelands in Namibia. The evidence available to us
and, 1 am sure, to members of the Council is that the
so-called talks had been aimed at preserving the
present structure of government-namely,
at keeping
the indigenous people in their tribal home areas and
the white population in the so-called military zone.
As is well known by the Council, the legislative
organ that was to emerge from those talks and, after
that, from elections based on those talks, was to
be based on representatives who were to corne from
the homelands of the various tribes in the region.
It is therefore clear that South Africa has also failed
to comply with this third demand.

85. The first of these, and probably the most important, was that South Africa take steps to effect
withdrawal from the Territory it has been ciccupying
illegally since its Mandate was terminated
in 1966.
As the members of the Council and all of us know,
South Africa has persistently refused to comply with
this demand. lndeed, the recalcitrant
behaviour of
South Africa did not begin in 1966. As the Council
Will remember, South Africa refused to comply with
the request of the Organization to place the Territory
of Namibia under the Trusteeship System that came
into effect when the United Nations was established.
This refusa1 and the administering
Power’s persistent
denial of human rights to the indigenous people of
Namibia led the Organization to seek the legal opinion
of the International
Court of Justice. The Opinion of
the Court is well known. South Africa alone disputes
it. We must therefore ask ourselves whether in the
interim period since the adoption of resolution 385
(1976) South Africa has taken steps that in any manne1
show the members of the Council that it is prepared to
withdraw from the Territory of Namibia.
In the view
of my delegation it has done nothing.
86. The Council was quite clear in its demands to
South Africa on how it was to prepare its withdrawal
from Namibia. It demanded that South Africa urgently
make a solemn declaration accepting the provisions
for the holding of free elections in Namibia under the
supervision and control of the United Nations. That
was the second demand made upon South Africa.
Kenya has followed the activities
of South Africa
relating to its responsibilities
for the Territory
of
Namibia in the time that has elapsed since the adoption of the resolution in January, and again it is a
matter of great concern and regret that we have not
seen any evidence to convince us that South Africa
bas made such a solemn declaration. In an attempt to
confuse the international
community
and to continue
manteuvering
with a view to entrenching
the supremacy of the white person in Namibia,
South
Africa conducted
the now very much publicized
so-called constitutional
talks in Windhoek.
But that
was not what the Council demanded of South Africa.
The talks, which were attended by delegates hand
picked by South Africa, were, in the view of my
delegation,
illegal, as they were organized by South
Africa,
which was itself illegally
occupying
the
Territory
of Namibia.
Moreover,
the instructions
of
thc Council were that there should be elections freely

88. The fourth demand made in this resolution was
that, pending the transfer of powers to the indigenous
people, South Africa must in spirit and in practice
compl)j fully with the provisions of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, release all Namibian
political prisoners, abolish the application in Namibia
of all racially discriminatory and politically repressive
laws and practices, and unconditionally
accord to all
Namibians currently in exile for political reasons ftlll
facilities for return to their country without risk of
arrest, detention, intimidation or imprisonment.
As is
well known, not only did South Africa bar the return
of the exiles-in
this case, the true representative of
the Namibian people, namely, SWAPO-but
it continued to harrass and arrest those people who in any
manner disagreed with the South African authorities
in the conduct of t’he so-called constitutional
talks
or opposed the continuing occupation of their land.
89. The last demand that was made on South Africa
was that it cesse to make Namibia a military base.
We had occasion to condemn South Africa for using
Namibia as a military base to attack the independent
Republic of Angola. South Africa came to the Council
ami tried to defend its position, which was, of course,
rejected. It is a matter of great concern to us that
even after the Council condemned the behaviouï of
South Africa in relation to its use of Namibia to
attack Angola, South Africa has seen fit to use lbat
same Territory as a military base to attack anothet
independent
African State, namely,
Zambia. And
Council debated, not too long ago-in
July-the
Zambian complaint against South Africa.
90. SO to sum it up, in the view of my delegation,
there is no doubt that South Africa completely defiel]
the supreme organ of the United Nations-namelY,

Some may try 10 convince the
secu&/ Coud.
council that South Africamade
a positive gesture by
announcing, through a lmy communiqué
after the
su-c~llledconstitutional talks, that independence would
begrklnted to Namibia by the end of 1978. My delegat;on refuses to accept this as compliance
in any
,,,;,,,ner with rhe demancls of the United Nations that
N;,mibia be accorded its inalienable right to move
towa& f1.111independence.
Moreover,
as I stated
earlier, the independence envisaged by this commu,,iquéclearly violated the concept of free elections and
the preservation of the lerritorinl
iilkgrity
and unity
of Namibia, as it proposes to establish bantustans,
contrery to the United Nations demands.
91, As I hope 1 have clearly shown, South Africa
h;ls net complied with the letter of the spirit of the
dcmands made by the Council in January of this year.
My delegation would
therefore
like to make the
of the
following proposals
fol the consideration
Council on the next steps that should be taken:
92, First, South Africa should, without delay, recognize the authentic representatives
of the Namibian
people-namely,
SWAPO-and
enter into negotiations with that organization, with a view to convening
a proper constitutional conference under the auspices
of the United Nations. SWAPO,
being the authentic
representative of the Namibian people, should not
just be invited to that conference, il should be involved
in its preparation. Indeed, SWAPO would act as thc
chief political party to cal1 on all the olher small
parties to close ranks SO as to present a united platform during the conference.
93. Secondly, the United Nations should, we feel,
consider sending a buffer force to Namibia to protect
the interests of the Africans,
as well as to establish
ils presence in the Territory.
We feel that this force
could be used to help supervise the organization and
conduct of the elections.
94. Thirdly, if South Africa refuses to comply with
the fïrst proposal-which,
in the view of my delega[ion, would lead to a peaceful transfer of powerthen it is incumbent on the CounciI to recommend
economic and other measures
of compulsion
that
Will oblige South Africa to comply with its decisions.
Such measures should include a complete embargo
on the sale, gift or transfer of arms and other forms of
militarY equipment to South Africa. It should also
include the cutting off of all economic tics with South
*frica. This perhaps would be difficult,
but it is a
matter that the Council should consider.

thank Mr. Sean MacBride. It is our view that he has
been a dedicated servant of the Office of the United
Nations Commissioner
for Namibia and that he has
carried Out the mandate entrusted to him by the
General assembly-namely,
p,reparing Namibia for
independence.
97. We have stated on many occasions that the
defiance by South Africa of the opinion of the in,ternational corrimunity
is eroding the authority
of the
United Nations and, if allowed to continue, will
constitute a dangerous precedent. Article 25 of the
Charter obliges all Member States to comply with the
decisions of the Council. We would therefore urge that
all countries should refrain from ,placing short-term
economic interests above human dignity and the
ideals of the Organization. 1 am confident that the
Council Will discharge its obligations and demand that
South Africa fully comply with its demands. And
1 want to observe in conclusion that any intransigent
Members like South Africa ought to be expelled from
the United Nations.
98. The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker is the
representative
of Mauritius, whom 1 invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
99. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius):
1 am happy to
report that I have received from Mr. Scranton, the
representative of the United States, a letter in which,
after consultations with Mr. Kissinger, he has replied
to the questions I raised here on Tuesday [/95&/?
n?r~/il~gj. The letter has been distributed as an officia1
document of the Council [S//2206].
100. 1 wish publicly to thank Mr, Scranton and the
delegation of the United States for having provided
me with civil answers to my civil questions. 1 consider
that the exercise of raising those preliminary questions
at an earlier stage of the debate has been constructive
ancl useful. I shall be commenting on those replies at
a later stage, and 1 am sure that all members who Will
bti participating in the Council debate on the question
of Namibia Will bear in mind and take into consideration the replies that have been provided to US by
Mr. Scranton.
The representative of Saudi
101. The PRESIDENT:
Arabia has requested
to be allowed to speak.
Accordingly,
1 shall ask him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

y& And, finally, we would cal1 on all States to give
material and moral support to SWAPO in order for it
t” wage an .intensive armed struggle to evict South
Africa from Nàmibia.

102, Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): MI-. President,
it is superfluous
for me to congratulate
YOU on
assuming the responsibility of the presidency, because
I have known you for many years, and, as they say
in Arabie, my testimony about YOU will not hold UP
in court because of mY affection for your person,
aside from your position as the representative
of
Libya.

%* Before concluding my statement, I should like to
takethis opportunity, on behalfof my Government,
to

103. 1 bave personally been seized of mandates
since 1922, 54 Years ago, and 1 shall not go into tbe

historical background of mandates. They were nothing
but colonialism in disguise,

,.

104. I had the privilege of being contacted by none
other than the Foreign Minister of South Africa,
Mr, Muller, in 1966; he wished to ascertain my views
on the question of what was then known as South
-West Africa,.and I was very candid with him, I told
him that more than 45 years had passed without
South West Africa being liberated, and at that time
I mentioned that it would be wise for his Government
to agree lo the appointment by the United Nations
of two administrators to accelerate the liberation of the
mandated Territory,
He was a reasonable man. He
toyed with the idea, but he was not the policy
formulator of his country and this encouraged me to
submit in 1967, during the special session on Namibia,
a draft resolution
calling for the appointment
of
co-ndministrators,
along with South
Africa, to
accelerate the liberation of the Territory.
105. Then a representative, whose nationality
I do
not want to mention, came up with the idea of the
United Nations Council for Namibia. He played on the
sentiments of our African brothers and they turned
their backs on me and settled for the Council for
Namibia. Then I warned South Africa, here and in
the Assembly, that it would be just a question of
several years before the struggle would begin and then
South Africa would have to accede to the demands of
the people of South West Africa, otherwise known
as Namibia.

108. If, on the other hand, Mr. Vorster or his
Government should opt for the holding of a plebiscite
to ascertain who represents Namibia, I can assure the
Council that the trouble would begin again and that
there might be a continuation
of the conflict. H,ow
da- I know!? Because I have. lived under mandates
and know how high commissioners
and their agents
act when they are in a territory which does not belong
to them. Of course they want to bring in their stooges,
who conduct plebiscites the way they choose, and
then trouble starts.
109. I do not say that those Africans who may
accompany Mr. Vorster should riot have a voice; they
should have a full voice. But, really, had there been
no SWAPO, the Mandate would have continued fol
another 50 years. Therefore, there are two parties.
Mr. Vorster, if we may say so, and SWAPO-and
Mr. Vorster is free to bring with him any Africans
who would like to co-operate with him and with
SWAPO. The alternative will be protracted Council
meetings, leading to nothing, and then innocent people
will lose their lives. That is one thing we do not
want to see.
1 IO. I am also in favour of two interested parties
who are not in the area lending their good offices
though not as Governments. They should choose from
among their nationals representatives who are known
for their integrity to work out a constitution. Somebody
suggested that gentleman who is a tower of strength,
Mr. Ivor Richard. I think he would contribute greatly
because of his integrity. I would not know who the
Americans
have of equal status with Ambassador
Richard. I mean that; I am talking seriously. We have
known Ambassador Richard for only a short time but
he has gained our confidence.
I do not say our
American friends have not gained our confidence, but
this is an election year and I do not who might be
appointed. That is a practicable solution: otherwise,
again, again and again we shall be bogged down in
interminable
bitter debates which may finally end in a
protracted struggle.

106. Now, if we are going to air our views without
getting a practicable solution, then I believe that things
may take a turn for the worse. May I humbly give
you an idea, now that I have spoken with several
persons and with my good friend the United Nations
High Commissioner
for Namibia,
an illustrious
gentleman.
I am convinced that there is a way to
accelerate the liberation of South West Africa, otherwise known as Namibia,
without further conflict,
provided that both parties are willing to collaborate,
and when I say bolh parties I mean the Government
of South Africa and SWAPO, the representative
of
Namibia.

I Il.
To sum up, therefore, may I, as an old-timer-I
am not a member of the inner circle, I am on the
ask you to consider seriously
edge of the circle-,
what I have told you from my humble experience
with mandates and those who operate them, and to
‘follow a line that, I hope, may lead to a practical and
practicable solution.

107, Succinctly, I would suggest that the SecretaryGeneral preside over an initial
meeting
between
Mr. Vorster, if he wishes, and whomever he wants to
accompany him from among the African friends of
South Africa, They would form one party. SWAP0
would form the other party. That would be an initial,
practical and practicable step: otherwise, negotiations
will be protracted and the whole affair will get out Of
Ihe hands of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly if we meet again on this question. There
should be a meeting between Mr. Vorster, or his
representative,
and SWAP0
representatives,
under
the chairmanship
of the Secretary-General,
with oUI
friend Mr, MacBride assisting and serving as catalyst.

112. I thank you, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Council for having afforded me the
opportunity
to speak again on this subject, in the
hope that a draft resolution incorporating
some of
those ideas will emerge.
I 13. The PRESIDENT:
The list of speakers has no%’
been exhausted, but, before I adjourn the meet&%
I should like, in my capacity as.representtitive
of the
LIBYAN
ARAB REPUBLIC,
to take this opportunity
12

t. thank all members of the Council for the excellent
co-ope~&n they have given me in the course of the
month of September and also for the courtesy they
bave shown me, not only in the public meetings but
alsoduring ouï numerous contacts, consultations and
infoimal meetings.

Assembly it could not pass because it lacked one vote
-one vote only. At that time the pressure of the big
Powers, of the Big Brother-and
at that time there
were many Big Brothers-on
the small nations was
tremendous and the vote was very tight, and just qc?, ...
smal! country changed its vote in favour of the draft
resolution and voted against it in the General
Assembly. It was Haiti, a small country linked to
Africa and Haiti’s vote, cast by Ambassador SaintLot in the General Assembly, which changed the
history of Libya at that time, It was just not the history
of Libya but the whole struggle in Africa. At that time
Libya was the least developed country in northern
Africa. That decision was a very important one in
provoking and accelerating the fight for liberation
in North Africa and throughout the whole continent
of Africa. SO one vote cast by a representative of a
small country changed history at that time. For that
reason we said that we small cou.ntries cari play a role
in the international Organization because we have the
proof. We have learned it from our own history.

114, When 1 spoke for the first time in the Council,
in January of this year, I said:
“We corne to the Security Council without any
pretensions. We know that the Libyan Arab
Republic is a small, developing country. History
teachesus, however, that small nations cari and must
play a very important role in international
politics
and within the Organization.
Especially now, in
the so-called era of détente, they cari play their role
and influence events individually
or collectively, in
spite of the fact that they are threatened, pressed
and blackmailed by some big Powers.” [187Oth
nmting, pa/n. 13 I t ]
115. We know that not everyone welcomed OUI
election to the Council or our assumption of the
presidency for this month. The biased mass media,
theevil forces of zionism and of imperialism attacked
Libya on the occasion of our assumption of the
presidency of the Council. But we are sure that the
supportth$ we enjoyed from members of the Coimcil
and from the membership of the United Nations on
our election is proof that the pretensions and accusations of these forces of evil were not true.

117. 1 have just mentioned Ambassador Saint-Lot,
a great man from Haiti, who passed away some days
ago. On this occasion 1 offer my condolences to his
nation and his family on behalf of the grateful people
of Libya.

116. Also, when 1 spoke about the role of small
nations in history and in our Organizalion,
1 said that
because we Libyans have learned from our own
experience. In 1949, our cause wus brought before the
United Nations. There was an agreement between
some European Powers to delay the independence
and unity of Libya. The decision passed through the
FiystCommittee. When it arrived before the General

13
