A/66/PV.76

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

76

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 6 December 2011, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Qatar)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Cancela
(Uruguay), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/66/70 and
Add.1 and Add.2)
Recommendations of the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group to study issues
relating to the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction and Co-Chairs’ summary
of discussions (A/66/119)
Report on the work of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on
Oceans and the Law of the Sea at its twelfth
meeting (A/66/186)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process for
Global Reporting and Assessment of the State of
the Marine Environment, including
Socio-economic Aspects (A/66/189)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.21)

(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementations of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Report of the Secretary-General (A/66/307)
Draft resolution (A/66/L.22)
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): Allow me, at the outset, to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive reports on ocean affairs and the law of
the sea, contained in documents A/66/70 and its
addenda. We also wish to thank the Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea, as well as the
Secretariat, for their valuable support in the
consideration of issues related to the law of the sea
during this session.
Indonesia continues to participate actively in the
consideration of issues related to the law of the sea,
because that law provides the regulatory framework for
the growing number of human activities in the marine
environment and thereby affects the political, strategic,
economic and other important interests of States. The
law of the sea is also one of the oldest parts of the law
of nations, having developed through the practice of
States over the centuries. It was carefully crafted when
the international community adopted the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in 1982.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-62512 (E)

*1162512*

A/66/PV.76

With regard to navigation and maritime security, I
would like to reiterate Indonesia’s commitment to
suppressing armed robbery and piracy on the high seas
adjacent to waters under our national jurisdiction.
Indonesia and littoral States cooperate in continuing to
work on that concern in the Straits of Malacca and
Singapore. We are pleased at the progress that we have
made so far, as incidents have continued to decrease.
I now turn to the situation off the coast of
Somalia, with particular reference to Security Council
resolutions that address the issue of armed robbery and
piracy in that area. We have always believed that the
authorization that those resolutions provide does not
infringe on rights, obligations or responsibilities under
international law, including rights and obligations
under the Convention on the Law of the Sea. In that
regard, that authorization is not considered as
establishing customary international law.
However, Indonesia remains concerned about the
threat that piracy poses to international navigation,
security and the economic development of States in the
Gulf of Guinea. It is our hope that the full authority of
Security Council resolution 2018 (2011) can be
brought to bear on the maritime insecurity in that
region.
This year, we had an opportunity, during the
informal consultation process preceding this meeting,
to discuss quite extensively the issue of marine
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Those deliberations have helped us to better
comprehend the responsibilities of States seeking to
generate economic benefits from the ocean and to fully
understand the legal implications of exploring living
resources of areas beyond national jurisdiction.
We are pleased that we were able to chart a
realistic course of action in that regard during the
informal consultative process. Although we still
confront the proper applicability of the existing legal
framework, we should emphasize the integrity of the
1982 Convention so that any new legal regime draws
on its basic norms. Only through that process can we
strengthen the integrity of the Convention.
The devastating impact of oil spills from offshore
exploration and exploitation activities that damage the
marine environment and the ecosystem in coastal
States is of great concern to us, because such
occurrences inflict a great setback on the
socio-economic development activities and prospects

2

of those States. Indonesia is of the view that it would
be prudent to see such incidents as a wake-up call to
strengthen the international regulatory regime so that it
will be able to respond adequately to similar events in
the future. While a comprehensive regime covering the
prevention, liability and compensation issues of oil
pollution damage from ships has already been
developed by the International Maritime Organization,
no existing instrument covers pollution damage from
offshore exploitation and exploration activities.
In our view, learning from such incidents, it
would certainly be timely for the international
community to consider how best to address the legal
lacunas of liability and compensation issues connected
with transboundary pollution resulting from offshore
exploitation and exploration activities. In that regard,
the Convention on the Law of the Sea has established,
in particular, general terms of commitment to advocate
international rules, regulations and procedures to
prevent, reduce and control pollution from such
activities in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Moreover, States have the obligation to cooperate
in developing international law relating to
responsibility and liability for marine pollution cases.
Reflecting
on
the
context
of
international
accountability, however, we note that, to date, there are
still no international regulations or instruments
dedicated specifically to dealing with issues involved
in transboundary offshore oil spills. Indonesia believes,
therefore, that there is a compelling need to establish
an international regime to address issues of liability
and compensation for transboundary pollution and
damage resulting from offshore exploration and
exploitation activities.
With regard to fisheries, we acknowledge the
importance
of
establishing
integrated
ocean
management to ensure the long-term use and
sustainable development of the sector. The application
of ecosystem and precautionary approaches to ocean
management will strengthen the fulfilment of that
objective.
Let me turn to the issue of illegal, unreported and
unregulated (IUU) fishing and the impediment to the
sustainable management of fisheries that such illegal
activities cause. As States seek ways of making a
greater impact in addressing those issues, Indonesia
reiterates that the current responses are inadequate,

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

especially as most of the measures being taken are
voluntary.
It is important to pay close attention to the
transnational nature of IUU fishing, which presents an
unprecedented challenge to conventional methods for
managing sustainable fisheries. In that connection, it is
the view of Indonesia that the study on transnational
organized crime in the fishing industry, which was
conducted by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, is an important and helpful contribution to this
discussion.
Lastly, with regard to consultations, we wish to
underline the importance and value of the United
Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on
Oceans and the Law of the Sea for discussions of ocean
affairs within the United Nations system.
Before concluding, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the coordinators of the draft
resolutions on the oceans and the law of the sea and on
sustainable fisheries (A/66/L.21 and A/66/L.22),
Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly
Koehler of the United States, for their able leadership
and excellent contribution to the work on the two texts
before us today.
Ms. Kok Li Peng (Singapore): My delegation is
pleased to address the General Assembly on agenda
item 76, “Oceans and the law of the sea”. I join my
friend from Indonesia, Mr. Yusra Khan, in thanking the
Secretary-General for the comprehensive reports
contained in document A/66/70 and its two addenda.
We also thank the coordinators of the two draft
resolutions before us today (A/66/L.21 and A/66/L.22),
Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil and Ms. Holly
Koehler of the United States. We record our
appreciation to the Director and staff of the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for their
assistance in supporting delegations’ work on those
drafts.
Singapore’s long-standing commitment to the law
of the sea is well known. We are a small island State
with significant maritime interests. We are also one of
the three littoral States of the Straits of Malacca and
Singapore. The Straits are Singapore’s economic
lifeline. But the Straits are also a major international
shipping route of long-standing importance. Roughly
90 per cent of global trade is carried by sea, and about
half of that passes through the Straits of Malacca and
Singapore. It is therefore in the interest of all States

11-62512

that we continue to preserve the freedom of navigation
and passage rights through these and other waters, as
guaranteed under the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea.
There is no better safeguard of the world’s
maritime and marine interests than the Convention. It
is a testament to the Convention’s fine balance of those
often-competing interests that it remains the
“constitution of the oceans” nearly 30 years after its
adoption. My delegation welcomes the two new
ratifications of the Convention during the period under
review, bringing the total number of parties to 162. For
the most part, the Convention already reflects
customary international law. However, we encourage
the minority of Member States that are not yet parties
to give serious consideration to accession so that the
Convention will achieve universal membership.
New challenges relating to the oceans and seas
will emerge along with the evolution of technology and
changes to the environment and the global economy.
Some of those challenges may prompt fresh debate
over the sufficiency or the proper application of the
Convention. The international community has to
respond to those challenges in a way that maintains the
balance of uses and the peaceful order in the oceans
and seas that we have hitherto enjoyed. We must
therefore remind ourselves that it is critical to maintain
the indivisibility of the Convention, which is the sole
and overarching legal framework for the oceans and
seas.
When the Convention was drafted, its negotiators
recognized that there were a number of very
contentious issues that could be resolved only through
trade-offs and by accepting the Convention as a
package. That is particularly true of the new legal
regimes created by the Convention, including those
relating to the exclusive economic zone, archipelagic
States, archipelagic sea lanes passage and transit
passage. No reservations can be made to the
Convention and no selectivity should be exercised in
its application. While the Convention allows for
declarations, the Convention itself provides that
declarations are not a back-door method of expressing
reservations concerning certain provisions, or of
interpreting the provisions in a manner that is
inconsistent with their letter and spirit.
Some of the new challenges we face are explicitly
dealt with in the Convention text. Others are not. It is

3

A/66/PV.76

my delegation’s firm view, however, that the
Convention contains both the core set of principles that
should be applied and the necessary scope for us to
successfully address all emerging issues related to the
oceans and seas. In that context, my delegation would
like to focus on two key issues today.
The first issue relates to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biodiversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction. My delegation has followed the
discussions of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal
Working Group with interest. We welcome the
endorsement, in the draft omnibus resolution, of the
Working Group’s recommendations, in particular the
recommendation in paragraph 1 (a) of the annex to
document A/66/119, which specifically recognizes that
any multilateral agreement dealing with marine
biodiversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction must
be developed under the Convention.
In pursuing the endeavour of conserving and
sustainably using marine biodiversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction, we must also be careful not to
undermine the freedom of navigation and other equally
important interests. It bears repeating that the careful
compromises embodied in the Convention have served
us well. Even as we move forward with the process
that we will initiate within the Working Group by
adopting draft resolution A/66/L.21 now before us, it is
imperative that we do so without undermining the
integrity of the Convention.
The second issue relates to the protection of
critical communications infrastructure located on the
seabed and ocean floor. It is still a little-known fact
that more than 95 per cent of international
communications are routed through fibre-optic
submarine cables. In other words, almost all of us use
these cables to perform everyday tasks that we have
come to take for granted: sending e-mail, making
international telephone calls, Internet banking and
making purchases online. A single break in a
submarine cable could result in huge economic costs
for all the countries it connects. As submarine cables
are slim and fragile, and simply laid on top of the
seabed, such breaks could happen for any number of
reasons, such as a ship unknowingly dropping anchor
in the wrong place.
My delegation is therefore heartened to note that
the report of the Secretary-General on oceans and the
law of the sea once again highlights the important issue

4

of submarine cables (A/66/70, para. 84). For the
second year running, Singapore introduced language on
submarine cables into the draft omnibus resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea (A/66/L.21). Singapore’s
proposals received strong expressions of support from
many delegations during the negotiations on the draft
resolution. We thank delegations for working
constructively with us to raise awareness of the need to
protect these cables and for them to be rapidly repaired
when damaged. This is an issue that concerns all
States, regardless of their geographical situation, which
rely on international communications to keep their
economies going.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea sets forth the legal
order for the seas and the oceans. All processes related
to the oceans, including the sustainable use of marine
resources, must be dealt with within the framework of
the Convention.
Norway’s marine policy rests on an integrated,
ecosystem-based approach to marine management. We
apply the precautionary principle and have drawn up
integrated management plans. They provide a
framework for the sustainable use of natural resources
in a way that maintains the biodiversity of ecosystems.
Oceans are critical for global food security.
Sustainable marine management is imperative if the
oceans are to continue to be a source of human food.
Our challenge, therefore, is to find a balance between
the responsible use of living marine resources and
conservation.
Sustainable resource management and the fight
against illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU)
fishing are the most important tools for safeguarding
the world’s fish stocks. Combating IUU fishing has
been one of the main issues on the international
fisheries agenda for the past decade, and we must
continue to cooperate on this issue. As my colleague
from Indonesia just stated, there is too much
voluntarism and discretion for States.
Based on experiences in our own region, we are
concerned about the connections between international
organized crime and illegal fishing. The study entitled
“Transnational organized crime in the fishing
industry”, published earlier this year by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, is a useful
contribution to the further exploration of such links.
We encourage States and international organizations to

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

further study the causes and methods of illegal fishing
in this context.

biodiversity and the sustainable use of resources in
areas beyond, as well as within, national jurisdiction.

The impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable
marine ecosystems and the long-term sustainability of
deep-sea fish stocks have been a concern for Norway
for several years. We are therefore pleased that the
General Assembly has agreed on measures to address
these problems. Vulnerable marine habitats outside
national jurisdictions are better protected against the
adverse effects of bottom fishing today than they were
before those decisions were made. The General
Assembly resolutions on this issue have had a clear
effect. According to the Secretary-General, if fully
implemented, resolutions 61/105 and 64/72, as well as
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations International Guidelines for the Management
of Deep-sea Fisheries in the High Seas, provide the
tools necessary to protect vulnerable marine
ecosystems from significant adverse impacts due to
bottom fishing and to ensure the long-term
sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks. It is therefore
vital that we focus on improving implementation. At
the same time, we must acknowledge that the
implementation of those resolutions is demanding for
many States and regional fisheries management
organizations, particularly for developing countries,
and we must make sure that we do not end up with a
system whereby only rich countries are able to fish.

We welcome the work of the Open-ended
Informal Working Group to study issues relating to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction
established by the General Assembly, and we look
forward to assessing the substantive issues in greater
depth as the process develops. It is important that the
Working Group examine all current and potential
negative impacts on biodiversity in sea areas beyond
national jurisdiction and consider how they can best be
dealt with. The conclusions must remain open. Only
then will we be able to identify the best solutions.

The impacts of climate change and ocean
acidification on the marine environment is a global
issue. The nature, rate and impacts of climate change
and the vulnerability of marine and coastal ecosystems
and societies will vary from place to place, but,
ultimately, the environmental and societal impacts will
be felt at the local level and affect people’s daily lives.
International shipping is responsible for its share
of greenhouse-gas emissions. The International
Maritime Organization has taken action this year to
address this through the adoption of energy-efficiency
requirements for international shipping. This is a major
achievement.
Protecting biological diversity is essential for the
preservation of the living networks and systems that
form the basis of our existence. There is also an urgent
need to implement effective measures to combat threats
to marine biodiversity. Norway therefore welcomes the
discussions on how to improve the protection of marine

11-62512

Clear maritime boundaries are essential so as to
determine which States have rights and obligations in
which areas according to the law of the sea. This is
important in relation to the sustainable exploitation of
marine resources and the protection of the marine
environment. Such legal clarity also promotes peace
and security.
The establishment of the outer limits of the
continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles is a key
element in the implementation of the law of the sea
regime. This is necessary to clarify the legal
framework for future shelf activities and for
environmental protection. It also has significant
development implications. Let me in this connection
acknowledge the significant contribution made by the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf.
The establishment of the outer limits of the
continental shelf presents a challenge for many
developing countries, which do not have the necessary
financial and human resources. Norway is now
cooperating with a number of African countries in this
connection. Our objective is to help those countries
utilize their rights under the law of the sea and,
ultimately, exercise a greater degree of control over
their own resources.
Norway would like to encourage all States with
the necessary resources to assist developing countries
in the preparation of documentation for the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf.
Lastly, Norway is concerned about piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia, which is
continuing to pose a threat to innocent lives,
humanitarian supplies, international commerce and

5

A/66/PV.76

navigation. This autumn, Norway assigned a maritime
patrol aircraft to NATO’s Operation Ocean Shield. We
have also sponsored relevant Security Council
resolutions, and we participate actively in the
International Maritime Organization’s work on
combating piracy and in the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. Norway will continue to
support the broad range of actions taken by the
international community to combat piracy and armed
robbery at sea.
Mr. Sánchez Contreras (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like, first of all, to express my
delegation’s sincere thanks and congratulations to
Ambassador Henrique Valle for having yet again done
an excellent job as coordinator of the draft resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea (A/66/L.21) and for
having guided the consultations to a satisfactory
conclusion. We also extend our thanks to Ms. Holly
Koehler, coordinator of the draft resolution on
sustainable fisheries (A/66/L.22).
Mexico believes that, as in previous years, the
draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea
constitutes a genuine guide to action that can serve to
orient the international community in accomplishing its
goals of promoting international peace and security,
broader cooperation and the sustainable development
of oceans and seas.
We believe that the draft resolution sets out
significant advances that are worth highlighting.
Mexico is extremely pleased that the draft resolution
takes note of the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea Seabed Disputes Chamber’s advisory opinion
on Responsibilities and obligations of States
sponsoring persons and entities with respect to
activities in the Area. The request for an advisory
opinion demonstrated the growing interaction and
necessary cooperation among the institutions created
under the aegis of the Convention on the Law of the
Sea. We are convinced that the advisory opinion has
substantial and practical value not only for the current
tasks of the Authority but also for its future activities.
Mexico also views as a positive development that
in this year’s draft resolution we have returned to the
practice followed in previous years, namely, that when,
in the framework of the Meeting of States Parties to the
Convention, elections to the International Tribunal for
the Law of the Sea or to the Commission on the Limits
of the Continental Shelf are held — as will be the case

6

during the next Meeting, in 2012 — the Meeting
should last for five or more days.
We also consider it an important step forward that
the draft resolution calls on States to consider
becoming parties to the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, their
Parts
and
Components
and
Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. My delegation
believes that that call fills a gap that previously existed
in the resolution, as it used to call on States with regard
to the two other Protocols that complement the
Convention without referring to this one. Mexico is
convinced that combating the illicit maritime trade in
firearms is an essential element in the fight against
organized crime.
We appreciate the fact that the draft resolution
recognizes the regional cooperation efforts being made
within the framework of the programme of Integrated
Assessment and Management of the Gulf of Mexico
Large Marine Ecosystem. That programme constitutes
a solid platform for cooperation for monitoring the
preservation and sustainable development of the
marine resources of the Gulf of Mexico, particularly in
terms of the great diversity of the migratory species
that inhabit it. In that context, we invite other States
with enclosed or semi-enclosed seas, when the
occasion arises, to adopt similar cooperation plans, in
line with article 123 of the Convention.
We also consider it a positive development that
relevant international organizations and other donors,
including the Global Environment Facility, are urged to
support the International Seabed Authority Endowment
Fund. We believe that such support will enable the
Authority to help scientists and technicians from
developing countries to participate in scientific
research programmes and cruises, which will certainly
strengthen the capacities of those States, including with
respect to protecting and conserving their marine
environments, and will also benefit humankind as a
whole.
As I said earlier, in Mexico’s view, the
fundamental theme of the draft resolution has to do
with marine biodiversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction. I would now like to make several points in
that regard.
We
welcome
the
adoption
of
the
recommendations of the fourth meeting of the Working

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

Group on marine biological diversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction. We consider that to be of vital
importance, given that it implies the beginning of a
process of negotiations to guarantee the development
of the necessary legal framework for the preservation
and sustainable use of biodiversity in areas beyond
national jurisdiction.
Mexico believes that the best way to carry out the
negotiations for a legal framework is through the
establishment of an intergovernmental committee
charged with developing a multilateral agreement
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea. From our point of view, as the recommendations
propose, that instrument should address as a whole —
simultaneously and as a single package — the topic of
marine genetic resources, including the sharing of
benefits derived from their use; measures and tools for
protecting biodiversity, including the designation of
marine protected areas; and environmental impact
assessments.
With respect to oceans and the law of the sea,
Mexico believes that the General Assembly should
place greater emphasis on two points.
First, we believe that it is necessary to stress the
role of the International Seabed Authority. In our
opinion, the Authority is the only organization with
specific, universal competence concerning the
activities on the seabed beyond national jurisdiction. In
that sense, it is beyond doubt that the Authority has
accumulated a great store of scientific and technical
information on the preservation and protection of the
biodiversity of the international seabed. Consequently,
the Authority should be the lead institution in advising
the General Assembly on technical and scientific
matters, so that the Assembly can fulfil its central role
in the preservation and sustainable use of marine
biodiversity in areas beyond the jurisdiction of national
borders.
Moreover, we should bear in mind that the
Authority has accumulated an important store of
scientific information on the seabed and that it is
developing specific plans to establish in the near future
an environmental management plan for the ClarionClipperton Zone. We therefore consider it fundamental
for the members of the Authority’s Legal and Technical
Commission to participate actively in the General
Assembly’s Working Group on biological diversity in
areas beyond the jurisdiction of national borders.

11-62512

The commemoration of the thirtieth anniversary
of the adoption of the Convention is upon us. In that
light, I would like to conclude by referring to the
vision expressed in the statement by Mr. Walter
Stewart, representative of Guyana, on 11 June 2004,
when he said that the Convention, like any legal
instrument, is a work in progress that will need to be
transformed in order to respond to new circumstances
and the demands of reality. My delegation believes that
Mr. Stewart’s words make more sense today than ever.
Mr. Kalinin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Next year will mark the thirtieth anniversary
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, of 1982. That treaty is of unique international
importance, and its development, we believe, is one of
the most important achievements of the twentieth
century. Our country has done and will continue to do
everything possible to enhance the authority of the
Convention, and we call upon States to implement it in
the appropriate fashion.
The significance of the world’s oceans for
humankind continues to increase. Every day, new
potentials open for the use of its riches. There is an
increasingly broad range of economic activities in the
oceans. All of that leads to the need to protect the
marine environment and encourage States to find an
effective resolution of current issues in this area.
The Russian Federation has always advocated the
conservation and sustainable use of marine resources,
in line with the Convention. On the other hand, we do
not support proposals aimed at limits on marine
activities that are not backed up by scientific data,
including the outcome of contemporary and earlier
marine research. However, we are convinced that any
differences in the approach to specific work in this
important area should not become a cause for any
confrontation, nor should they undermine trust.
Allow to me to thank the Secretary-General for
presenting to the General Assembly his reports on
maritime affairs (A/66/70 and Add.1 and 2, and
A/66/307). The Russian Federation commends the
work of the bodies set up under the Convention. We
note in particular the role of the Commission on the
Limits of the Continental Shelf and its valuable
contribution to implementing article 76 of the
Convention. Our country was one of the first to make a
submission to the Commission on the Limits of the
Continental Shelf with regard to the Arctic and the

7

A/66/PV.76

Pacific Oceans. I am glad to inform the Assembly that
we are currently conducting scientific research that is
nearing completion.
We support the efforts to find the optimal
resolution of the problems that have caused a
significant increase in the workload of the
Commission. In that regard, we stress that it is
important that States and the experts on the
Commission should meet their obligations to ensure
their ongoing participation in the Commission’s work.
We also believe that the Division for Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea should be given the resources
necessary to carry out its functions as the secretariat of
the Commission.
The Russian Federation is pleased with the
outcome of the twelfth meeting of the Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea. We remain convinced of the usefulness of
that forum, which gives a wide range of participants
the possibility to hold wide-ranging discussions on
current aspects relating to maritime issues, including
sustainable development.
We also support the recommendations of the most
recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal
Working Group to study issues relating to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond areas of national jurisdiction, and we
continue to be ready to take a constructive part in
further discussions on that issue within the Working
Group.
The Russian Federation gives particular attention
to efforts with regard to the conservation and
management of fish stocks. We welcome the enhanced
integrated measures to combat illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, and we are pleased to note the
consistent measures being taken to enhance controls by
flag States and to increase the effective measures
implemented by port States.
The Russian Federation continues to take an
active part in developing and implementing measures
to protect vulnerable marine ecosystems, both at the
individual level and within the framework of relevant
regional fisheries management organizations. Once
again, we call on Member States that have not yet done
so to sign the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement.
This year Ms. Holly Koehler will complete her
work as the coordinator of the informal consultations

8

on the draft resolution on sustainable fisheries. Allow
me to express our thanks for all her contributions over
many years to promote the work in this area. We
welcome Ms. Alice Revell as the new coordinator for
these consultations.
We would also like to thank the coordinator of
the omnibus draft resolution on the law of the sea,
Ambassador Henrique Valle. Despite the large number
of difficult problems, we have been able to have
constructive talks. As a result, it was possible to reach
mutually agreeable decisions. We take note of the
valuable support from the Division for Ocean Affairs
and the Law of the Sea, under Mr. Serguei Tarassenko,
in all stages of its work.
Mr. Delgado Sánchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba believes the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea is of essential importance for the
maintenance and strengthening of peace, order and
sustainable development in the oceans and seas. This
international legal instrument is a milestone in the
codification of the international law of the sea and has
been ratified by the immense majority of Member
States. In it the appropriate and universally recognized
legal framework is established, within which all
activities related to the oceans and the seas should be
carried out.
It is important to preserve the integrity of the
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the application
of its provisions as a whole. Matters related to oceans
and the law of the seas should be under the direct
supervision of the General Assembly in order to ensure
greater consistency in dealing with those issues and for
the benefit of all Member States.
Cuba has been making major efforts in
implementing national strategies for sustainable
development and to protect the marine environment in
order to ensure a consistent, progressive and efficient
application of the provisions of the Convention. The
Cuban State has a solid national institutional and
legislative structure with regard to the law of the sea.
The Government of Cuba takes all the measures
available to it to successfully respond to crimes on the
seas, such as illicit trafficking in drugs and
psychotropic substances, illegal trafficking in persons
and piracy.
Cuba reiterates the importance of strengthening
international cooperation in the management of marine
resources and in caring for the oceans and their

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

biodiversity within the principles of international law,
ensuring due respect for the jurisdiction of sovereign
States over their territorial sea and in the management
of resources in their exclusive economic zones and
their extension in the continental shelf.

that Cuba has not joined the Agreement because we are
concerned about the mechanism for boarding and
inspection visits to fishing vessels in accordance with
articles 21 and 22 of that instrument and its possible
political manipulation.

We firmly support the laudable work of the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf,
and we call on all Member States to provide their
support so that the Commission has all the resources it
needs for its work. It is important that the Commission
be able to do its work quickly and effectively while
following the legal requirements established for that
work.

We do not want to conclude without expressing
our appreciation of the commendable work by the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea and
by the coordinators of the two draft resolutions, whose
adoption my country will support.

The delegation of Cuba firmly supports the
principle that all existing resources in the Area are the
common heritage of humankind. It is our responsibility
to work to realize that principle, which is clearly
established in the Convention. We must not allow those
resources to be patented by transnational companies,
nor should we allow the selfishness of some nations to
prevent us from reaching important agreements on this
issue. All States should benefit from the existing
resources in the Area, including its biodiversity and the
genetic resources that exist there.
We advocate a broad exchange of scientific and
technical knowledge and the free transfer of clean and
sustainable technologies to developing countries.
Marine scientific research in the Area should be
conducted exclusively for peaceful purposes and the
benefit of humankind as a whole.
The continuing sea-level rise threatens the
territorial integrity of many States, especially small
island States, some of which are destined to disappear
if
urgent
measures
are
not
taken.
The
interconnectedness of ocean systems and the close
relation to the dramatic process of climate change
affecting humankind oblige us to urgently comply with
and further renew the commitments in these areas.
With regard to the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the Convention
relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, I wish to underscore that Cuba abides in good
faith by its fundamental provisions for conservation
and management, although it is not a State party to that
instrument. However, that Agreement and all decisions
arising from it are, like any international agreement,
legally binding only for its States parties. We reiterate

11-62512

Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Secretariat, including the able
staff of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of
the Sea, for the valuable assistance provided to
Member States. I would also like to thank the two
coordinators, Ambassador Henrique Rodrigues Valle of
Brazil and Ms. Holly R. Koehler of the United States,
for conducting the informal consultations on the two
draft resolutions before us, on oceans and the law of
the sea (A/66/L.21) and on sustainable fisheries
(A/66/L.22), both of which Iceland sponsors.
Ms. Koehler, who is stepping down after eight years of
excellent and invaluable service, deserves special
tribute.
It is imperative to preserve the integrity of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
which provides the legal framework for all our
deliberations on the oceans and the law of the sea. By
ratifying and implementing the Convention, States
sustain and promote a number of the most cherished
goals of the United Nations. Every effort must be made
to utilize existing instruments to the fullest before
other options, including possible new implementation
agreements under the Convention, are given serious
consideration.
The three institutions established under the
Convention are all functioning well. The Commission
on the Limits of the Continental Shelf has received
57 submissions from coastal States, including Iceland.
We note with satisfaction the progress in the work of
the Commission, but we share the concern about its
heavy workload. We emphasize the need to ensure that
the Commission can perform its functions
expeditiously and effectively, while maintaining its
high level of quality and expertise and respecting fully
the Convention and the Commission’s rules of
procedure.

9

A/66/PV.76

We fully support the request to the SecretaryGeneral to allocate appropriate and sufficient resources
to the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea to provide adequate services and assistance to the
Commission in view of the increased number of its
working weeks, including through the establishment of
additional posts to reinforce the geographic
information
system
and
through
legal
and
administrative support to the Commission by the
Division.
Iceland participated in the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Open-ended Informal Working Group to study issues
relating to the conservation and sustainable use of
marine biological diversity in areas beyond national
jurisdiction, held in New York last May. We fully
endorse its recommendations. We look forward to the
next meeting of the Working Group, which will
presumably prepare workshops that focus on such
issues as marine genetic resources and area-based
management tools.
Iceland welcomes the work of the United Nations
Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans
and the Law of the Sea and its contribution to
improving coordination and cooperation among States
and to strengthening the annual debate of the General
Assembly on oceans and the law of the sea by
effectively drawing attention to key issues and current
trends. This year’s focus topic was very timely and
appropriate. In that regard, we endorse the call in the
draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea on
States to consider the 2012 United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development as an opportunity to
consider measures to implement internationally agreed
goals and commitments relating to the conservation
and sustainable use of the marine environment and its
resources.
In the preparations for the Conference, Iceland
puts special emphasis on the marine environment.
Economic prosperity and food security are dependent
on healthy oceans. The sustainable use of living marine
resources contributes substantially to human food
security, as well as dietary variety. It provides for the
livelihood of millions of people and is a central pillar
of many national and regional economies, especially
low-income food-deficit countries and small island
developing States.
Iceland attaches great importance to the longterm conservation, management and sustainable use of

10

living marine resources and the obligation of States to
cooperate to that end, in accordance with international
law, in particular the Convention on the Law of the Sea
and the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement. We
welcome the reaffirmation of those goals in the draft
resolution on sustainable fisheries.
My country considers the Agreement on Port
State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate Illegal,
Unreported and Unregulated Fishing, of the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO), a very important
instrument. We welcome the signatures and
ratifications of this first global treaty focused
specifically on the problem of illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing, and we encourage States to ratify
it with a view to its early entry into force.
Iceland welcomes the recent review of actions
taken to implement the relevant paragraphs of
resolutions 61/105 and 64/72, which address the
impacts of bottom fishing on vulnerable marine
ecosystems and the long-term sustainability of deep sea
fish stocks. In particular, we welcome the successful
workshop held in New York on 15 and 16 September to
discuss the implementation of those important
paragraphs. At the workshop, representatives of States
and regional fisheries management organizations
(RFMOs) explained extensively their respective
implementation actions. We concur with the
concluding remarks in the Secretary-General’s report
prepared for the workshop (A/66/307), that, if fully
implemented, resolutions 61/105 and 64/72, as well as
the FAO Guidelines, provide the tools necessary to
protect vulnerable marine ecosystems from significant
adverse impacts due to bottom fishing and to ensure
the long-term sustainability of deep sea fish stocks.
My country welcomes, as does the draft
resolution on sustainable fisheries, the important
progress made by States, RFMOs and those States
participating in the negotiations to establish RFMOs
competent to regulate bottom fisheries to implement
the relevant paragraphs. Despite the progress made,
however, the actions called for in those paragraphs
have not been fully implemented in all cases, and
further actions are needed to strengthen continued
implementation. We welcome the decision to conduct a
further review after four years, in 2015. That should
give
sufficient
opportunity
for
improved
implementation, where necessary, with the technical
assistance of the FAO.

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank both coordinators,
Ms. Holly Koehler of the United States of America and
Ambassador Henrique Valle of Brazil, for their
remarkable work in completing the difficult
negotiations on the draft resolutions that have been
introduced in the General Assembly today (A/66/L.21
and A/66/L.22). I would also like to thank the United
Nations Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea for its supportive role and excellent work.
My Government attaches great importance to the
Convention on the Law of the Sea, as it provides a
unique and comprehensive legal framework for the
peaceful use of the world’s oceans. For three decades,
the Convention has shown what the global community
can achieve if we work together in a spirit of
cooperation for the collective good. It is worth noting
that all activities on the oceans and seas have been
carried out within that framework and that the
Convention’s integrity has been maintained without
disruption.
As of 31 August, there were 162 parties to the
Convention. We urge those States that have not yet
become parties to the Convention and its two
implementing agreements, the 1994 Agreement relating
to the implementation of Part XI of the Convention and
the 1995 Fish Stocks Agreement, to do so as soon as
possible. The institutions established by the
Convention — the International Seabed Authority, the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea and the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf —
have all played important roles. Member States should
continue to make concerted efforts to address the
difficulties that those executive bodies may encounter
in carrying out their work.
The Assembly of the International Seabed
Authority held its seventeenth session in Kingston in
July. We welcome its decision that preparations should
begin for drafting a mining code regulating the
exploitation of deep-sea minerals in the international
seabed Area. We believe that such a code will
contribute
significantly
to
the
Convention’s
implementation. We also note with satisfaction the
Tribunal’s contribution to the peaceful settlement of
disputes, in accordance with Part XV of the
Convention.
One instance for which my delegation would like
to express its appreciation to the Tribunal was the

11-62512

timely delivery on 1 February, at the request of the
Council of the Authority, of its advisory opinion on the
responsibilities of a sponsoring State under the 1994
Agreement and the Convention. We believe that that
advisory opinion is very much in line with opinions
and statements submitted by many States parties,
including my Government. We also believe that the
Tribunal will continue to demonstrate its competence
and expertise by resolving such pending maritime
disputes as the 2009 delimitation of the maritime
boundary in the Bay of Bengal, the 2010 M/V Louisa
case and the M/V Virginia G case.
The delineation of the outer limits of the
continental shelf, including beyond 200 nautical miles
from the baselines, would bring certainty to the
exercise of rights and jurisdictions in national and
international areas. In that context, the work of the
Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf is
of particular importance. In that regard, we are pleased
to note that the Commission has continued to examine
the submissions made by States parties to the
Convention this year. My Government reaffirms its
commitment to the goals of the Convention and its full
support for the effective and efficient operation of its
institutions.
The year 2012 will mark the thirtieth anniversary
of the opening for signature of the Convention. When
we assess the status of the implementation of the
Convention and its related Agreements on that
occasion, we believe that we should not underestimate
the overarching significance of the Convention in
strengthening international peace and security,
promoting international cooperation and achieving
sustainable development of the oceans and seas.
While the Convention has stood the test of time,
it also faces challenges ahead as the world changes
around it. For example, piracy and armed robbery at
sea against vessels continue to cause grave problems
for international navigation and the safety of
commercial maritime routes. Collaborative efforts at
the subregional, regional and international levels are
needed to adequately address such problems. While we
welcome actions taken in that regard by the Security
Council and commend the activities of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, as well as
the work of the International Maritime Organization
and the other international bodies engaged in
combating such illicit acts, we believe that much
remains to be done in that area.

11

A/66/PV.76

The Government of the Republic of Korea has
continued to contribute to ocean affairs. First, next year
in Yeosu, an ocean-front city in southern Korea, the
Republic of Korea will hold Expo 2012, under the
theme “The living ocean and coast”. We welcome the
participation of UN-Oceans in the Expo, and are fully
confident that it will be an excellent opportunity for
keeping ocean issues high on the agenda.
Secondly, as the Assembly may be aware, the
Northwest Pacific Action Plan’s regional initiative on
marine litter continues to be implemented in
cooperation with various stakeholders. In that
connection, we are pleased to note that in October
2010 the tenth annual Northwest Pacific Action Plan
international coastal clean-up and workshop on marine
litter was held on Jeju Island in Korea.
In conclusion, the international community has
long worked together to ensure an orderly and stable
regime on the oceans and seas. There is a great need
for the spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation
that is enshrined in the Convention at this time when
humankind is facing many challenging issues — inter
alia, maritime security, the protection and preservation
of the marine environment, sustainable development
and climate change. We would like to take this
opportunity to renew our commitment to ensuring
sound governance of the oceans and seas.
Ms. Leal Perdomo (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Aware of the vital role
that the oceans and seas play in meeting humankind’s
food and nutritional needs, and of the fact that they
represent an essential component of the global system
for supporting life and a valuable resource for ensuring
sustainable development, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reaffirms the importance it attaches to the
oceans and the law of the sea.
With that in mind, my country’s public policies
attach a particular priority to the issue, as is clearly
reflected in our national legislation and in the plans
and programmes formulated and implemented
according to the criteria and principles of conservation
and the sustainable use of marine resources. In that
context, in August the Venezuelan Government created
by a decree with the scope and force of law the Island
Territory of Francisco de Miranda, which includes the
archipelagos of Los Roques, La Orchila and Las Aves,
in the Caribbean Sea. They will function as a single
political territory under a special system that will

12

promote, among other benefits, the protection and
preservation of aquatic ecosystems and manage the
commercial and industrial exploitation of the area’s
resources. Importantly, policies on the protection of
protected areas, maritime security, water transport,
public security, public health and environmental
protection will also be put into effect.
Venezuela possesses within its maritime
jurisdiction a string of more than 100 islands in its
territorial waters, which form the outer limit from
which extend the 200 miles that constitute our
exclusive economic zone. That is why Venezuela takes
a special interest in international developments in the
matter of oceans and seas, especially the recent
meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal
Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the
Sea, held here at New York Headquarters in June. The
Consultative Process is a forum for political and
technical cooperation, open to all interested States and
organizations, to assess the status of the marine
environment on the global level. We therefore believe
it very important to maintain the Consultative Process
as a valuable United Nations forum, necessary for
synergy among the major environmental conventions
and for coherence on maritime issues, with a view to
filling various judicial gaps in the law of the sea.
Discussion of that subject must be closely linked
to the concept of sustainable development. We should
therefore give greater weight to the role of the oceans
in, among other issues, food security and the quest to
eradicate poverty. We also take the opportunity
provided by today’s debate to reaffirm our concern
about what we believe to be the failure to fully apply
international law in efforts to preserve and manage
genetic resources beyond areas of national jurisdiction.
In our judgement, that discussion should be based on
the Convention on Biological Diversity. Venezuela
finds it unacceptable that the management of those
resources is being handled by means of an exclusionary
judicial system. Furthermore, we call for more rigorous
studies so that scientific certainty can serve to steer the
international community towards the best measures to
protect and preserve the marine environment and its
living resources against pollution, degradation and
anything that threatens its existence.
This year, the Government of Venezuela and the
United Nations Environment Programme concluded an
agreement to strengthen the Marine and Coastal
Protected Areas System under my country’s

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

jurisdiction, for the systematic study of 585,000 square
kilometres of marine areas, representing the first
initiative in Venezuelan history to address in a unified
way such a vast space. The project foresees the
development of such offshore territories through
various programmes, including fishing and natural gas
exploration, aiming to provide employment and
improve the quality of life for our island dwellers. Not
only will that represent progress in the right to life, it
will be a cooperative initiative promoting growth not
only for my country but also for other Latin American
nations.
In the view of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea of 10 December 1982, does not in itself —
either in its text or in its supplementary agreements —
cover all aspects of the issues that the international
community must address in the matter of oceans and
seas. My delegation therefore strongly emphasizes the
key role that should be played by other international
instruments in the management of marine biological
diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction, as
reflected in decision IX/20 of the ninth meeting of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
Biological Diversity, held in Bonn in 2008.
With regard to draft resolution A/66/L.22, on
sustainable fisheries, which calls for, inter alia, making
fuller use of the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks and related instruments, Venezuela underlines
that this is a highly sensitive matter involving an
extremely important sector for our country. We have
therefore begun a far-reaching initiative involving a set
of programmes to conserve, protect and manage marine
biological resources.
Venezuelan fishing and fisheries law provides for
penalties against flag vessels that engage illegally in
the extraction of marine resources without due
authorization by the State, as well as for ships crossing
into our territorial waters without presenting
documents authorizing them to do so. In such cases we
report them to their flag States.
On the issue of highly migratory fish stocks, a
registry of vessels is regularly submitted to regional
fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) for

11-62512

information and follow-up, as required by regulations
and as a demonstration of transparency. Venezuelan
law likewise prohibits trawling, so as to promote
sustainable development, specifically of fish stocks.
At the international level, Venezuela adheres to
principles of the Code of Conduct for Responsible
Fisheries, in accordance with Chapter 18 of Agenda 21,
adopted at the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in
1992. We also take an active role in various RFMOs.
We believe that it is important to participate in joint
initiatives to control illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing. Our Government has adopted the
means necessary to address that situation.
Venezuela reaffirms its commitment to cooperate
with multilateral efforts and initiatives to promote the
sustainable development of seas and oceans. We
therefore call for an international legal framework that
includes all regional and international agreements
needed for the conservation and sustainable use of
marine resources.
Venezuela reiterates its long-standing position,
expressed in many international forums, that the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is
not the only basis for the law of the sea. We reject its
being considered the sole source. We also emphasize
that that instrument does not enjoy universal
acceptance, given that a significant number of States
are not party to the Convention.
Venezuela would like to recognize the work of
the coordinators for today’s draft resolutions, as well as
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
for its extremely valuable support.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): I am pleased to make
this statement under agenda item 76, which covers both
oceans and the law of the sea and sustainable fisheries.
At the outset, we would like to sincerely thank
the coordinators of draft resolution A/66/L.21, on
oceans and the law of the sea, and draft resolution
A/66/L.22, on sustainable fisheries, as well as the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea for
its continued support and work on oceans issues. We
would also like to wish Ms. Holly Koehler the best of
luck in her future endeavours. We greatly appreciate
her leadership and guidance during the informal
consultations.

13

A/66/PV.76

The Maldives believes that this year’s draft
resolutions on sustainable fisheries and oceans and the
law of the sea validate the continuing globalization of
the oceans agenda. The global level of consciousness
on the role of oceans is high, but the collective ability
to manage oceans issues to the benefit of all nations
and peoples of the world needs to be strengthened.

arrangements and organizations should be adopted. We
would also suggest that such arrangements need to
advance the developmental aspirations of coastal
developing States, especially the small island
developing States, including the possibility of
preferential access to available fisheries resources, for
example.

For Maldivians, the critical importance of
sustainable fisheries and oceans to our livelihoods,
economic development and food security cannot be
overemphasized, given that the Maldives is a small
island developing State consisting of over 1,000 lowlying islands. Our survival and, indeed, our future
remain and will continue to remain heavily dependent
on treating the oceans and everything in them in a
sustainable and justifiable manner.

In that respect, we take note of Part XIV of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS), which commits States parties to promote
the development of the marine scientific and
technological capacity of States. We also take note of
resolution 65/37 B, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea”.

We remain deeply concerned about overfishing,
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, discards
and by-catch, trawling and other habitat damage,
perverse Government subsidies, ineffective fisheries
governance, overcapacity in fishing fleets, biodiversity
loss, habitat loss, single-species management and the
adverse effects of climate change, all of which are
insufficiently addressed. In order to deal with those
issues properly, we must start to think about the oceans
and oceans management in a completely different way.
Regional fisheries management organizations
(RFMOs) are the basis of high-seas fisheries
governance. RFMOs need to establish effective
regional agreements on ocean resources management,
create integrated ecosystem-based regional bodies and
have comprehensive and innovative approaches that
address the sustainable use and management of marine
living resources. We remain concerned, however, that
the lack of political will, capacity and enforcement in
some RFMOs greatly hampers the effective
management of the oceans.
The Maldives would like to reiterate its proposal
that serious consideration be given to the need to create
new, effective regional arrangements to take an
integrated,
ecosystem-based
approach
to
the
management of oceans, marine resources and ocean
users across entire ocean basins. For existing regional
organizations, we believe that a review of decisionmaking processes should be carried out, with a view to
improving transparency and accountability at the
global level. We would suggest that specific provisions
for General Assembly oversight of those regional

14

Member States need to address the threats facing
the oceans, which are one of the means of achieving
sustainable development. Such threats include
overfishing, as well as subsidies, marine reserves and
protected areas in areas beyond national jurisdiction.
Flag States need to practise responsible fishing
and control their vessels, while port States must not
contribute to illegal, unregulated and unreported
fishing by letting such catches enter their ports and
reach the market.
In conclusion, Sir, for small island developing
States, like the Maldives, and other developing coastal
States, sustainable fisheries and the effective
management of oceans and marine resources form an
integral part of their development strategies. However,
all States have a stake in this worldwide agenda. We
must ensure that, as we play our respective roles, we
contribute to the betterment of all peoples.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 51/204
of 17 December 1996, I now give the floor to
Mr. Shunji Yanai, President of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Yanai (International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea) (spoke in French): It is a great honour for me
to take the floor on behalf of the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea to address the General Assembly
at its sixty-sixth session.
It is my sad duty to inform you, Sir, of the death
of one of our colleagues, Judge Anatoly Lazarevich
Kolodkin, on 24 February. We shall always remember
him and his invaluable contribution to the work of the
Tribunal.

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

As is the custom, I shall report to the General
Assembly on the developments in the Tribunal’s work
since the sixty-fifth session. I shall also take this
opportunity to address several points regarding the
Tribunal’s recent activities. Before I do so, however,
please allow me to welcome Thailand, which this year
became a State party to the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).
On the subject of the composition of the Tribunal,
it should be noted that the twenty-first Meeting of
States Parties to the Convention re-elected Judges Cot
(France), Gao (China), Lucky (Trinidad and Tobago)
and Ndiaye (Senegal). It also elected three new judges
to a nine-year term of office: Mr. David Joseph Attard
(Malta), Ms. Elsa Kelly (Argentina) and Mr. Markiyan
Z. Kulyk (Ukraine). They were sworn in on 1 October.
Judge Kelly is the first woman to serve as a judge of
the Tribunal.
On 30 September, my immediate predecessor,
Judge Jesús, completed his three-year term as President
of the Tribunal. At a meeting on 1 October, I was
elected President of the Tribunal for a three-year term.
On the same day, Judge Albert Hoffman was elected
Vice-President of the Tribunal. Judge Vladimir
Golitsyn was elected President of the Seabed Disputes
Chamber on 6 October. As for the Registry, on
22 March, the Tribunal re-elected Mr. Philippe Gautier
as Registrar of the Tribunal for a five-year term.
In regard to jurisdiction, as a judicial institution
specializing in the law of the sea, the Tribunal plays a
key role in the dispute settlement system established
under the Convention. Pursuant to article 287,
paragraph 1, of the Convention, a State may choose, by
means of a written declaration, the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, the International Court
of Justice, an arbitral tribunal or a special arbitral
tribunal as a means for settling disputes concerning the
Convention. As at 6 December, 45 States parties had
made declarations under article 287, and 33 of them
had chosen the Tribunal as an appropriate forum.
The choice of procedure is of crucial importance.
A State party involved in a dispute not covered by a
declaration in force is deemed to have accepted
arbitration in accordance with Annex VII of the
Convention. Let us note as well that, even when States
have not made a declaration under article 287 of the
Convention, they may still entrust the Tribunal with a
dispute initially submitted to arbitration in accordance

11-62512

with Annex VII. To date, that option has been used in
four cases referred to the Tribunal: Case No. 2, The
M/V “SAIGA” (No. 2) Case (Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines v. Guinea); Case No. 7, Case concerning
the Conservation and Sustainable Exploitation of
Swordfish Stocks in the South-Eastern Pacific Ocean
(Chile/European Union); Case No. 16, Dispute
concerning delimitation of the maritime boundary
between Bangladesh and Myanmar in the Bay of
Bengal (Bangladesh/Myanmar); and Case No. 19, The
M/V “Virginia G” Case (Panama/Guinea-Bissau). The
parties to a dispute stand to benefit in many ways from
exercising that option, particularly in respect of court
costs and dispute resolution by a standing specialized
court.
The Tribunal’s jurisdiction also extends to any
dispute concerning the interpretation or application of
an international agreement related to the purposes of
the Convention which is submitted to it in accordance
with the agreement. In that connection, I note with
satisfaction that many conventions on, among other
subjects, fisheries, protection and preservation of the
marine environment, conservation of marine resources,
underwater cultural heritage and the removal of wrecks
refer to the Tribunal as the forum for the settlement of
disputes. Those clauses could prove quite useful in the
event of a dispute over the interpretation or application
of an agreement, by providing Member States with a
judicial means of arriving at a solution within a
reasonable amount of time.
The Tribunal also enjoys advisory jurisdiction
independent of that of the Seabed Disputes Chamber.
Advisory proceedings are provided for in article 138 of
the rules of the Tribunal. I shall confine myself here to
observing that advisory proceedings before the
Tribunal may prove an attractive alternative for States
seeking an opinion on a disputed point of law.
I would now like to say a few words about the
activities of the Tribunal since the sixty-fifth session of
the General Assembly. With respect to the Tribunal’s
judicial activity, two decisions have been delivered
since my predecessor’s last statement before the
Assembly (A/65/PV.58). On 23 December 2010, the
Tribunal handed down its order in Case No. 18, The
M/V “Louisa” Case (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines v.
Kingdom of Spain).
On 1 February 2011, the Seabed Disputes
Chamber delivered its first advisory opinion on the

15

A/66/PV.76

Responsibilities and obligations of States sponsoring
persons and entities with respect to activities in the
International Seabed Area. During the same period, the
Tribunal continued its examination of Case No. 16,
Dispute concerning delimitation of the maritime
boundary between Bangladesh and Myanmar in the
Bay of Bengal (Bangladesh/Myanmar). In addition, the
Tribunal has received a new case: The M/V “Virginia
G” Case (Panama/Guinea-Bissau).
I would like to indicate to the Assembly the main
legal issues raised in the various proceedings. With
respect to The M/V “Louisa” Case (Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines v. Kingdom of Spain), on 24 November
2010, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines instituted
proceedings against Spain before the Tribunal, in a
dispute concerning the detention of the M/V Louisa.
The Application to institute the proceedings before the
Tribunal included a request for the prescription of
provisional measures submitted in accordance with
article 290, paragraph 1, of the Convention.
The M/V Louisa, flying the flag of Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, was arrested by the Spanish
authorities on 1 February 2006 and has been detained
ever since. The Applicant maintains that the vessel was
conducting scientific research under a valid permit
issued by Spain and that the detention is in violation of
the Convention. The Applicant’s request for the
prescription of provisional measures included a request
that the Tribunal order the release of the vessel. In its
statement in response, Spain claimed that the
M/V Louisa had been detained on account of violations
of the law on the protection of Spanish cultural
heritage. The hearing held in the framework of urgent
proceedings with respect to provisional measures took
place in December 2010.
The Tribunal delivered its order in the case on
23 December 2010. While finding that it had prima
facie jurisdiction over the dispute, the Tribunal held
that there was no real and imminent risk that
irreparable prejudice might be caused to the rights of
the parties in dispute before the Tribunal so as to
warrant the prescription of the provisional measures.
In addition, with respect to the Applicant’s
argument that leaving the ship docked in a Spanish port
would pose a threat to the environment, the Tribunal
placed on record Spain’s assurances that port
authorities were monitoring the situation and were
capable of responding to any threat to the marine

16

environment. The case must now be judged on the
merits. The written proceedings should be concluded in
April 2012 and the hearing in the case should occur
next year.
With regard to the request for an advisory opinion
on Responsibilities and obligations of States
sponsoring persons and entities with respect to
activities in the International Seabed Area, submitted
to the Seabed Disputes Chamber on 6 May 2010, the
Council of the International Seabed Authority adopted
decision ISBA/16/C/13, by which, in accordance with
article 191 of the Convention, it requested the Seabed
Disputes Chamber of the Tribunal to render an
advisory opinion on several questions regarding the
responsibility of States Parties to the Convention which
sponsor activities in the Area in accordance with the
Convention and with the 1994 Agreement relating to
the implementation of Part XI of the Convention.
Fourteen States Parties to the Convention took
part in the proceedings by submitting written
statements or making oral statements at the hearing,
which took place in Hamburg. The International
Seabed Authority and four international organizations
also took part in the proceedings.
The Chamber delivered its advisory opinion on
1 February, a little less than nine months after the
request was submitted. In its advisory opinion, the
Chamber explained that States sponsoring activities in
the Area are under two kinds of obligations. The first
of those is the “obligation to ensure compliance by
sponsored contractors with the terms of the contract
and the obligations set out in the Convention and
related instruments”. That is an obligation of “due
diligence”, requiring the sponsoring State “to make
best possible efforts to secure compliance by the
sponsored contractors” and “to take measures within its
legal system”, namely, laws, regulations and
administrative measures.
Obligations of the second kind identified by the
Chamber are direct obligations with which sponsoring
States must comply independently of their obligation to
ensure a certain conduct on the part of the sponsored
contractors. Those include, among others, the
obligation to assist the Authority, the obligation to
apply a precautionary approach and the obligation to
apply the best environmental practices.
The liability of the sponsoring State arises in part
from its failure to fulfil its obligations, as well as when

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

such failure has resulted in damage. That requires a
causal link to be established between the failure and
the damage it has caused. The Chamber has finally
provided guidance as to the necessary and appropriate
measures that a sponsoring State must take in order to
fulfil its responsibilities.
In July, the Secretary-General of the International
Seabed Authority welcomed the contribution made by
the opinion to the Authority’s work. Indeed, the Legal
and Technical Commission of the Authority at its
seventeenth session recommended, inter alia, that the
Nodules Regulations be revised in the light of the
advisory opinion and suggested that the Authority
should prepare model legislation to assist States in
fulfilling their obligations as laid out in the opinion.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General of the Authority
also expressed the view that the opinion provides
important clarifications on some of the more sensitive
aspects of the Convention relating to exploration and
exploitation of the seabed. At the twenty-first Meeting
of the States Parties, several delegations viewed the
advisory opinion as a landmark in the work of the
Tribunal.
Turning now to the Dispute concerning
delimitation of the maritime boundary between
Bangladesh and Myanmar in the Bay of Bengal
(Bangladesh/Myanmar), let me say that it is the first
maritime delimitation case to have come before the
Tribunal. By letter dated 13 December 2009, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh notified the
President of the Tribunal of declarations made under
article 287 of the Convention by Myanmar and
Bangladesh on 4 November and 12 December 2009,
respectively, whereby the two States accepted the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal for the settlement of the
dispute relating to their maritime boundary. By the
same letter, the Minister for Foreign Affairs invited the
Tribunal to exercise its jurisdiction to settle the
dispute.
In the light of the agreement between the parties,
as evidenced by their declarations and the notification
made by Bangladesh, the case was inscribed on the list
of cases of the Tribunal as Case No. 16, on
14 December 2009. The case concerns the delimitation
of the territorial sea, the exclusive economic zone and
the continental shelf, including a distance of 200
nautical miles. The hearing was held from 8 to
24 September. The case is now under deliberation, with
a decision expected in March 2012, some two years

11-62512

after the case was submitted to the Tribunal, which
represents a reasonable duration for a maritime
delimitation case.
Regarding the M/V “Virginia G” Case
(Panama/Guinea-Bissau), the Agent of Panama
transmitted to the Tribunal, by letter dated 4 July 2011,
notification of an agreement concluded between the
two countries through an exchange of notes, to submit
to the Tribunal a dispute regarding a damage claim
resulting from the arrest of the vessel Virginia G.
According to the statement of claim submitted by
Panama, the oil tanker Virginia G was carrying out
refuelling operations for fishing vessels in the
exclusive economic zone of Guinea-Bissau, when it
was arrested on 21 August 2009 by Guinean
authorities. Panama maintains that, although the vessel
was released on 22 October 2010, it suffered
significant damage during the 14 months of detention.
Panama is seeking reparation for the injury suffered.
Since 1977, an internship programme has been
established at the Tribunal. From 2004 to 2009 it
received financial support from the Korea International
Cooperation Agency. Of the 223 interns from
73 countries, who participated in the programme until
2011, 84 were from developing countries and benefited
from grants from Korean funds. In October 2009, the
Tribunal established a trust fund to provide financial
assistance to programme participants from developing
countries.
Since April 2010, two contributions have been
made to the fund: one by a company from the Republic
of Korea and the other by the Korea Maritime Institute.
Since 2007, the Tribunal has established, with the
support of the Nippon Foundation, a dispute settlement
capacity-building and training programme under the
Convention. Seven interns are participating in this
year’s programme — from Angola, France, Jamaica,
Panama, Senegal, Tonga and Viet Nam. The ninemonth Nippon Programme affords interns the
opportunity to become familiar with the law of the sea,
judicial procedures and the work of the various
international organizations dedicated to the seas and
the law of the sea.
I have the added pleasure of informing the
Assembly that the fifth Summer Academy of the
International Foundation for the Law of the Sea was
held at the Tribunal’s premises in July and August.

17

A/66/PV.76

Before I conclude, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General, the Legal
Counsel and especially the Director of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, for their
unwavering cooperation and the support they have
always provided to us.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with resolution 51/6, of 24 October 1996, I
now call on His Excellency Mr. Nii Allotey Odunton,
Secretary-General of the International Seabed
Authority.
Mr. Odunton (International Seabed Authority):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate the President on
his election to the presidency of the sixty-sixth session
of the General Assembly. I have every confidence in
his ability to guide the Assembly to a successful
conclusion.
I wish to refer to the two draft resolutions before
the General Assembly (A/66/L.21 and A/66/L.22) and
to express my appreciation to Member States for their
kind references to the work of the International Seabed
Authority contained in draft resolution A/66/L.21. I
also express my appreciation for the very
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General
(A/66/70) which, as always, has provided detailed
background material for our consideration.
In July, at its seventeenth session, the Council of
the Authority approved four new applications for plans
of work on exploration in the Area. Two plans of work
were approved, sponsored by China and the Russian
Federation respectively, relating to exploration for
polymetallic sulphides, and two further plans of work
were approved, sponsored by Nauru and Tonga,
respectively, relating to exploration for polymetallic
nodules in the areas of the seabed reserved for the
conduct of activities by developing States. In their own
way, each of those workplans represent a milestone in
the work of the Authority.
The two applications sponsored by China and the
Russian Federation were the first such applications to
have been made under the Authority’s Regulations on
Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic
Sulphides in the Area, adopted in 2010. As I mentioned
in my statement to the Assembly last year (see
A/65/PV.59), it is an entirely new resource with
tremendous potential as a future source of seabed
minerals.

18

Following the approval by the Council of the two
applications, I had the honour, in Beijing on
18 November, of signing the first ever 15-year
exploration contract for polymetallic sulphides in the
Area, with the China Ocean Minerals Research and
Development Association.
I
congratulate
the
Association and the Government and people of China
on that important achievement. The contract with the
Russian Federation is in the process of finalization, and
I look forward to signing it in due course.
Another first for the Authority was the approval
of two applications by private sector interests,
sponsored by developing States, for plans of work for
exploration for polymetallic nodules in the so-called
reserved areas. The Council approved applications by
Nauru Ocean Resources Inc., sponsored by the
Republic of Nauru, and by Tonga Offshore Mining
Ltd., sponsored by the Kingdom of Tonga. Not only are
those the first applications for exploration licences in
the international Area by genuinely private-sector
entities, but also they are the first applications to have
been made for reserved areas on the basis of
sponsorship by developing States.
That is a tremendously important development. I
would like to remind the Assembly that the original
purpose behind the parallel system of exploitation, as
set out in the Convention, was to provide developing
States with a practical and realistic means of
participating in seabed mining, either in their own right
or through the Enterprise. The effect of the 1994
Agreement was to delay, perhaps indefinitely, the
establishment of the Enterprise, leaving developing
States with few options to actively participate in
seabed mining, given the huge financial risks involved.
The only realistic option for most developing
States, therefore, is to form partnerships with
commercial interests that have access to the financial
capital and technology that are necessary to conduct
deep sea exploration. That is exactly what happened in
the case of Nauru and Tonga. It could not have
happened, however, unless the private sector had
sufficient confidence in the regulatory system that had
been developed by the Authority over the past 15 years
to make such an investment in the first place.
I wish to congratulate Nauru and Tonga, as well
as their commercial partners, on being the first
developing States to participate in exploration in the
Area. I also believe that all members of the Authority

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

may congratulate themselves on having developed, at
least to this point, a regulatory system that respects the
careful balance of interests reflected in Part XI of the
Convention, while at the same time providing
sufficient incentives and security of tenure to enable
the private sector to invest in developing the common
heritage of humankind. I believe that those
developments are encouraging both for the Authority
and for Member States, which will be the ultimate
beneficiaries from seabed mining.
Let me remind the Assembly that from its
establishment in 1996 until 2010, the Authority issued
eight exploration contracts to different States and
entities, nearly all of which were former registered
pioneer investors under resolution II of the third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. The fact of
those four new applications, combined with a
significantly increased interest on the part of private
sector mining companies and deep ocean technology
companies in participating in the seminars and
workshops organized by the Authority, clearly
indicated a renewed commercial interest in deep
seabed mining as an alternative source for the minerals
that are needed to fuel economic development in many
parts of the world.
The huge technological and financial challenges
involved in recovering nodules from great depths have
led to long delays in facilitating the exploitation of
those resources on a commercial scale. That has, in
turn, led many to question whether seabed mining
would ever take place at all. The fact is, however, that
not only are active research and development
programmes for nodule mining continuing, but also
geologists and engineers have been actively seeking
out new resources and new areas of interest as potential
sources of seabed minerals.
Nevertheless, it remains the case that investments
that originate from the private sector will inevitably be
guided largely by financial considerations, including
the impacts of national taxation, payments to the
Authority and debt financing. The responsibility of the
Authority in those circumstances is to begin the
process of developing fair and equitable policies and
regulations for the exploitation of marine minerals.
Many of those issues were left pending as a result
of the 1994 Implementation Agreement. How some of
the critical legal and financial questions are addressed
will be an important factor in eventually determining

11-62512

whether investment in the seabed mining industry will
take place, or not. That will form an important part of
the Authority’s work programme in 2012 and beyond.
Another milestone in 2011, not only for the
Authority but also for the Convention as a whole, was
the delivery in February of the advisory opinion by the
Seabed Disputes Chamber on the Responsibilities and
obligations of States sponsoring persons and entities
with respect to activities in the International Seabed
Area.
As the Assembly will recall, the advisory
proceedings were instituted by the Council of the
Authority pursuant to article 191 of the Convention in
response to a proposal originally submitted by the
delegation of Nauru. The advisory opinion has
provided important clarification of some of the more
difficult aspects of the Convention and the 1994
Agreement.
The universal reaction to the opinion, including
from academia, members of the Authority and the
seabed mining industry, has been positive, in that it has
provided much-needed certainty in the interpretation of
the obligations and responsibilities of sponsoring
States under the Convention and the 1994 Agreement.
It is an encouraging sign for the Authority and its
member States, not least because it suggests that the
commercial sector is fostering confidence in the legal
regime for the orderly development of the resources of
the Area that has been put in place over the past
13 years.
I should like to use this opportunity, on behalf of
the Authority, to express our appreciation to the
outgoing President of the Seabed Disputes Chamber,
Judge Treves, and to his colleagues, for the
expeditious, diligent and transparent manner in which
the advisory proceedings were conducted.
I also wish to acknowledge the contributions of
the 15 States parties, as well as the intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations, that submitted
written or oral statements to the Chamber. Those
contributions not only enriched the proceedings, but
also demonstrated the strong commitment of States
parties to ensuring the integrity and resilience of the
Convention regime.
The need to protect and preserve the marine
environment from the harmful impacts of seabed
mining is a matter that has always been a particular

19

A/66/PV.76

concern of the Authority. Indeed, as recognized in the
draft resolution contained in document A/66/L.21, the
Authority is under a legal duty to elaborate rules,
regulations and procedures for that purpose and to take
such other steps as may be necessary.

Government of Fiji and the Permanent Representative
of Fiji to the United Nations, Ambassador Thomson —
who is also the President of the Assembly of the
Authority — for their efforts in enabling that important
workshop to take place.

In that regard, I wish to commend the Council of
the Authority for the excellent progress it made in 2011
towards the establishment of a regional environmental
management plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Fracture
Zone in the central Pacific Ocean, including the
designation of a number of areas of particular
environmental interest and proposals to advance the
Authority’s
work
on
the
establishment
of
environmental baselines.

As mandated by the 1994 Agreement, the
approach to establishing the Authority and the
regulatory regime for the Area has been an
evolutionary one, linked directly to the pace of
activities in the Area. At times over the past 15 years,
the pace of activity has been slow, and that has been
reflected in an apparent lack of activity on the part of
the Authority. Over the past two years, however, the
pace of activity in the Area has increased rapidly and
significantly, leading to a substantial increase in the
Authority’s workload and greater recognition of its role
in managing the seabed and ocean floor beyond
national jurisdiction. The establishment phase of the
Authority’s existence is well and truly over, and it is
now firmly in its operational phase.

Although much more work needs to be done, I
believe the decision taken by the Council, on the
recommendation of the Legal and Technical
Commission, is an important first step that reflects not
only the provisions of the Convention and the 1994
Agreement, but also other commitments made by
States, such as those contained in the Convention on
Biological Diversity and the declarations of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development, which are
referred to in the draft resolution.
Under the scheme set out in the Convention and
the 1994 Agreement, and as a matter of international
law, seabed mining cannot be authorized to proceed
without a prior environmental impact assessment. For
that reason, a key driver of the Authority’s work over
the past decade has been the need to establish
environmental baselines against which to measure the
impacts of future seabed mining. That is a challenging
task. The deep-sea environment is very poorly
understood, and there is a critical need for more
science in order to better understand the deep ocean,
including more data and improved standardization of
data, especially relating to taxonomy.
In that connection, I have just returned from Fiji,
where the Authority was honoured and delighted to
hold an international workshop on issues relating to
environmental impact assessments of seabed mining, in
collaboration with the Pacific Community’s Applied
Geoscience and Technology Division and the
Government of Fiji. The workshop made good progress
in identifying the issues that will have to be addressed
in future environmental impact assessments and in
identifying data gaps and areas for capacity-building
among developing island States. I wish to thank the

20

The decisions that will be made in the next few
years are likely to be critical with regard to the
common heritage of humankind. Consequently, it is
more important than ever that all members of the
Authority attend meetings and participate fully in all
aspects of the Authority’s work. I therefore look
forward to the widest possible participation by all
members in the Authority’s eighteenth session in July
2012, at which, among other things, the budget for the
next biennium will be considered. The newly elected
Legal and Technical Commission and Finance
Committee will also meet for the first time during that
session. I congratulate the new members of those
bodies on their elections and look forward to working
with them in the coming years to help shape the
Authority’s future.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with General Assembly resolution 54/195,
of 17 December 1999, I now give the floor to the
observer of the International Union for the
Conservation of Nature.
Mr. Cohen (International Union for the
Conservation of Nature): The International Union for
the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) welcomes the draft
resolutions put forward for the General Assembly’s
consideration this year (A/66/L.21 and A/66/L.22). We
wish to highlight certain areas where progress has been
made and others where it has yet to be achieved.

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

We welcome the progress with respect to the
Regular Process for Global Reporting and Assessment
of the State of the Marine Environment, including
Socio-economic Aspects. Two meetings of the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Whole on the Regular Process,
and a related workshop held under the auspices of the
United Nations in Santiago, in September, have
brought forward important work towards developing
the first global integrated marine assessment. We look
forward to further rapid progress towards completing
that assessment, which will also promote the work of
the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Services.
We welcome the progress in the discussions
regarding the protection of marine biodiversity beyond
areas of national jurisdiction. We would welcome
adoption of the draft resolution before us today that
endorses the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Openended Informal Working Group at its June meeting on
studying issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond
areas of national jurisdiction.
A crucial step forward would be an agreement to
initiate a process under the auspices of the General
Assembly to ensure that the legal framework for the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction effectively
addresses those issues by identifying gaps and ways
forward. That step must be implemented expeditiously
to avoid or mitigate additional stresses on the marine
world. Questions on the sharing of benefits of marine
genetic resources, measures such as area-based
management tools, including marine protected areas,
and the use of environmental impact assessments,
capacity-building and the transfer of marine
technology are to be addressed as a whole.
With respect to bottom fishing on the high seas,
we are concerned that the necessary impact
assessments have not always been done or been made
publicly available. Appropriate measures to prevent
significant adverse impacts on vulnerable marine
ecosystems and to ensure the long-term sustainability
of deep-sea fish stocks have not always been
implemented. My delegation welcomes progress, but
we remain deeply concerned about gaps. A lack of
public availability of impact assessments makes it
impossible to judge their adequacy, hinders capacitybuilding for States and impedes the sharing and use of
scientific knowledge to better manage such resources.

11-62512

Transparency is of particular importance, as it
forms a basis for sustainability. That was clear during
the two-day workshop held here in September to
review and discuss the impacts of bottom fishing on
vulnerable marine ecosystems and on the long-term
sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks. At the fourth
World Conservation Congress, held in Barcelona in
2008, IUCN members adopted a resolution that
stressed the importance and value of transparency in
fisheries management and called for the promotion of
free and timely access to information, taking into
account relevant protocols with respect to data
confidentiality, in order to increase awareness of, and
accountability for, the sustainability of natural
resources.
Based on a workshop organized in January 2011
by IUCN and The Nature Conservancy to examine
deep-sea fisheries management, IUCN and The Nature
Conservancy
developed
a
set
of
policy
recommendations to inform, support and promote
better management of deep-sea fisheries and
ecosystems. The full report is available on our website,
but I will give some highlights here.
Bottom fishing should not be allowed unless and
until appropriate management measures are in place,
including prior assessment of the proposed fishing
activities and the likely impacts on the marine
environment. Assessments should consider both natural
variability and effects of other environmental factors,
including impacts associated with mining, shipping,
marine pollution and climate change, wherever
appropriate. Assessments should be open to review by
relevant science working groups, by other States and
by the interested public. Data collection and exchange
requirements should reflect the requirements described
in the Compliance Agreement of the Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) and in Annex I of the
1995 Fish Stocks Agreement, as accurate data are
necessary for good stock and impact assessments and
are integral to good fisheries management.
Results of scientific research and related data on
the deep sea should be made available to the public.
Historical fishing data should be released to provide
any information they may contain on the location of
vulnerable marine ecosystems and on fish stocks.
Fishing should not be permitted in areas where data are
not collected or shared. Adaptive management
approaches with set precautionary harvest levels and
appropriate biological reference points should be

21

A/66/PV.76

implemented by regional
organizations and by States.

fisheries

management

With respect to deep-sea fisheries, capacitybuilding programmes are urgently needed. Such
programmes could assist States as necessary to develop
and implement laws and agreements; to better regulate,
manage and conserve fish stocks; to undertake prior
assessments; to better monitor, control and survey
areas subject to their national jurisdiction; to better
monitor the operation of their vessels and nationals in
marine areas beyond their national jurisdiction; and to
attend relevant international meetings, including of
appropriate
regional
fisheries
management
organizations.
Any allocation of rights to fish on the high seas
should incorporate the best available science, take into
account the need to conserve healthy ecosystems, and
incorporate transparency and equity in order to meet
the needs of all States, especially those of developing
countries that now have an interest in fishing in the
high seas and an ability to do so.
We welcome the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development to be held in Rio de Janeiro
in June 2012. The Conference offers a venue to secure
renewed
political
commitment
to
the
full
implementation of the three pillars of sustainable
development and to reaffirm the importance of the full
implementation of Agenda 21, the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development and its 27 Principles,
and the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. In these
documents, many of the paragraphs regarding oceans,
seas, islands and coastal areas remain unimplemented.
For example, the Johannesburg Plan called for the
maintenance or restoration of fish stocks to levels that
can produce the maximum sustainable yield with the
aim of achieving those goals for depleted stocks on an
urgent basis and, where possible, by not later than
2015. That has not been done. The Plan called for the
development and facilitation of diverse approaches and
tools, including the establishment of representative
networks of marine protected areas by 2012 and
time/area closures for the protection of nursery grounds
and periods. That has not been done. The Plan called
for the elimination of subsidies that contribute to
illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing and
to overcapacity. That has not been done. The Plan
called for the implementation of the 1995 FAO Code of
Conduct for Responsible Fisheries, together with its

22

related four international plans of action for the
management of fishing capacity, the conservation and
management of sharks, the reduction of incidental
catch of seabirds in longline fisheries, and the
prevention, deterrence and elimination of IUU fishing.
That has not been completed.
We look forward to work at Rio on climate
issues. With respect to oceans, we would welcome the
adoption of a global ocean carbon strategy, including
the protection of blue carbon sinks such as mangroves,
salt marshes, sea grasses and coral reefs. We note the
importance of applying marine spatial planning and of
networks of marine protected areas. We would
welcome robust study and understanding of the
potential effects of ocean acidification on marine
biodiversity that lead to measures to build resilience
into marine ecosystems and to more fully inform
climate change policy.
We look forward to a discussion of marine
renewable energies at the thirteenth meeting of the
United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea next year, as
we believe it is important to ensure a balance between
the promotion of renewable energy and marine
renewable energy technologies and the conservation of
marine biodiversity and the minimization of
environmental impacts on the marine environment.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on agenda
item 76 and its sub-items (a) and (b).
The Assembly will take action on draft resolution
A/66/L.21 at a later date to be announced.
We turn now to draft resolution A/66/L.22. The
Assembly will take action on the draft resolution,
entitled “Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijn (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I wish to
announce that since the issuance of draft resolution
A/66/L.22, the following countries have also become

11-62512

A/66/PV.76

sponsors: Belgium, Cameroon, Costa Rica, Denmark,
Honduras, Monaco, the Netherlands, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
Tuvalu and Ukraine.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/66/L.22?
Draft resolution
(resolution 66/68).

A/66/L.22

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of position
following the adoption of the resolution, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Díaz Bartolomé (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): Argentina joined the consensus for the
adoption of resolution 66/68. However, we wish to
state once again that none of the recommendations
contained in that resolution can be interpreted as
meaning that the provisions of the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, adopted in New York in 1995, can be
considered as binding on those States that have not
expressly indicated their consent to abide by the
obligations under that Agreement.
Resolution 66/68 contains paragraphs relating to
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Review Conference on the Agreement. Argentina is of
the view that those recommendations cannot be
considered applicable, even as recommendations, to
States that are not party to the Agreement.
Furthermore, that is particularly relevant in the case of
States that have dissociated themselves from those
recommendations, as has the Argentine Republic.
Therefore, as it did at the Assembly’s sixty-fifth
session, Argentina dissociates itself from the
Assembly’s consensus with regard to the paragraphs of
the resolution that refer to the recommendations of the
Review Conference on the 1995 Fish Stocks
Agreement.
At the same time, Argentina wishes to point out
that current international law does not enable regional
fisheries management organizations or arrangements or
their member States to adopt any type of measure with

11-62512

respect to vessels whose flag States are not members of
such organizations or arrangements or have not
explicitly consented to the application of such
measures to their flag vessels. Nothing in the
resolutions of the General Assembly, including the one
just adopted, can be interpreted in a manner contrary to
that conclusion.
In addition, the unmistakable legal framework for
the implementation of conservation measures and the
conduct of scientific research or any other activity
recommended in Assembly resolutions — in particular
resolution 61/105 and concordant resolutions — is the
international law of the sea in force, as reflected in the
Convention, including its article 77 and Part XIII. The
implementation of such resolutions therefore cannot be
claimed as supposed justification for denying or
ignoring the rights established under the Convention.
Nothing in that resolution or in others of the General
Assembly can affect the sovereign rights of coastal
States over their continental shelf or the exercise of
jurisdiction by coastal States with regard to their
continental shelf, in conformity with international law.
Paragraph 123 of the resolution just adopted
contains an extremely relevant reminder of that
concept, which is already reflected in resolution 64/72.
In the same vein, paragraph 124 recognizes the
adoption by coastal States, among them Argentina, of
measures to address the impacts of bottom fishing on
vulnerable marine ecosystems on the whole extent of
their continental shelf, as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures.
Finally, I wish to reiterate that the growing
divergences with regard to the contents of the
resolution
on
sustainable
fisheries
seriously
compromise the possibility of its being adopted by
consensus at future sessions.
Mr. Şahinol (Turkey): With regard to resolution
66/68, I would like to state that Turkey is fully
committed to the conservation, management and
sustainable use of marine living resources and attaches
great importance to regional cooperation to that end. In
that context, Turkey supported the resolution.
However, Turkey dissociates itself from references
made in the resolution to international instruments to
which it is not a party. Those references should
therefore not be interpreted as a change in the legal
position of Turkey with regard to those instruments.
Ms. Leal Perdomo (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian

23

A/66/PV.76

Republic of Venezuela wishes to explain its position on
resolution 66/68, on sustainable fisheries, including
through the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of
the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments.
Venezuela reaffirms before the General Assembly
its commitment to cooperating in initiatives and efforts
intended to foster coordination on issues related to
sustainable fisheries. However, as we have previously
stated in the Assembly, and maintaining the reasons
that have prevented Venezuela from becoming a party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea and to the 1995 Agreement on the Implementation
of the Provisions of that Convention, my delegation
confirms the traditional position of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela as having reservations with
respect to the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments, in the context of the resolution that the
Assembly has just adopted.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of position
after the adoption.
I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Pessôa (Brazil): Brazil is a sponsor of
resolution 66/68, on sustainable fisheries. Like others,
we wish to put on the record our appreciation of the
remarkable way in which the consultations were
conducted by Ms. Holly Koehler of the United States.
We wish her all the best in her new endeavours. We
also welcome Ms. Alice Revell of New Zealand as the
new coordinator. She proved her worth in moderating
the workshop on bottom fishing earlier this year.
We welcome the outcome of the review by the
General Assembly of the implementation of paragraphs
80 and 83 to 87 of resolution 61/105, as well as
paragraphs 117 and 119 to 127 of resolution 64/72,
which address the impacts of bottom fishing on
vulnerable marine ecosystems and the long-term
sustainability of deep-sea fish stocks.
The sustained role of the General Assembly in
monitoring the implementation of those commitments
has proved instrumental in stimulating action to

24

comply with internationally agreed commitments.
Those commitments are certainly not new, as some
date back to the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in Rio in 1992. That is
the case with impact assessments.
The review showed that some progress in this
respect has been achieved, but procedures still have to
be strengthened, for both carrying out those
assessments and making them publicly available. This
is not a new requirement either, as it was already
reflected in Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, which states, inter alia,
that States shall facilitate and encourage public
awareness and participation by making information
widely available.
Brazil is a committed party to the 1995 Fish
Stocks Agreement and is convinced of the relevance of
the Agreement to the sustainability of straddling and
highly migratory fish stocks. Nevertheless, Brazil
remains concerned that the mechanisms under Part VII
of the Agreement, especially the Assistance Fund
established therein, have thus far fallen short of the
expectations of developing countries.
In that respect, even though we have learned from
the Secretariat that financial commitments have been
recently made, the report circulated in February on the
status of the Assistance Fund disclosed the disturbing
news that it then had a negative balance of $11,400. If
there ever was an illustration of how a purpose can be
defeated, this is it. We therefore expect that the appeal
contained in paragraphs 30 and 31 of resolution 66/68
will be duly heeded by donor countries.
Finally, I was remiss this morning in not thanking
Ms. Revell of New Zealand and Mr. Robert Borje of
the Philippines for facilitating the informal
deliberations on section X, on marine biodiversity, of
the omnibus draft resolution A/66/L.22
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 76?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 76 and of
agenda item 76 as a whole.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

11-62512
