m RF.sOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIFTH COMMin'EE
11 (1). TERMS OF APPOINTMENT OF THE

12 (1). APPOINTMENT OF TEMPORARY STAFF
Recognizing the ability and faithful service of
the temporary staff under the Executive Secretary
and the need for the staff members to be informed
soon of their status in the Secretariat; and recognizing also the desirability of leaving to the Secretary-General full freedom to select the perm:inent
staff which will assist him to carry out h1s responsibilities:
the General Assembly authorizes the SecretaryGeneral to continue, pursuant to rule M of its
provisional rules of procedure, the employment
of the members of the staff of the Executive
Secretary under the present t ~ and. regulations until 1 April 1946, or until such prior date
as the Secretary-General may enter into employment arrangements with such :nembers in. accordance with the provisional staff regulat10ns
and other conditions of employment in the
Secretariat established by the General Assembly.
Twenty-first plenary meeting, 1 February 1946.

SECRETARY-GENERAL

The General Assembly resolves that, in view of
the heavy responsibilities which rest upon the
Secretary-General in fulfilling his obligations
under the Charter:
1. The terms of the appointment of the
Secretary-General shall be such as to enable a
man of eminence and high attainment to accept
and maintain the position.

2. The Secretary-General shall receive a
salary of an amount sufficient to bring him in a

net sum of $20,000 ( U .S.), together with representation allowance of $20,000 (U.S.), per annum. In addition, he shall be provided with a
fumished residence, the repairs and maintenance
of which, excluding provision of household
staff, shall be borne by the Organization.
3. The first Secretary-General shall be appointed for five years, the appointment being
open at the end of that period for a further fiveyear term.

13(1) º ÜRGANIZATION OF THE SECRETARIAT
l.

ADMINISTRATIVE ÜRGANIZATION OF THE

SECRETARIAT

4. The following observations contained in
paragraphs 18-21 of section 2, chapter VIII of
the Preparatory Commission's Report be noted
and approved:

The administrative organization of the Secretariat should be so designed as to enable the work
of the Secretariat to be conducted with the greatest possible efficiency.
Therefore, the General Assembly resolves that:
l. The Secretary-General shall take immediate
steps to establish an administrative organizatio:1
which will permit of the effective discharge of hIS
administrative and general responsibilities under
the Charter and the efficient performance of those
functions and services required to meet the needs
of the severa! organs of the United Nations.
2. The principal units of the Secretariat should
be:
(a) Department of Security Council Affairs.
(b) Department of Economic Affairs.
(e) Department of Social Affairs.
(d) Department for Trusteeship and Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territories.
(e) Department of Public Information.
(f) Legal Department.
(g) Conference and General Services.
( h) Administrative and Financia! Services.
3. The Secretary-General is authorized to appoint Assistant Secretaries-General and such other
officials and employees as are required and to
prescribe their responsibilities and duties .. Assistant
Secretaries-General shall have responsibility for
and supervision of Departments and Services.
There shall always be one Assistant SecretaryGeneral designated by the Secretary-Genrral to
dcputize for him when he is absent or unable to
perform his functions. The Secretary-General shall
take whatever steps may be requircd to ,·n,un· thc
necessary co-ordination between the Departments
of Economic Affairs and of Social Affú,s, and the
maintenance of appropriate administrative relationships between those Departments and the Econom:c and Social Council, "n th" one hand, ;i.7d

(a) There being no stipulation on the subject in the Charter, the General Assembly 'and
the Security Council are free to modify the
term of office of future Secretaries-General in
the light of experience.

( b) Beca use a Secretary-General is a confident of many govemments, it is desirable
that no Member should offer him, at any rate
immediately on retirement, any govemmental
position in which his confidential information
might be a source of embarrassment to other
Members, and on his part a Secretary-General
should refrain from accepting any such
position.

(e) From the provisions of Articles 18 and

27 of the Charter, it is clear that, for the
nomination of the Secretary-General by the
Security Council, an affirmative vote of seven
members, including the concurring votes of
the permanent Members, is required; and that
for his appointment by the General Assembly,
a simple majority of the members of that body
present and voting is sufficient, unless the
General Assembly itself decides that a twothirds majority is called for. The same rules
apply to a renewal of appointment as to an
original appointment; this should be made
clear when the original appointment is made.
( d) I t would be desirable for the Security
Council to proffer one candidate only for thr
consideration of the General Assembly, and
for debate on the nomination in the General
Assembly to be avoided. Both nomination and
appointment should be discussed at private
meetings, and a vote in either the Security
Council or the General Assembly, if taken,
should be by secret ballot.
Seventeenth plenary meeting, 24 JanuarJ' 1946.
14
