UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR
th
MEETING:

2 APRIL

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
, . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +, . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , , . , . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , q. . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917) , , , . . . . . . . , . . . . , , , . . . . , . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . *, , . . . -1.. . . . . I

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2348)

S/PV .2348

,

I

\
‘,

NOTE

,Symbol,s of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to’s United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~cpplen~en~s of the Official Records qf the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of tlze Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2348th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 2 April 1982, at 7 p.m.
Prrsidljnt:

Mr. KAMANDA
(Zaire).

wa KAMANDA

Prcsc~nr: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.

Provisional agenda (SJAgendaJ2348)

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2, The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14917)

2. The PRESIDENT
(ir?tcJr’pretution
.fiwn Frcnc~h):
1 should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have received from the representatives of Saudi
Arabia and Democratic Yemen letters in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 22 March 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14917)

I. The PRESIDENT
(itztoprctaticm
.ftwtn Frcwh):
In accordance with decisions taken at the previous
meetings on this item [23-W/1, 2S38tk, 2340th utzd
2344th tnecJritlg.s], I invite the representative of Israel
to take a place at the Council table. I also invite the
representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a place at the Council table.
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh,
Cuba, Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic,
India, Iran, Iraq, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, MorocCO, Pakistan,
Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Turkey, Viet Nam, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(itZtCI.l~I.C1cttictn fivtn Fwtzrh):
Members of the Council have before them document S/14943, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Jordan.
4. The first speaker is the representative
on whom I now call.

of Israel,

5. Mr. LEVIN (Israel): Once again a draft resolution
has been brought before the Council that does nothing
to promote the cause of peace in the Middle East.
But it does one thing: it places another obstacle in
the path of peace, The root cause of the disturbances
that erupted in Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District
was the growing realization among Palestinian Arabs
that an alternative existed to the PLO methods of
violence and destruction. Daily radio broadcasts and
incitement by the PLO, Syria and Jordan and provocations inside the areas became a significant cause of
the growing disturbances there. All this obviously
stems from the fear of the PLO and of the Jordanians
that they are losing their influence. At the same time,
lsrael for its part instituted civilian administration
in
the areas as a first step towards the autonomy envisaged in the Camp David accords.

6. The draft resolution
in auestion savs nothing
about the instigations from abriad. It also ignores the
fact that some Arab countries have been funnelling
money through their agents into these areas and
organizing subversion. Accordingly, no other conclusion can be reached but that the draft resolution is
designed to condone and to encourage incitement. The
Jordanian threat to impose the death penalty on anyone
working for coexistence between Israelis and Palestinian Arabs has been purposefully
omitted.
No
wonder, considering the author of the draft. Not a
single word in the draft supports understanding and
conciliation.
The ongoing peace process is studiously
avoided. All this is another Arab exercise in futility,
another error ofjudgement on the part of Arab leaders.

saddened at the tragic loss of life and injuries
have occurred.

12. Together with the Governments of the other
member States of the European Community,
my
Government has appealed urgently [SLY S/14%54] for
an end to the dangerous cycle of violence and repression. In this connection, my Government
has denounced the recent Israeli measures dismissing the
democratically elected mayors of Nablus and Ramallah
and the disbanding of the Municipal Council of AlBireh. Like the rest of the Ten, my Government
considered that such measures, together with the violntion of the liberties and rights of the inhabitants of the
occupied territories, which have followed the illegal
extension of Israeli law, jurisdiction
and administriltion to the Golan Heights, can only damage the pr-ospects for peace.

7. Israel will not tolerate terror and subversion in
Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District; nor will it
stand by while other attempts are made to thwart the
peace process or disturb the groundwork being laid for
coexistence and co-operation between the Israelis and
the Palestinian Arabs.

13. My Government has taken this view because we
strongly believe that it is only through the creation of
an atmosphere of trust and confidence between Israel.
the Arab inhabitants of the occupied territories and
neighbouring Arab States that there can be hope of an
advance towards a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace settlement. We believe that recent events and
the particular measures which I have cited, far from
creating trust, have served to undermine it. In 0111
view the Government of Israel can best act to restore
calm and to create confidence in its intentions by
rescinding the measures in question. My Government wishes to reiterate its view that the provisions
of the fourth Geneva Convention of I2 August 194Y1
continue to apply to all the territories occupied by
Israel since 1967. We attach very great importance to
respect for both the spirit and the letter of this COW
vention.

8. The draft resolution before us notwithstanding,
Israel will continue its efforts to create an atmosphere
conducive to the peace process. Israel will continue to
work towards the establishment
of autonomy
in
Judea, in Samaria and in the Gaza District, in accordance with the Camp David framework for peace in the
Middle East.
9. The PRESIDENT
(interprctotion
jwn Frewlt):
I take it that the Council is ready to proceed to the
vote on the draft resolution S/14943 before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put it to the vote.

In ~cI\Y>/(~: China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom
of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Against:

United

which

14. At the same time, we believe that it is incumbent on all concerned in the region to make a renewed
effort before it is too late to bring about the conditions which will make a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement possible. For it is only through such
a settlement that an acceptable and enduring solution
to the present problems will finally be achieved, MY
Government
reaffirmed, in the statement by the
European Council of 30 March [ibid.], our wish to
contribute to the achievement of such a peace. We
continue to believe that the basis for this peace can he
found in the principles enunciated in the Venice declaration of 13 June 1980, which, basing itself on Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) called for the
general recognition and implementation
of two fundamental principles, namely, the right to existence and
security of all the States in the region, including Israel,
and justice for all the peoples of the region, whicll
implies the recognition of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination [S//4009, pnra. 41.

States of America

10. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpwtation
,fiorn Fwwh):
I shall now call on those members of the Council who
have asked to be allowed to make statements after the
voting.
I I. Sir Anthony PARSONS
(United Kingdom):
My
Government
has been seriously disturbed
by the
recent grave events in the occupied territories of the
West Bank and Gaza. We are deeply concerned and

15. My Government has just voted in favour of the
draft resolution sponsored by Jordan. We are in agree2

ment with it-indeed,
operative paragraph I faithfully
reflects the views of the member States of the European Community to which I earlier referred. But, at
the same time, it is no secret that my delegation,
together with like-minded delegations, made .a particular effort-indeed,
a most strenuous effort-to
encourage agreement on a text which could have
commanded consensus in the Council. We are extremely disappointed that this was not successful. We continue to believe that it is only through consensus that
the Council can contribute effectively and enduringly
in addressing problems relating to the Arab-Israel
dispute. It is my very real hope and wish that the
Council will be able to achieve such a consensus in
any future consideration of this subject.
16. Mr. LICHENSTEIN

nately in this respect Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (I973), forged by this body in past years after
full debate and consultation,
provide an available,
ready-made, internationally
approved basis for a just
and lasting settlement of the outstanding issues. These
resolutions are the foundation of the Camp David
framework. They remain the only existing basis for a
negotiated solution leading to a resolution of the conflict. We deeply regret that this draft resolution makes
no reference to resolutions 242 (1967) or 338 (1973).
20. We would have preferred to have had before us
a draft resolution that we could have supported, one
that expressed in a non-condemnatory
way the Council’s great concern about the recent tragic events,
which have resulted in injury and loss of life on both
sides. Instead, the draft resolution we were called on
to vote on this evening uses strongly denunciatory
language and does not take into account the complexity of the problem. Nor would it lead us closet
to a solution: on the contrary, it would lead us away
from an ultimate solution. Since this draft resolution,
in our judgement, did not promote, will not promote,
the cause of peace- which should always be the paramount concern of the Council-the
United States was
compelled to vote “no”.

(United States of America):

Recent events on the West Bank have been a source

of deep concern to the Government and people of the
United States. In the last few days the level of tension
and violence has somewhat subsided, but of course
we are aware of the danger of a resurgence and of a
renewed crisis in this complex and emotional situation. For that reason we believe that the Council’s
primary role in the present context should have been
to urge restraint on the parties to avoid any new outbreak of violence which could endanger international
peace and that its other, equally essential role should
have been to take a step, at least, on the road to a
secure and lasting peace. We do not believe that the
Jordanian draft resolution achieved that objective.

21,

Mr. de La BARRE

(intPI.pI’Ct(/tion~onz

de NANTEUIL

(France)

Fwnc*h): Mr. President, first of all

I should like to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of
April and also to commend you on the impartial and
excellent way you have been discharging your duties.

17. I wish to address myself to the dismissal of the
three West Bank mayors referred to in the draft resolution. My country was founded on, and is proud of
its support for, the concept of government by freely
elected officials. We are always concerned when
elected officials are no longer able to serve their constituents. At the same time, it is useful to recall that
the present situation on the West Bank is that of belligerent occupation, subject to the rules laid down for
such rCgimes in the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949,
and that Convention is a carefully drawn and balanced
set of rules seeking to serve the interests of the occupier and the occupied alike.

22, I should also like you to transmit to Mrs. Kirkpatrick the expression of my gratitude for the outstanding way in which she also carried out her duties
when she presided over the Council last month.
23. The spiralling cycle of violence on the West
Bank and in Gaza after the unrest that followed in the
Golan the adoption by Israel of a law extending to that
territory its legislation, its jurisdiction
and its administration, is of the greatest concern to my Government.
24. My delegation most vigorously denounces the
decision of the Israeli authorities to disband the Municcipal Council of Al-Bireh and to dismiss the Mayors
of Nablus and Ramallah. We also most categorically
denounce the repression in the occupied territories of
the West Bank and Gaza and steps that are likely to
prevent the democratically
elected authorities from
carrying out their duties. By the same token, my Covernment is disturbed by the acts of violence involving
several Palestinians
in the West Bank which have
involved new loss of human life.

IS. There is no provision in the fourth Geneva
Convention for the election of public officials-which
Israel none the less permitted in 1972 and 1976, thereby
going beyond the requirements of the Convention. In
any event, article 54 of the Convention gives the
occupying Power the unrestricted right to dismiss
public officials, whether they be appointed or elected.
As we would not wish Israel to be selective in its own
application of the Convention to the occupied territories, so we should not be selective in our criticism,
denouncing Israel for violations where in fact no
violations of the Convention have taken place.

25. The policy of *firit accompli
pursued by Israel
in the territories it has occupied since 1967 is unacceptable to France and contrary ta international
law, in
particular the Hague Convention
of l907? and the
Geneva Convention of I2 August 1949.

19. But the goal, of course, is to move beyond belligerency to a state of peace. This is the higher duty
-indeed,
the highest duty-of
the Council. Fortu-

3

26. More generally, in application
of a basic principle of its policy, and as was recalled by the President
of the French Republic on 4 March, France can only
disapprove of any unilateral
measure imposed on
any State or people in the Middle East region. We
request that there be respect for democratic liberties
and an end to the spiralling violence and repression.
We would observe that any decision that violates the
acknowledged rights of the population of the occupied
territories renders more difficult the search for a just
and lasting peace in the region.

Israel, the principles set out in resolution 242 (1967)
have not been implemented.
35. The result has been that a dangerous and inherently unstable occupation of territories has continued.
This has been a source of political if not of military
weakness for Israel, and it has been a continuing source
of anger and resentment for those who live under
occupation and the Arab world at large. More recently
it appears that new claims to a right to retain certain
territories have been made, and there is in some
quarters a fear of new moves towards annexation.

27. It is through dialogue and negotiation,
and not
through violence and repression, that we shall be able
to achieve a peace that will allow security for all the
States of the region and justice for all peoples that
wish to be able to enjoy their legitimate rights in theil
homeland,

36. All of us should know from examples in other
parts of the world how dangerous it is if deep-seated
grievances and a sense of alienation within a community are allowed to continue with no evidence of a
real political settlement in sight but instead a continuing reliance on security forces or an army to maintain order and calm. Any such situation must be
described as explosive.

28. Mr. DORR (Ireland): Mr. President, I should like
to begin by congratulating
you as you assume office
for this month and to wish you well in the difficult
month that I fear you may have ahead.

37. The danger is built into the situation and it exists
whatever the behaviour of the security forces, although
it can be aggravated if they behave harshly, In such
a situation things may appear quiet and some time
may pass without major tremors. But, so long as thcrc
is no adequate political settlement, the danger of
an explosion is always there. In each generation young
people grow up imbued with bitterness about events
which may have long preceded their birth. For them
the past lives and past injustice is not forgotten as it
would be in a normal society. It is kept vividly alive by
a sense of alienation from present political structures.

29. I should also like to express my good wishes and
thanks to your predecessor, Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
for the
way in which she conducted our proceedings last,
month.
30. The present deteriorating
situation in the occupied territories of the West Bank, Gaza and the
Golan Heights is a matter for concern because it
involves loss of life and injuries and because it gives
rise to wider dangers to peace in the region. One
cannot ignore the human dimension, but it is this latter
aspect which must be a cause of the most serious
concern to the Council.

38. This is the atmosphere which prevails today in
the occupied territories and it is this atmosphere which
gives us cause for the most serious concern and which
makes the situation so potentially dangerous.

31. These developments
in the occupied territories
cannot be seen in isolation. The dangers which they
present become clearer when they are seen against the
background of the whole situation in the region.

39. The heads of State and Government of the European Community, of which Ireland is a member, have
already expressed their grave concern on behalf of
the European Economic Community at their meeting
in Brussels on 29 and 30 March, as my colleague the
representative
of the United Kingdom has noted

32. Resolution 242 (1967) clearly established two principles as basic to any settlement: first, withdrawal by
Israel from occupied territories and, secondly, full
acceptance of the right of all States to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries.

[J7U1’~1.12 1.
40. The Council in particular,
it seems to US, has
every reason for serious concern. It was because we
believed that there was an immediate need to press
all concerned to show restraint that we thought that
this call should at the present time be addressed Particularly to Israel, the occupying Power. Israel, we
felt, should be asked to rescind its decisions dismissing
the elected Municipal Council of Al-Birch and the
Mayors of Ramallah and Nablus, since those decisions were the immediate cause of the present tension.
The Council could also have made it clear that the
occupation must inherently be temporary by reaffirming that it is inadmissible to acquire territory by
force, and the Council could have reaffirmedonce again

33. As I have said before in the Council, we believe
that those principles are a necessary but not a sufficient
condition for a peace settlement. They are not sufficient because they do not cover what must be an
important part of any comprehensive
settlement, the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people: but they are
necessary, and their validity must be upheld.
34. We must presume that when resolution
242
(1967) was adopted, the Council intended that it would
be implemented
at an early date. Instead, I.5 years
have passed: there has been another major war and,
except for the Sinai and relations between Egypt and
4

I

that the terms

1949’ continue
territories.

of the fourth Geneva Convention of
to apply in full to all of the occupied

41. We worked informally
with other delegations
to secure agreement in the Council on the basis of the
points I have just outlined. The draft resolution that
has just come before the Council differed somewhat
from the text which we in our informal efforts had
hoped might serve as a basis for consensus. Nevertheless we voted in favour of that draft resolution.
42. But these steps by the Council could only be a
short-term attempt to reduce the tensions of the past
weeks. Tensions and danger will persist and grow
unless and until there is serious progress towards a
comprehensive settlement and an end to occupation.
43. We hope that despite the fact that the draft
resolution has not been adopted, all in a position to do
so will use their influence in favour of restraint in the
present dangerous situation, and we hope too that
Israel, which has a particular responsibility,
will be
wise enough to ease present tensions by rescinding
its recent decisions removing an elected municipal
council and two mayors in the West Bank area.
,:

44. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Sir, I have asked to
speak to make a brief explanation of vote, and yet
I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of April. It is indeed fortunate
that a person with your experience and abilities will
be guiding the work of the Council at a time when it
has been called upon to deal with troublesome questions. I should like also to express my gratitude to
Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
who so skilfully presided over the
work of the Council during the month of March.
45. We are once again witnessing an increase in tension in the occupied Arab territories of the Golan
Heights and the West Bank because of Israel’s measures to isolate towns in the area, dissolve a town
council and dismiss its mayor together with those of
several other towns. My delegation is deeply distressed by this situation, particularly
since it has
resulted in bloodshed among the local inhabitants.
Israel’s latest actions clearly violate the relevant
Council resolutions as well as the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of I2 August 1949.’ We deplore these measures and we fear that they will heighten tensions not
only in the occupied territories but throughout the
Middle East. Moreover, they are detrimental to the
atmosphere that must prevail if the problem is to be
settled peacefully,
46. It is incumbent upon the Council to express its
profound regret at the deterioration
of conditions in
the region and to demand that Israel rescind its recent
measures immediately,
It is our earnest hope that
Israel will respect the will of the international
com-

munity so that tensions in the occupied territories
be eased without delay.

can

47. Although the latest situation in the occupied
Arab territories has been created by Israel’s most
recent actions, to which I have just referred, the principal cause of the problem lies in Israel‘s prolonged
occupation of the Arab territories
since 1967. We
therefore strongly urge Israel to withdraw as soon as
possible from those territories
in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (l973), so that the
Palestinian people can exercise their right to selfdetermination
in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
48. The international
community,
including Japan,
has been making utmost effort towards the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in
the Middle East. Israel’s recent actions in the occupied Arab territories have made the solution of the
Palestinian
question even less attainable
and obstructed international
efforts to achieve a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. It is our sincere
hope that Israel will fully co-operate with international endeavours towards the achievement of peace
throughout the region. Under these circumstances,
my delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution.
49.

Mr.

de PINIl%
(Spain) (itztcrprettrtiun
from
Mr. President, as previous speakers have
done, I should like to congratulate you on your assumption of such a lofty post. Apparently, this is going to
be a very busy month, and 1 wish you all success
which I trust you will achieve because of your wellknown skills. Of course, you may count on my delegation’s support as you discharge your duties.
Sptrnish):

50. As this is the first time this month that I have
spoken in the Council, I should like to express special
satisfaction with the presidency of Mrs. Kirkpatrick,
to whom I wish also to pay a tribute.
5 I + The constant deterioration of the situation in the
Arab territories occupied by Israel is a matter of concern, since it might lead to confrontations fraught with
dangerous consequences to peace not only in the region
but also throughout the world.
52. On 26 March, a spokesman of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Spain made the following statement:
“The Spanish Government
is following
with
concern the serious events occurring in the West
Bank and Gaza as a result of measures taken by the
Israeli authorities in these occupied Arab territories
and condemns the violence with which the demonstrations were suppressed, resulting in the wounding
of many and the death of several Palestinian citizens.”
53. In January 12322126 to 233&h mwting],
the
Council had the opportunity
to consider the situation

of tension caused by the annexationist
measures
adopted by the Government of Israel concerning the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights.

population. The Palestinian and other Arab peoples of
the occupied Arab territories are experiencing escalated harassment, expulsions, expropriations and the
demolition and sealing of dwellings. They are faced
with the decisions to disband elected municipal councils and to remove mayors from their offices. They are
witnessing the construction of more and more new
Israeli settlements. They are subjected to methods and
measures of terror, with a growing number of victims.

54. It is difficult now not to see in the most recent
measures adopted by the Israeli authorities on the West
Bank and in Gaza the continuation of a deliberate and
planned policy designed, ultimately, to perpetuate the
occupation
of the territories acquired by force in
contravention
of universally recognized principles of
international
law.

61. The steps that are being taken by the Israeli
authorities originate in and stem from the programme
of step-by-step destruction of the Arab character of
these territories. This programme, which is being pursued with iron-fist consistency, cannot but cast a long,
ominous shadow over the region. One of the methods
applied is the constant broadening and intensification
of the colonization. It reflects the continued policy of
,fuit (rc~cotnpli pursued by the occupying Power, which
makes plausible the ultimate
annexation of the
occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza as
proven by the cases of Arab Jerusalem and the Golan
Heights.

55. My delegation would like once again to put on
record its great concern about this series of measures,
especially
the dismissal of democratically
elected
mayors. However, we cannot be satisfied with the
mere rescinding of measures or provisions which,
by their very nature, are provisional.
56. As long as there is no definitive withdrawal by
Israel from the Arab territories occupied since 1967,
it is an illusion io think that a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East is possible. It is
impossible
to believe in the sincerity of the peace
intentions of those who, declaring their support for
negotiation,
seem to think that the best way to prepare for dialogue is by repressive and intimidating
actions.

62. The Israeli decisions to disband the freely elected
Municipal Council of Al-Bireh in the occupied territory
of the West Bank and to replace it by direct Israeli
rule and to remove by force the Mayors of Nablus and
Ramallah constitute yet another step in the policy of
creeping annexation and are part of the Tel Aviv
strategy to tighten its hold on the West Bank and
Gaza and eventually to annex those lands. Constituting
a flagrant violation of the norms of international law,
being a grave breach of international conventions and
defying the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as of numerous resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council, the
policy of the Israeli authorities can only add to the
further aggravation of tension in the Middle East, one
of the most sensitive areas in the world.

57. We continue to believe that it is necessary for
all countries of the region to bend every effort to find
a solution to the serious problems which for more than
30 years now have constituted a tragic reality. But the
path towards this long-sought peace ties in overcoming
the obstacles which have been so persistently erected
by the Government of Israel.
58. Mr. WYZNER
(Poland): Sir, I should like at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. We are confident that,
as the representative of non-aligned Zaire-a country
with which Poland is linked with many ties of friendship
and mutually beneficial co-operation-you
will guide
our work with your well-known wisdom, experience
and impartiality.

63. Poland, whose contribution
to the cause of
peace in the Middle East through its participation in
the United Nations peace-keeping forces need not be
emphasized in this chamber, maintains its consistent
position on the question of Palestine. The questian of
Palestine is the crux, indeed, of the Middle ‘East conflict. It is the key to its settlement: a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in this sensitive region cannot be
established without the withdrawal of Israel from all
the Arab territories, including Arab Jerusalem, which
it has occupied since 1967. Without the achievement
of a just solution to the problem of Palestine, based
on the recognition of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, peace can hardly endure in that region.
Ignoring the question of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people can lead to a further impasse,
increasing the tensions even more and making the
Prospects for peace more distant.

59. I also wish to express our gratitude to Mrs. Jeane
Kirkpatrick
for the efficient way in which she guided
us through what certainly was a difficult month of
March.
60. As the Council meets today to discuss the question of the situation in the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories and to vote on the draft resolution submitted by the representative of Jordan, the gravity of
the situation, as well as the rapidity of its deterioration, poses a serious threat to peace and security in
the region. These events are the tragic consequences
of the expansionist policy of Israel aimed at breaking
the determined resistance of the Arab people. They
result directly from the persistent escalation of Israeli
repressive policies and measures against the Arab

64. For all those reasons we voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted by the representative Of
Jordan.
6

65. The PRESIDENT
(intoprctrrtion
fiwm Fwrwk):
I shall now speak as the representative of ZAIRE.

within the framework of the efforts i\nd the draft resolution of Ireland. which we supported. to achieve ;I
consensus which would have enabled pressure to be
put on the opinion of the international
community
as a whole in order to bring peace to the region-if
the draft resolution had hinged upon the need to
rescind the decision to dissolve the Municipal Council
of Al-Bireh and to dismiss the Mayors of Nablus and
Ramallah, and upon the need for Israel to rescind the
measures it has adopted in the West Bank and abandon
any policy or action aimed at changing the physical
character,
demographic
composition,
institutional
structure and legal status of the occupied territories.

66, The Council is once again seized of the thorny
question of the Middle East and Palestine as a result
of the disquieting situation that prevails in the occupied
Arab territories,
particularly
the West Bank and
Gaza.
67. The world, including Zaire, has been following
with well-justified concern the dissolution of the Municipal Council of Al-Bireh and the dismissal of the
democratically
elected Mayors of Ramallah
and
Nablus, a dismissal that seems to be intended to
introduce or to extend Israeli jurisdiction,
legislation
and administration
to the occupied Palestinian and
Arab territories of the West Bank and Gaza, although
the Council, through its resolution 497 (198 I), has
unanimously
adopted an unambiguous
position relating to such measures.

72. Unfortunately,
we did not have enough time
to obtain the necessary instructions concerning the
new text, and the efforts undertaken with a view to
obtaining a unanimous
resolution
hinging upon a
unanimous
and constructive
approach have been
thwarted and defeated by rigidity of position which
apparently is not based on the desire to find an appropriate solution to the problem.

68. After the annexation of Jerusalem and of the
Syrian Golan Heights and the dismissal in 1980 of the
Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul, all this is most disturbing and it is understandable that the people and
their elected officials in the Arab territories of occupied Palestine should ascribe to the Israeli authorities
the obvious intention of wishing purely and simply
to annex their territories. Who indeed could say anything other than that? The present chain of confrontation cannot fail to have grave consequences for peace
and security, both in that region and in the world.
How often have we said that it was imperative, in the
interests of all parties, to stop the cycle of violence in
the Middle East, and called upon the parties concerned to understand the need to abide by the principles set forth in the pertinent Council resolutions in
order to reach a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Middle East crisis, through peaceful
means and through negotiations, taking into account
that the question of Palestine lies at the heart of the
problem of the Middle East?

73. That is why the Republic of Zaire. while reaffirming here its unswerving support for the Arab and
Palestinian cause and calling upon Israel to withdraw from the occupied Arab territories and respect
the relevant resolutions of the Council. abstained in
the vote on this draft resolution.
74.

I now resume my functions

as PRESIDENT.

75. Mr, NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): A people that sees
with its own eyes and hears with its own ears, day in
and day out, the ruthless obliteration
of its existence
needs no goading from anybody to struggle for its
survival.
76. If assistance-meagre
as it is-has been extended
to the Palestinian inhabitants,
it has been extended
primarily by family, relatives and public funds and has
been given solely to keep a whole population alive
and afloat.

69. The way in which the parties concerned react
to calls for calm and moderation and to the many
appeals by the Council and the international
community for respect for the relevant resolutions designed to help in the quest for a comprehensive, just
and lasting settlement to the Middle East conflict is
B matter of very great concern to us. There can be no
question of settling the complex problem ofthe Middle
East and Palestine by expedient unilateral solutions,
which consist purely and simply of grabbing the
occupied Arab Palestinian territories.

77. The Israelis would love nothing better than to see
those inhabitants starve to death and even to see the
municipal
services deteriorate
to the point where
epidemics become rampant. The people are even
denied the right to build houses. They are prohibited
from digging wells. They are not allowed to engage in
trade. The Israelis want them to be slave labour
-drawers
of water and hewers of wood-or
that is
what they think.

70. The solution to the thorny question of the Middle
East and Palestine with the sudden changes inherent
in the unilateral acts undertaken in Jerusalem, the
Syrian Golan Heights, the West Bank and Gaza must
be both Arab and Israeli.

78. The Palestinian people, who risked their lives and
bared their chests in confronting
lethal weaponry,
can never-we all know what human nature is likebe prompted or catalyzed by all the gold in the world
to die in vain. The Israeli occupiers will, in the nottoo-distant future, realize this simple, banal fact.

71. In this matter, it appeared to the delegation of
Zaire that the members of the Council were ready,

79. The draft resolution which was actually adopted
but was vetoed by the United States just now is self7

explanatory. J wish to express our deep appreciation
to the Member States which have just cast their affirmative votes in a gesture of legal and moral support
for the beleaguered Palestinian Arab people who are
struggling-literally-to
preserve their existence in
their ancestral homeland.

85. Yesterday, I received a letter in the mail fru,m
Rabbi Blat], a very distinguished Judaic scholar, who
probably knows more about Judaism than anyone
else in the world. He asked me to pass on this short
message-there
is a much longer message which
J shall not cite this evening, but which I shall pass on
for circulation later on. In this short message he saidand this is not an Arab complaint, but rather iI cornplaint by a very distinguished Jewish scholar, who wits
born in Palestine, who knows Palestine, who knew
better days in which Arab and Jew lived side by side
before the intrusion of the Zionist mythology of exclusiveness:

80. They had already endured IS years of one of the
most ruthless occupations and decimations of a whole
people in history, openly designed to supplant the
lawful inhabitants of the Holy Land and to effect the
annexation of their territory; and today the ruthless
military crackdown
by the forces of occupation,
whether they be called organized or unorganized,
entered its sixteenth day, accompanied by horrendous
suffering in every home and in every walk of life-if
we can still talk about life in any meaningful sense,
other than in contradistinction
to death, in the context
of our peoples’ tragedy.

“We want in this letter to express our revolt ;md
our grief concerning the situation in the Holy Land,
where the Government
of a State created with
bloodshed, continues, as in the past, to persecute
its inhabitants.
“The declaration
which our beloved leader.
Rabbi Blau . , . made more than ten years ago is,
unfortunately, of still more actuality than ever:

81. In the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, the entire
Syrian population
still in the area has been living
under a curfew and in confinement for six weeks on
end for refusing to relinquish its ten thousand-yearold Syrian identity because of an intruding Zionist conquest. I am talking about the remnants of the Syrian
population here, including its elderly religious leaders
-the vast majority of the population, almost 200.000
people, are in exile.

” ’ We in the Holy Land find ourselves in ;\n
unfortunate position, both materially and spiritually. Materially we are against our will in ;KI
independent nationalistic
State, labeled Jewish.
whose entire foundation and ways are opposed IU
our faith.

82. The reign of organized terror, mass detentions,
murder, annexation,
absorption,
strangulation
of
education, economic enterprise and the elementals of
human existence continue ruthless and unabated in a
futile attempt to break the will of an indomitable people
through tyranny and sadism. But the millenia of
history of the Palestinian people testify to their impregnability and their ability to survive, whatever the
magnitude of the transient odds they face.

” ‘Our Sages warned us against such a phenomenon two thousand years ago, The State has.
since its establishment,
been in a constant stale
of war and bloodshed. Jewry has always lived in
peace with its Arab neighbours, and we are cert;lin
that we could have continued living in the Holy
Land in peace with its Arab neighbours.
” ‘We decry bitterly the bloodshed of these
wars, diametrically
opposed to our will and our
faith. We look forward with trepidation and horrur
to the future predicted by our Sages for this indcpendent State.

83. The Council draft resolution is an assurance that
civilized humankind knows what is right and what is
inhuman and brutal and that it is eternally imbued with
the courage and wisdom to say so without let or hindrance, without fear or inhibition.
In the meantime,
the fact that the United States vote was a veto came
-sad to say-as no surprise to anyone. It was, believe
me, no surprise to anyone-for
a reason with which the
Council is all too familiar. It is my earnest hope that
one day the American voice at the Council-and
America is a super-Power-will
be, unlike today, in
accord with the general will of international
legality,
morality and justice, as well as in conformity
with
its own fundamental values.

” ‘Spiritually
we find ourselves under the rule
of Jews, devoid of faith, who aspire to live in
permissiveness and abandon. The education and
culture in like manner are leading our youth astray
in the Holy Land’ ”
-In schools they are taught that the Arabs are savages:
they call them “our Arabs”, referring to the 640,OQo
Palestinians in Galilee and elsewhere, who have been
“their Arabs” since 1948-

84. Only the other day, the representative of Israel
referred to the entire situation as a conflict between
Arab and Jew. Both my colleague, the representative
of the PLO, and I explained that we had known a
united Palestine in which Arab and Jew lived in friendly, amicable, normal and peaceful relations.

” ‘The situation to us is more bitter than death
itself, may God spare us.
‘% ‘Our Jewish brethren in exile among the
nations of the world live under no comparable
awful threat, either material or spiritual. We find
8

no formula to turn back the. wheels of confusion
that have run down Jewry in the Holy Land . . .’

independence of States: in order to prepare ri~r furthct
aggression against small countries,
medium-sized
countries and even big countries.

“We want the world to know that we, Jews
faithful to our Law, to our destiny, want in the Holy
Land the establishment of a State under whose
government all its inhabitants will live together in
peace and friendship.”

94. The other veto was also a veto of universally
accepted principles.
95. The falsity of what the United States has said is
obvious. It said that whenever the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949’ does not contain ;I specific provision. the occupying Power can commit any crime
it wishes. But above and beyond the Geneva Convention there is the principle of equity and justice.

86, The PRESIDENT
(infcrpl.Pttrtioll
.fiwn French):
The representative of the Syrian Arab Republic has
asked to speak. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
87, Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic): Sir, as
this is the first time I have spoken before the Council
under your presidency, I should like at the outset to
extend to you my sincerest congratulations on your
assumption of that important post.

96. You claim to have democracy in the United
States: yet you prevent three or more mayors even from
taking care of their towns’ sewer systems, You have
vetoed the right of peoples LO resist foreign occupation. But we are going to resist the Israeli occupation
by all means possible. We are proud to see adolcscents, students, girls and boys throwing stones, and
more than stones. We shall encourage them to do that.
The number of dead is not important: the important
thing under occupation is to liberate the territory.

88. I must express my feelings after today’s historic
events. We, the third-world countries, have received
two United States vetoes.
89. The first was a veto of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations: the United
States has vetoed the obligation of States to respect the
principles of the Charter, particularly those relating to
non-intervention
and non-interference in the domestic
affairs of States, Israel does not respect those principles, nor does the United States: it is like Israel.

97. Our people. the Palestinians, Syrians and others.
have lost tens of thousands of martyrs, But the population of the Arab nation is 120 or I30 million, and WC
can afford to lose IO. 20, 30 or 40 million to fight
American imperialism
and the United States and
Israeli racist, Zionist, imported, synthetic occupaticm.
98. You have gone to the extent of encouraging the
Israeli occupying authorities to kill our peoples through
and because of your veto. The situation in the West
Bank, in Gaza and in the Golan will not he hcttel
tomorrow because of your veto. It is going to worsen
because you have encouraged your Israeli henchmen
and the terrorist Begin, the assassin of Count Folke
Bernadette, to increase and escalate their inhuman
practices against children, women and the elderly,
against our land and against our cities, against our
culture and civilization.
However, the battle has not
ended with the United States veto: it has just begun,
and the United States is going to pay the price of its
veto. And this time, the price will be very high. YOUI
political illiteracy,
your callous approach to world
problems, your disregard for the human being have
made you, the United States , a nightmare for mankind
and have made your tool, Israel, our permanent
suppressor.’

90. The United States has vetoed the most sacred
principle for those who have endured years, indeed
centuries, of white colonialism and now are enduring
white United States imperialism:
the Charter principle of the right of peoples to self-determination.
It
has been trampled on, violated by the United States
veto. The self-determination
of peoples was vetoed
because it applies a!so to the Palestinians: that was
the reason for the United States veto.
91. The principle of the non-use or threat of use of
force has also been flouted, disregarded and dismembered, encouraging IJnited States imperialism and its
tools to use force and to threaten other countries,
particularly
small countries and countries under
occupation.
92. Universal principles enshrined in the Charter and
universally
recognized in all instruments,
whethel
ratified by the United States or not, have been trampled
upon in order to save Israel’s neck.

99. I should like to draw the President’s attention
to the situation in the Golan Heights. The following
acts are being committed:
first, the Israeli military
authorities have been reinforcing their troops in the
Golan Heights since its annexation on 14 December
1981: yet the representative of the United States still
savs this is not annexation. not an act of force. but that
it is il legal act. that it is the law and th;\t not one gun
CPI’;.)w shot ljx‘,, txcn fired since the Israeli occupation authorities have been there. Annexation,
there-

93. The principle of the territorial
integrity and
political independence of States has been trampled
upon, for the United States is an expansionist State.
We are not now going to mention how it expanded
and where it expanded: the country concerned may one
day reclaim its occupied territories. That. is why the
United States had to veto a universally accop~c’d
principle, that of the territorial integrity and political
9

fore, under the American interpretation,
must be
accompanied
by active belligerency.
This is a new
concept of international law. In other words, if someone kills a person with a gun, he is an assassin, but if
he strangles his victim, he is not. This is the logic of
the United States. This is the political and juridical
illiteracy of the United States,
100. Secondly, all of the leaders of the Golan region
are being detained. Since I4 February, the entire
population of the Golan has been out in a general strike
in protest of the imposition of Israeli nationality and
identity cards. Israeli measures have gone so far as to
prevent people from marrying if they do not submit an
Israeli identity card. The dead cannot be buried if the
corpse has no Israeli identity card. A child cannot be
registered in the civil register if he does not bear an
Israeli identity card. I should like to quote from the
daily news bulletin of the Jewish Telegraphic Agency
of Tel Aviv dated 21 March:
“The Druze on the Golan Heights began the
sixth week of their general strike today”-this
was
21 March, and it is now therefore the eighth week“in protest against Israel’s annexation
of that
territory last month. The strike, with shops, schools
and business establishments
shut and Druze empfoyed in Israeli concerns refusing to go to theirjobs,
is estimated to be about 80 per cent effective, The
four villages where the Golan Druze population is
centred have been sealed off by the Israeli authorities, and inasmuch as the residents have refused to
accept Israeli identity cards, they are not permitted to leave. The news media have also been
barred.”
This-and
I am again addressing myself to the representative of the United States-is
your democracy,
this is Israel’s benign democratic occupation:
“The news media have also been barred, raising
angry protests and putting into question the credibility of official reports from the area by the army.
Druze farmers have complained
that their cattle
are dying because they are not allowed to take them
to pasture near the Syrian border. The army claims
the cattle are being led to pasture by farmers with
Israeli identity cards and have not suffered. The
media are unable to determine
which version is
correct.”
101. We know the true version. You, Mr. President.
know it, and everyone here knows it, save for the
United States, which feigns not to know it in order to
protect the Israeli annexation of the Golan Heights.
102. According to fhe same report, Israel was embarrassed when the International
Committee
of the Red
Cross (ICRC) in Geneva flatly denied yesterday a
claim made by the army-1 refer- to the Israeli armylast week that an ICRC representative
had expressed
satisfaction with the medical condition of the Golan

Druze. According to a military spokesman, the repr’esentative visited the region on I6 March and astertained that reports of a shortage of medicine in the
requesting town were incorrect, ICRC said yesterday
in Geneva, however, that the Israeli military authorities
had denied its local representative freedom of movement and freedom to choose those persons whom he
wanted to interview. As a consequence, ICRC was
unable to obtain the necessary information on the
humanitarian situation in the Golan and, according
to the Geneva statement, it was in no position to pass
judgement on conditions there. ICRC said it was
continuing its approaches to the Israeli authorities and
hoped to resume its work in the Golan Heights as soon
as possible. This means that the Golan region is completely sealed off and that even ICRC cannot enter the
area in order to evaluate the very precarious situation
there, particularly
the inhuman situation that has
existed since the Israelis have decided to put pressure
on the population either to adopt Israeli nationality and
obtain I.sraeli identity cards or to leave the country.
the “democratically”
occupied land.
103. The United States veto has also reassured us.
the 120 million Arabs and almost 800 million Muslims.
because the United States-although
in effect millions
of Europeans have voted in favour of that draft resolution-is
now unmasked as a bankrupt Power, both
intellectually and in the humanitarian field, threatening
the very foundations ofjustice and violating the Charter
of the United Nations.
104. The PRESIDENT
(inre/p,,~~trrric,il~~o,?l Ffrnc-h):
The representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization has asked to be allowed to speak and I cd
on him.
105. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): Mr. President, I know that you have had a very
hard day, but of course a price has to be paid for
assuming the responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security by becoming a member of the
Security Council. I shall not tax your patience.
106. Today was really a historic day in the life of the
Council. This morning the representative of the United
States told us “this is a serious international forum”
12347th tneetin~, ptrrtr. 461. Naturally, we were very
pleased to know that at last the Government of the
United States realizes that this is a serious international forum, not a centre for exacerbating situations,
as it claimed a few weeks ago.
107. Furthermore, the representative
ment of the United States told us:

of the Govern-

.L. . . selective invocation
and application of
universal principles does not strengthen either the
principles or the organizations dedicated to thei
realization and implementation.
It breeds cynicism.
It harms the United Nations. It mocks the search
for peace.” [/hi~i., ptr/*tr. 13 I

Mockery it is when we see that principles have become
a cheap commodity offered for trading by the representative of the Government of the United States.

really show that she is committed?
I know she is
expressing not her personaf feeling. but that of heI
Government, but why does she not show any interest
at all in the fate of 4 million Palestinians who since
1947 have been denied the right to live in their own
homes?

108. The representative of the United States told us
again this morning that article 21 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,’ is very important and
must be kept in mind. That article-which
she quotedreads:

112. She reminded us that this was “not a Turkish
bath” [2347t11 mcc~ting, prrr~r. 461. I should like to tell
her and the Council that we agree that this is not a
Turkish
bath, but my country has become a blood bath
-as a result of the criminal acts committed by the
neo-Fascists, the SS troopers, of Menachem
Begin
and his ilk.

‘*The will of the people shall be the basis of the
authority of government: this will shall be expressed
in periodic and genuine elections which shall be by
universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by
secret vote or by equivalent free voting procedures”.

I 13. The representative of the United States told
us that they really had had a deep concern, but that
now the situation has subsided. I do not know where
they get their news, but 1 do know that yesterday the
British Deputy Foreign Secretary was prevented from
meeting Mayors Shaka’a and Khalaf-because
“everything was really smooth, so why should he bethel
them? Let them have their nargila and coffee”. Does
that indicate that the situation has subsided?

109. I sincerely wish that the United States Government would apply that principle when it deals with the
question of the Palestinian people. Here we have a
people denied, through occupation, the right to hold
elections. Elections were held once, but then the
occupation authorities realized that the will of the
Palestinian people was to get rid of them and be liberated from the yoke of foreign domination. That is why
they did not repeat that exercise. As I said the other
day, I challenge them to repeat that exercise: then they
can judge what is the will of the people of Palestine
under occupation. But again, to be selective is really
a cheap commodity,
I IO. We were told
United States:

by the representative

I 14. We do know that in Duheishe refugee camp
near Bethlehem the curfew is still on and clashes have
been reported between the SS troopers and the villagers and refugees in the camp. We do know that
several shops were sealed off in Jenin and Bethlehem,
and we know also that the daughter of the Mayor of
Bethlehem was dismissed from her job as R teacher.
Everything is clear and quiet, you know-even
teachers are being expelled from their schools.

of the

“We have noted as well that this is not the first
time that United States initiatives aimed at resolving disputes have been met by deliberate escalations.” (//?id., /MM. 431

115. We know that in Nablus the troopers arrested
Salim Alka’Kani,
the Secretary of the Municipality
of
Nablus. A coupfe of days ago he was beaten and taken
to the hospital in Rafidia. He was discharged from the
hospital and on his way back home he was again
treated very, very badly by the troopers and received
injuries.

It is the United States that has torpedoed the sincere
efforts of the United Nations to bring peace to the
Middle East; it was intervention by the United States
when it supported the Governments
of Sadat and
Menachem Begin and signed the Camp David accords,
at the price of ignoring completely the presence of the
Palestinian people, 4 million of us, at the price of
annulling our right to live in our country in peace and
to exercise our right to self-determination.
What the
United States said this morning-and
they keep on
repeating it-is the height of hypocrisy.

I 16. We are told that the situation has subsided,
but we know that demonstrators in Toubas today were
confronted with Israeli fire.
I 17. I do not know on what the Government of the
United States bases its assessment. Perhaps it can be
moved only by real genocide. But I tell you this:
even if it subsides, the rebellion of our people has not
been extinguished and it has not been suppressed.

1 I I I The United States representative
expressed
concern about the newspaper La Prensrr and something called El N~/~IY) Dir/rib. All that is really very
touching. But what would she say about the suspension of the publication in Jerusalem of Al-Fqjr, Al
Shtr’h and AI-Quds? Those newspapers are not just
censored: they are banned and barred from circulation; they are not permitted to publish news. I quoted
from Shipler’s article the other day [234&h meeting,
pa~cr. 491; only 5 per cent of the news is permitted
there. Why does the United States representative not

I IX. We were told that the United States would
have loved to urge and call for restraint in order to
avoid renewed outbreaks of violence and that consequently the United States vetoed this draft resolution.
Why did it veto it? Because the United States wants
the people to submit. The United States wants to
endorse the latest Israeli violation and the United
States is inviting Israel to create a belligerent occupation. That is an invitation
to violence. In other words,
II

unless there is machine-gun fire, the occupation is a
benign one. The United States is inviting the people
to resort to machine guns and Molotov cocktails. Then
it will become belligerent.

representative
States.

of the Government

of the United

123. The United States has opted to be a minority of
one against the rest of the international community.
The United States Government has selected its friend
and ally but has alienated itself further. It has isolated
itself from the rest of the world and it has again affirmed where it belongs: it belongs in the ranks of
darkness and oppression with the neo-Fascists, 7%~
PLO holds the Government of the United States to be
not only an accomplice but also an equal partner in
the crime committed against our people, in the crime
to deprive our people of the right to a life in its own
homeland. The United States is equally responsible
for those crimes.

119. The issue is not legalish;
the issue is that there
is an occupation and the people under occupation
iire exercising their right to resist. This has been done
in every single country. Why should we be denied
that right? And yet, despite the fact that the European
Economic Community
has denounced the violations
[s(*(, S/140.54], the Government of the United States,
as clever as it is, says that there are no violations.
We have :just been told that no violations have taken
place. This is an insult to the intelligence of everyone
around this table. It could be called arrogance: it could
be called hypocrisy: but the very least it can be called
is a twisted approach.

124. 0~11’ people is determined to continue to exercise its right to rebel, its right to resist, its right to
pursue its struggle. The right of rebellion is one of the
rights in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.’
The Palestinian people will continue its struggle until
it attains its inalienable rights in its own homeland
in Palestine between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean, until all the Palestinians return to their
homes in accordance with their rights and the resolu.
tions of the General Assembly and other United
Nations organs, until we freely exercise our right IO
self-determination
in our own country and until WT
establish our own State. We shall continue to exercise our right to designate our representative, which
the Council has invited to participate in its deliberations, namely, the PLO, This is the only basis for a
comprehensive and just peace.

120. And then the United States expressed the wish
that it could have supported something. What can
the United States offer’? There is a challenge here. Let
us see what paper the United States can offer the
Council that would secure peace in the area. Let us
set what sort of ideas it has. Let it put them on paper
and commit itself to them. The United States is called
on to respect the will of the international
community
and the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and to bear in mind the fate of 4 million Palestinians,
For whatever the United States does. if it simply
tries to ignore the presence of 4 million Palestinians,
then it is not sincerely attempting to achieve peace
in the area.
121. The neg:ltive vote of this permanent member
in our view is a deliberate obstruction of the constructive role and duty of the Council, It is a deliberate
move by the Government of the United States further
to exacerbate the already explosive situation in the
arcupied Palestinian
and other Arab lands. It is a
deliberate move to exacerbate the situation in Ramullah. in Gaza. in Jerusalem-the
city of peace, It is a
deliberate move to perpetuate the bloodshed in the
streets of Jerusalem, Ramallah, Beir Zeit and other
places. It is ;L malicious effort at perpetuating instability
in the region. But more than that, it is an affirmation
of the United States Government’s
hostile policy
inimical to the Palestinian
people and to the Arab
people in general. It is an affirmation of United States
encouragement of Israel not only with financial and
military support but also with diplomatic support here
in the Council, through resort to the veto power.

125. The crimes currently being committed are bitt
the inevitable result of the prolonged occupation, of
Israel’s policies and design to annex the occupied
territories in their totality, to strangle-both
economically and physically-our
people in an attempt 40
force us to abandon our centuries-old homes and seek
refuge and become perpetual refugees. But our peoPles
under the leadership of the PLO, are not ready to
submit and we will resist until victory.
126. The PRESIDENT
(intcJr.pr.ptrrtiondja,n
FwJI(.~):
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of the consideration of the item on the agenda.

122. The Palestinian people under occupation are
more convinced than ever, as a result of the vote
taken just now, that their faith and trust in the IJnited
Nations is justified and that it pays good dividends,
In their name I wish to register our appreciation to
those delegations which voted in favour of the draft
resolution. which was muI-dered in cold blood by the

NOTES
I United Nations. T,~rrty SW’~.S. vol. 75, No. 973, p. 287.
! Carnegie
Endowment
for International
Peace. 7%~~ flWlirc
~‘~JI~IY~/I~~/ws I/M/ ~dtrrcttior~,s
((1’ /NY orrd 1’107 (New
York
Oxford
University
Press, 191.5). p. 100.
’ General Assembly
resolution
217 A (HI).

12

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New
SE

PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier.
InTormez-vous
aupres
des ventes.
New York ou Geneve.

COMO

PUBLICATIONS

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York
o Ginebra.

DE

in United

Nations.

New

York

NATIONS

LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estan en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a; Naciones

Litho

DES

sent en vente dam les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Its agences
1 : Nations

depositaims
du
Unies, Section

UNlDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccibn
de Ventas,
