S/2013/173

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 March 2013
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Yemen,
27 January 2013
I. Introduction
1.
In a letter dated 3 January 2013, the President of the Security Council
informed the Secretary-General that the members of the Council had decided to send
a mission to Yemen on 27 January. Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations, and Mark Lyall Grant, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations, co-led the mission, which was composed as follows: 1
Argentina

Mario Oyarzábal, Minister

Australia

Gary Francis Quinlan, Permanent Representative

Azerbaijan

Agshin Mehdiyev, Permanent Representative

China

Jiang Hua, First Secretary

France

Martin Briens, Deputy Permanent Representative

Guatemala

Gert Rosenthal, Permanent Representative

Luxembourg

Sylvie Lucas, Permanent Representative

Morocco

Mohammed Loulichki, Permanent Representative,
mission co-leader, assisted by Abdellatif Erroja,
Morocco mission expert

Pakistan

Raza Bashir Tarar, Deputy Permanent Representative

Republic of Korea

Shin Dong-ik, Deputy Permanent Representative

Russian Federation

Alexander A. Pankin, First Deputy Permanent
Representative

Rwanda

Olivier Nduhungirehe, Deputy Permanent
Representative

__________________
1 The United States of America was represented by its Ambassador to Yemen, Gerald Feierstein.

13-26422 (E) 250313

*1326422*

S/2013/173

Togo

Kodjo Menan, Permanent Representative

United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern
Ireland

Mark Lyall Grant, Permanent Representative,
mission co-leader, assisted by Simon Day, United
Kingdom mission expert

2.
The primary purpose of the mission, as set out in the terms of reference, was to
reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the ongoing political
transition process in Yemen, in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) Initiative and Implementation Mechanism leading towards elections in
February 2014. The mission also sought to assess the implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2051 (2012), and review the
progress made by the Government of Yemen towards launching the National
Dialogue Conference, restructuring the security and armed forces and addressing the
economic, as well as humanitarian, situation; consider the security situation,
including the ongoing work of the Government of Yemen to combat Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula and to carry out security sector reforms; highlight the Security
Council’s continued concern about those hindering or interfering in the transition,
noting that resolution 2051 (2012) allows for the imposition of sanctions on
spoilers; assess progress made towards activating pledges made in Riyadh on
4 September 2012 and at the Friends of Yemen Ministerial Meeting in New York on
27 September 2012 and reiterate the importance of immediate donor coordination
and funding in order to alleviate the critical humanitarian situation in Yemen; and
express strong support for the role of the international community in implementing
the GCC Initiative, including the five permanent members of the Security Council,
the Gulf Cooperation Council, the representative of the European Union and the
Secretary-General’s Special Adviser, as well as his good offices in Yemen.
3.
The Security Council mission, the first Council visit to Yemen and the first to
the region in five years, was conducted in support of the implementation of the GCC
Initiative and Implementation Mechanism, signed in Riyadh on 23 November 2011
in accordance with resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012). The terms of reference
of the mission, which were agreed on 14 January 2013, and its programme of work
are contained in annexes I and II to the present report.
4.
The mission left New York on 25 January and returned on 28 January. It
visited Yemen on 27 January and met in Sana’a with the President of Yemen, Abd
Rabbo Mansour Hadi, the Prime Minister, Mohammed Basindwah, and his Cabinet,
the members of the Preparatory Committee for the National Dialogue Conference,
including its Chairman, Abdul Karim al-Eryani, and representatives of political
parties, non-governmental organizations and civil society. The mission also met with
the Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Abdullatif bin Rashid
al-Zayani, together with the representatives of the Riyadh agreement guarantors and
witnesses (the G10, a group comprising China, France, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States, GCC
countries and the European Union). During the mission, the representatives of the
Security Council were also briefed by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on Yemen, Jamal Benomar, the United Nations Resident Coordinator in Yemen,
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and members of the United Nations country team.

2

13-26422

S/2013/173

II. Key issues
Status of the political transition process
5.
The mission recalled that, on 23 November 2011, the then President, Ali
Abdullah Saleh, the ruling General People’s Congress and the opposition Joint
Meeting Parties signed the GCC Initiative and Implementation Mechanism in
Riyadh for a transfer of power from the President to the Vice-President and a twoyear transition period. The agreement was the result of face-to-face negotiations
facilitated by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General, working closely with the
members of the Security Council, the Gulf Cooperation Council and other
international partners. The agreement sets out two phases. The first phase provides
for the formation of a Government of National Unity and early presidential elections
within 90 days of the signing of the agreement. The second phase (February 2012February 2014) includes the convening of a National Dialogue Conference feeding
into a constitution-making process followed by a referendum and culminating in
general elections in February 2014.
6.
The mission found that progress has been made in implementing the GCC
Initiative and Implementation Mechanism in accordance with resolutions 2014
(2011) and 2051 (2012). It noted the successful completion of the first phase of
Yemen’s transition agreement, which culminated in the election of Vice-President
Hadi as the new President of Yemen. It also took note of the progress made so far
during the second phase of the transition, in particular with regard to military
restructuring, efforts to regain control over territory lost to Al-Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula and other Islamic militants, and the completion of preparations for an allinclusive National Dialogue Conference. This view was confirmed at the meeting
with the Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the G10.
7.
Taken together, these achievements have enabled the people of Yemen to step
back from the brink of civil war. The mission recognized the commitment and
strong efforts of President Hadi and the Government of National Unity, led by Prime
Minister Basindwah, to keep the transition process on track.
8.
However, despite progress, the mission also found that many challenges
remain in the transition. The Government continues to maintain limited control over
parts of its territory, especially in the north and the south. Al-Qaida and other
militant armed groups remain an acute threat. Furthermore, the mission noted the
limited capacity of the Government to deliver basic services and humanitarian
assistance and to jump-start the economy.
9.
The mission also learned that actions aimed at undermining the Government
and the transition process continue, despite the demand by the Security Council in
paragraph 6 of resolution 2051 (2012) for the cessation of all such acts and an
expression of its readiness to consider further measures, including under Article 41
of the Charter of the United Nations, if such actions continue. The mission was
informed that, while some attacks against the country’s oil and gas infrastructure
were purely criminal, there is evidence that some attacks are politically motivated.
In addition, Council members were made aware that the Government’s efforts to
restructure the military and the implementation of the presidential decrees of 6 April
2012 concerning military and civilian appointments had been obstructed on several
occasions.

13-26422

3

S/2013/173

10. The mission also learned with regret that the adoption of Yemen’s transitional
justice law remains pending owing to political deadlock.
Security situation and security sector reform
11. The mission found that the Government has made progress in improving the
security situation in the country. However, it also got a clear sense that, overall, the
security situation remains tenuous.
12. While the security situation in Sana’a, Taiz and other areas has improved,
clashes between the Al-Houthi movement, Salafists and tribal groups associated
with the Islah Party in the north, where six wars have broken out since 2004,
continue. As a result, the Government has not been able to re-establish control in the
north. The Al-Houthis have expanded their political influence beyond Sa’ada
Governorate and established a strong presence in Sana’a and other parts of Yemen.
In the south, elements of the Al-Hirak movement calling for independence are
increasingly vocal, and the sentiment of “the street” is drawn to the extremes in the
absence of central government benefits. Furthermore, Yemen remains one of the
most heavily armed countries in the world, and new arms shipments are reportedly
entering the country from various countries of origin.
13. With regard to the threat of Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and other
militant armed groups in Yemen, the mission was informed that, under the
leadership of President Hadi, the Yemeni armed forces have succeeded in dislodging
Al-Qaida elements from cities and surrounding areas in Abyan and Shabwa
Governorates, thereby regaining government control over most of those territories.
However, it was also conveyed to the mission that the military offensive had led
Al-Qaida and other militant armed groups to disperse throughout the country and
infiltrate major cities. The increasing number of terrorist attacks, in addition to local
tribal attacks, against the oil and gas infrastructure of Yemen, as well as against
government and foreign targets in Sana’a and elsewhere, including numerous
assassination attempts on government officials, politicians, military personnel and
diplomats, is evidence of this development.
14. At its meeting with the Military Affairs Committee, which was established in
December 2011, the mission stressed that the work of the Committee marks an
important milestone in advancing the transition process. The Committee is headed
by President Hadi and includes the Minister of the Interior, Major General ‘AbdelQader Mohammad Qahtan, and the Minister of Defence, Major General Mohammad
Nasser Ahmad, as well as 12 senior army and security officers. The mission was
informed that, through the work of the Committee, armed confrontations between
rival military units and militias in the capital, Sana’a, have been brought to an end
and military units have been removed from the city. In many parts of the country,
roads have been opened and illegal checkpoints and barricades have been removed.
The mission was also informed that the military has cooperated in the preparations
and conduct of the presidential elections held in February 2012 and that police
forces have been deployed to protect State institutions.
15. The mission was further briefed about the efforts overseen by the Committee
to restructure the divided Yemeni military under a unified command. It was told
that, in the summer of 2012, this effort had met strong resistance by armed elements
loyal to former President Saleh, when both the Ministries of the Interior and
Defence had come under attacks by soldiers and security forces purportedly in anger

4

13-26422

S/2013/173

at the non-payment of their salaries and bonuses. The Government informed the
mission that it considered these attacks as intended to undermine the restructuring of
the security forces. In the same context, the mission was told that the Minister of
Defence had escaped at least six assassination attempts in the past 12 months.
16. In a further step to advance military reform, the President issued a decree on
19 December 2012 restructuring Yemen’s military forces into four major units —
land, maritime, air and border forces — and bringing counter-terrorism units under
the unified command of the Ministry of Defence. A previous decree issued in August
2012 integrated the First Armoured Division, previously under the command of
General Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar, and the Republican Guard, previously under the
command of General Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh, under the authority of seven
regional commands and a new presidential protection force. The mission recognizes
that, while this decree can be implemented only over time, its adoption represents an
important step towards bringing a Yemeni military under unified command.
17. The mission also raised the concern of the Security Council expressed in
resolution 2051 (2012) and in the report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2012/261) that children continue to be recruited and used by
armed groups and certain elements of the security forces, and suggested that the
issue of child protection should be included in the agenda of the National Dialogue
Conference. The Government responded that Yemeni law prohibits the recruitment
of any person under the age of 18 into the military and criminalizes any offence
against this law. Child soldiers were primarily recruited by other militias, and the
Ministry of Human Rights was addressing this issue.
Economic and humanitarian situation
18. The mission found that the humanitarian situation in the country remains
precarious. The President and the Government emphasized that Yemen was in urgent
need of international humanitarian assistance. The Government is still unable to
provide basic services, including water and electricity, in many parts of the country.
Sana’a and other cities require major investments in public infrastructure to meet
basic needs for all citizens. In the north, the six wars since 2004 have left largescale destruction. Similarly, the southern Abyan Governorate has been severely
affected by fighting. While 80 per cent of the internally displaced persons in the
south have returned to Abyan, in the north more than 300,000 remain, including
more than 100,000 each in Sa’ada and Hajjah Governorates. In addition, the
Government informed the mission that Yemen was hosting approximately 1.2
million Somali refugees and economic migrants and had very limited resources to
address threats caused by piracy on its coastline.
19. The United Nations country team informed the mission that half of the Yemeni
population of 24 million people do not have access to clean water and sanitation, 10
million people do not have sufficient access to food, and more than 6 million people
lack access to basic health care, including life-saving reproductive health services
for women and girls, as maternal mortality remains high. Of the 1 million children
suffering from acute malnutrition, more than 150,000 may die if they do not receive
immediate assistance. The 2013 Yemen humanitarian response plan targets one third
of the Yemeni population through a range of emergency-focused activities. The
funding requirements amount to $716 million, a 22 per cent increase from the 2012
response plan. The mission noted positively that, over the past months, the

13-26422

5

S/2013/173

Government has increased the number of registered non-governmental organizations
in Yemen. As a result, the presence of the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations has increased and humanitarian access has been improving in most
parts of the country.
20. On the economic front, the Government’s two-year development plan has to
address many challenges. Yemen has 6 million young people between the ages of 15
and 28 who are looking for employment, and each year Yemen produces an
additional 600,000 graduates seeking jobs. However, the Government is unable to
provide for their needs. President Hadi therefore called upon the Friends of Yemen
to transform over $7 billion in international pledges into concrete assistance. In a
positive development, the World Bank noted that Yemen had increased its financial
reserves from $3.7 billion during the 2011 crisis to $5.9 billion currently. The
Yemeni currency has also been stabilized.
21. The United Nations country team remains concerned that in 2013 extreme
poverty, volatile food and commodity prices and an increase in the cost of living
might further reduce food security and access to basic services and livelihoods for
millions of Yemenis. This situation might be further compounded by localized
conflict and the limited capacity of the Government to provide basic social services.
Preparations for the National Dialogue Conference
22. The mission noted that significant progress has been made in preparing for an
all-inclusive National Dialogue Conference. It stressed that the Security Council
considers the National Dialogue Conference a key element in Yemen’s political
transition as it determines the process of constitution drafting. Its conclusions will
feed into the formal drafting of a new constitution, which will be submitted to a
popular referendum. It will also discuss important issues, such as women’s rights,
economic development and the southern question.
23. The Chairman of the Preparatory Committee, Abdul Karim el-Eryani,
informed the mission that the Committee’s final report, which defines the structure
and organization of the Conference, was submitted to President Hadi on
12 December 2012. The mission noted positively that the Committee represents all
major political constituencies in the country, including the General People’s
Congress, the Joint Meeting Parties, youth, women, civil society, Houthis, Al-Hirak
and other political parties. The Committee is the first fully inclusive and
representative governmental institution to be established in Yemen. The Conference
will include 565 delegates from all of the country’s major constituencies listed
above, who will be divided into nine working groups. It has been agreed upon that
the Conference will include at least 50 per cent southern, 30 per cent women and 20
per cent youth representatives. The Conference will take decisions by consensus,
defined as a 90 per cent majority. One of the pending tasks remains the selection of
delegates for youth, women, civil society and the southern Al-Hirak.
24. The mission was informed that in the south there were increasing separatist
tendencies despite considerable international efforts to engage with the Al-Hirak
movement. Unrest in Yemen’s south has its roots in the marginalization and
discrimination of southerners since unification in 1990 and their perceived lack of
access to resources and opportunities. Long-standing grievances have left many in
the south feeling excluded. Since 2007, southerners have mobilized to demand equal
access to employment and government services, land reform and a degree of local

6

13-26422

S/2013/173

autonomy. This movement, known as the Al-Hirak, began as a rights-based
movement demanding equality under the rule of law. Over the years resentments
have deepened and radicalized some in the movement towards a maximalist agenda
for a separate State. President Hadi has started to address the concerns of
southerners through the issuance of Presidential Decree No. 2 on 8 January 2013,
establishing two commissions to redress long-standing grievances concerning land
and public employment.
25. The mission was informed that final political and logistical preparations,
including the identification of a Chairperson and a venue for the Conference, are
under way. On 21 January 2013, President Hadi established the general secretariat
of the National Dialogue Conference through presidential decree. President Hadi is
currently awaiting the list of names from each delegation for participation in the
Dialogue. The mission noted with regret that the commencement of the National
Dialogue had been delayed. The mission was told, however, that as soon as it begins
(the recently announced date for it is 18 March 2013) it will be held for a six-month
period and the constitution-drafting process could then begin three months into the
National Dialogue process, in order to catch up with the agreed transition timetable.
26. The mission was briefed by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
the considerable efforts of the United Nations to support the preparations and
conduct of the National Dialogue Conference, through a small special political
mission and a Multi-donor trust fund (the Yemen National Dialogue and
Constitutional Reform Trust Fund).
International support for the transition process
27. The President, the Government and many other interlocutors expressed strong
appreciation for the roles of the Gulf Cooperation Council, the United Nations, the
G10 ambassadors and the members of the Friends of Yemen in support of Yemen’s
transition, stressing that, without the help of the international community, Yemen
would not be able to move the transition process forward. In this regard, the
initiative of the Security Council to dispatch a mission to Yemen and the visit of the
Secretary-General to Yemen on 19 November 2012 were strongly welcomed as a
clear demonstration of the commitment of the United Nations to help Yemen
succeed.
28. The mission noted the efforts of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
and the United Nations country team to facilitate the coordination of international
assistance to Yemen, working closely with the members of the Security Council, the
Friends of Yemen, who will hold their next meeting in London on 7 March, and the
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the European Union. The mission
noted that, at meetings in Riyadh and New York in 2012, Yemen’s partners have
confirmed their commitment in over $7 billion in pledges to help Yemen with its
economic recovery. The Government urged Council members to encourage donors
to now transform their pledges into concrete assistance.

III. Observations
29. The signing of the GCC Initiative and Implementation Mechanism in
November 2011 leading to a peaceful transfer of power in Yemen marks a critical
milestone in the history of the country. More than one year on, significant progress

13-26422

7

S/2013/173

has been made in implementing the transition agreement against many odds and
under a tight timetable. In many parts of the country, including in the capital,
Sana’a, the security situation has improved, and serious efforts are under way to
combat terrorism, restructure Yemen’s military under a unified command, provide
humanitarian assistance and jump-start the economy with international assistance. In
addition, comprehensive preparations have been made for the convening of an allinclusive National Dialogue Conference. Council members commend President
Hadi, Prime Minister Basindwah, the Government of National Unity and the people
of Yemen for these efforts aimed at promoting peace, stability, justice and prosperity
for all Yemenis.
30. However, the members were also made aware first-hand that the transition
process remains very fragile and that the most challenging milestones still lie ahead.
In particular, the Security Council remains concerned that actions aimed at
undermining the transition and the Government of National Unity continue, despite
the Council’s repeated demands under paragraph 6 of resolution 2051 (2012) for the
cessation of such actions. While reiterating its call upon all those responsible to
abide by this demand with immediate effect, the Council was of the view that
further measures, including under Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations,
should be considered, taking into account information received during this mission.
31. The Security Council also remains concerned about the increasing number of
attacks carried out or sponsored by those individuals and groups obstructing the
transition, including Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and other armed groups,
against the oil and gas infrastructure of Yemen, as well as against government and
foreign targets in Sana’a and elsewhere, including numerous assassination attempts
on government officials, politicians, military personnel and diplomats. It reiterates
its determination to address this threat in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, including through the application of sanctions against
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, pursuant to resolution 2083 (2012). The Council
noted that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula continued to pose a threat both inside
Yemen and internationally.
32. Council members welcomed the opportunity for a direct interaction with the
Military Affairs Committee to receive a first-hand account of efforts to restructure
the Yemeni armed forces under a unified command, as exemplified by the
presidential decree of 19 December 2012.
33. In this regard, the Security Council also welcomes President Hadi’s statement
of 27 November 2012 prohibiting the recruitment and use of children by the Yemeni
security forces. Council members reiterated their concern that children continue to
be recruited and used by the parties in Yemen. The Council recalls the commitments
made by the Government to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict in November 2012 and acknowledges the willingness
of the Government to develop and implement an action plan to end the recruitment
and use of child soldiers, in accordance with resolution 1612 (2005).
34. Council members remain concerned about the humanitarian situation. While
the Council is encouraged by the fact that 80 per cent of internally displaced persons
have been able to return to their homes in Abyan Governorate, Council members are
concerned that millions of Yemenis in all parts of the country continue to suffer
from severe food insecurity and a lack of sanitation and adequate health care, and
that the capacity of the Government to provide basic services and humanitarian

8

13-26422

S/2013/173

relief remains limited. The Council recognizes the importance of President Hadi’s
call for international donors to provide full funding for the 2013 humanitarian
response plan ($716 million). The Council recognizes the Government’s primary
responsibility to provide basic services and assistance to its people and is
encouraged that an increasing number of non-governmental humanitarian
organizations are given safe and unimpeded access to populations in need.
35. Council members welcome the Government’s efforts to promote economic
recovery and development and requests all donors to provide strong support for
these efforts. The Council hopes that the continuous engagement of Yemen’s
international partners, together with the plans for a new intragovernmental
coordinating body to support the implementation of over $7 billion in pledges made
by the Friends of Yemen in Riyadh and New York in 2012, will help to channel
funds effectively with a view to transforming pledges into concrete assistance as
soon as possible. The Council is looking forward to the progress report in this
regard at the upcoming Friends of Yemen meeting in London on 7 March 2013.
36. Council members emphasize the importance of conducting a fully inclusive,
participatory, transparent and meaningful National Dialogue Conference, including
with youth and women’s groups. The Council therefore welcomes that many
stakeholders in Yemen have participated actively and constructively in the
preparatory process. However, the Council regrets that the convening of the
Conference has been delayed. It therefore calls upon all Yemeni stakeholders to
come together to finalize arrangements that would enable the commencement of the
Conference on 18 March 2013 without any further delay.
37. Council members recognize the important roles played by the Gulf
Cooperation Council, the United Nations, the G10 ambassadors, the Friends of
Yemen and other international partners of Yemen to help keep the transition process
on track. In this regard, the Council welcomes the direct interaction during the visit
with the Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation Council, Abdullatif bin Rashid
Al Zayani, the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on Yemen, Jamal Benomar,
the G10 ambassadors and the United Nations country team and encourages them to
continue their respective roles in support of the transition.
38. The mission concluded that Yemen’s transition has reached a critical stage.
More than one year after the signing of Yemen’s transition agreement, the people of
Yemen have shown leadership, courage and determination in choosing the path of
peace towards a more secure, stable, just and prosperous future. However, the
process remains under direct threat from those seeking to achieve political goals
through obstruction, violence and other illegitimate means. As a result, Council
members are of the view that the threat of civil strife and conflict, and its potential
consequences for international and regional peace and security, has not disappeared.
In accordance with resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012), the Security Council
will therefore remain fully engaged, working closely with other international
partners and taking appropriate measures to help Yemen’s transition to succeed.

13-26422

9

S/2013/173

Annex I
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Yemen
The terms of reference are as follows:
(a) To reaffirm the continued support of the Security Council for the ongoing
political transition process in Yemen, in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation
Council Implementation Mechanism and leading towards elections in February
2014, and for the important roles of President Hadi, the Government of National
Unity and the people of Yemen within that process;
(b) To assess the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolution 2051 (2012), and review the progress that the Government of
Yemen has made towards launching the National Dialogue Conference, restructuring
the security and armed forces under a unified professional national leadership
structure, ending all armed conflicts and addressing the economic, as well as
humanitarian, situation;
(c) To consider the security situation in Yemen, including the ongoing work
of the Government of Yemen to combat Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and to
carry out security sector reforms;
(d) To meet, discuss and evaluate the transition with a cross section of
Yemeni parties and international partners in Sana’a, including, if possible, the Gulf
Cooperation Council, and Yemeni actors, including civil society representatives;
(e) To assess progress made towards activating pledges made in Riyadh on
4 September 2012 and at the Friends of Yemen Ministerial Meeting in New York on
27 September 2012;
(f) To reiterate the importance of immediate donor coordination and funding
in order to alleviate the critical humanitarian situation in Yemen;
(g) To recognize the many challenges still facing Yemen in the transition
process and highlight the Security Council’s continued concern about those
hindering or interfering in the transition, noting that resolution 2051 (2012) allows
for the imposition of sanctions on spoilers;
(h) To express strong support for the role of the international community in
implementing the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, including the five permanent
members of the Security Council, the Gulf Cooperation Council, the representative
of the European Union, and the Secretary-General’s Special Adviser and his good
offices in Yemen.

10

13-26422

S/2013/173

Annex II
Programme of work of the Security Council mission
to Yemen
27 January 2013

13-26422

9.30-9.50 a.m.

Briefing by the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Yemen, Jamal Benomar

10-11 a.m.

Meeting with the President of Yemen, Abd Rabbo
Mansour Hadi

11.10-11.30 a.m.

Meeting with the Military Affairs Committee

11.40 a.m.-12.20 p.m.

Meeting with the Prime Minister of Yemen, Mohammed
Basindwah, and the members of the Government of
National Unity

12.30-1.30 p.m.

Ceremony

1.35-2.35 p.m.

Lunch

2.45-3.15 p.m.

Meeting with the Secretary-General of the Gulf
Cooperation Council, Abdullatif bin Rashid Al Zayani,
together with ambassadors of the G10 countries

3.20-4.20 p.m.

Meeting with the Preparatory Committee of the
National Dialogue Conference

4.30-5 p.m.

Meeting with the United Nations Resident Coordinator
in Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed, members of the
United Nations country team and non-governmental
organizations

4.30-5 p.m.

Press conference

11
