S/2020/223

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 March 2020
Original: English

Situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2480 (2019), the Security Council extended the mandate of the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA) until 30 June 2020 and requested me to report to the Council every three
months on the implementation of the resolution. The present report covers major
developments in Mali since my previous report (S/2019/983), dated 30 December
2019, as well as progress made in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the Government’s efforts to address the situation in central
Mali. It also provides an update on cooperation between the elements of the security
presence in Mali and the implementation of the Mission’s adaptation plan.

II. Major political developments
2.
The inclusive national dialogue concluded in Bamako on 22 December 2019
with the adoption of four resolutions and a series of recommendations. The
resolutions included a call for the holding of legislative elections before May 2020,
followed by a constitutional referendum, the redeployment of the reconstituted armed
forces and State administration throughout the country and a review of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in keeping with the Agreement’s article 65. Both
signatory armed movements – the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and
the Platform coalition of armed groups – welcomed the outcome of the dialogue.
Political parties of the opposition that had decided not to participate in the dialogue
subsequently expressed their willingness to move forward and ensure the effective
implementation of the decisions.
3.
The Government therefore announced on 22 February that legislative elections
for the first and second rounds would be held on 29 March and 19 April, respectively.
Several opposition parties and civil society groups expressed concern that persistent
insecurity in central and northern Mali and the absence of State authorities may
jeopardize the polls in some areas. However, they expressed their willingness to
participate in elections. The Government decided to organize the elections on the
basis of the existing delineation of electoral districts, which does not include the 11
cercles and 2 regions of Taoudenni and Ménaka in northern Mali created in 2016.

20-03942 (E)

250320

*2003942*

S/2020/223

4.
In communiqués issued on 25 January and 16 February, respectively, the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad conditioned its participation in and
support for the elections on the inclusion in the poll of the cercles and regions created
in 2016. It also called for territorial and administrative restructuring to ensure a larger
representation of northern Mali in the national institutions, as well as the participation
of Malian refugees and internally displaced persons. On 3 February, Imam Mahmoud
Dicko, a popular religious leader, announced that, contrary to initial plans, his
movement, which had been created in September 2019, would not participate in the
polls.
5.
On 29 February, the Constitutional Court published the final list of candidates
for legislative elections. For 147 seats to be filled, the Court received 560 lists, for a
total of 1,447 candidates, including 1,021 men and 426 women. Of the 560 lists
submitted, 546 were validated.
6.
One of the recommendations resulting from the inclusive national dialogue was
that the Government open a dialogue with terrorist leaders Amadou Koufa and Iyad
Ag Ghali, who are designated on the Security Council’s ISIL (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida
sanctions list. In a media interview conducted on 10 February, the President of Mali,
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, expressed support for such an initiative, noting that talking
with jihadists would not be contradictory to combating terrorism. In a press release
issued on 8 March, Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin terrorist group
conditioned the initiation of dialogue with authorities on the departure of international
forces from Mali.
7.
In Bamako, with the support of MINUSMA and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, the Government held a high -level
workshop on women’s participation in the decision-making bodies of the peace
process and the broader political system on 22 and 23 January. A total of 200 women
leaders, representing all regions of Mali, participated. In the workshop, specific
measures were recommended, including an increase in the number of women in the
mechanisms of the Peace Agreement from 3 to 30 per cent; the creation of an
independent women’s observatory to monitor the progress of the implementation of
the Agreement; and the establishment of a monitoring framework to follow up on the
outcomes of the workshop. The signatory parties expressed their full support for the
recommendations.
8.
The Prime Minister of Mali, Boubou Cissé, visited Gao on 27 and 28 January
and Timbuktu from 29 to 31 January, respectively. He was accompanied by the
Minister for Social Cohesion, Peace and National Reconciliation, Lassine Bouaré,
and the Army Chief of Staff, General Abdoullaye Coulibaly. During his visit,
Mr. Cissé launched rehabilitation works for the Gao-Sévaré road, keeping a promise
that he had made following popular protests in September 2019. From 4 to 6 March,
Mr. Cissé led an official visit to Kidal, Aguelhok and Tessalit, accompanied by eight
government ministers and representatives of the international community, including
the African Development Bank and the World Bank Group. The delegation visited a
reconstituted unit of the Malian Armed Forces in Kidal and a viewed numb er of
infrastructure projects.

A.

Implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali
9.
Overall, the inclusive national dialogue contributed to decreasing tensions
among the signatory parties, and its conclusion enabled the parties to refocus their
attention on the implementation of the Peace Agreement. The Special Representative,

2/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

in coordination with key partners, intensified his engagement with the parties to build
on the momentum and accelerate the implementation of the Agreement.
Redeployment of the reconstituted unit to northern Mali
10. In a significant development, on 13 February, the first reconstituted unit of the
national armed forces arrived in Kidal. The Mission ’s good offices were critical in
assisting the parties in overcoming mistrust and reaching agreement on the modalities
of the redeployment, as envisaged in the Peace Agreement. The Mission facilitated
the redeployment of the reconstituted unit by escorting the national armed forces
convoy of 35 vehicles from Gao to Kidal and through the provision of security, fuel,
food allowances and medicine, as well as the refurbishment of camps. The unit
comprises two companies of 240 personnel, including 80 former combatants from the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and 80 from the Platform coalition of
armed groups. The deployment to Kidal was carried out without major incident.
11. A company of 118 soldiers arrived in Timbuktu on 16 February, followed by a
second company of 123 military personnel on 17 February. The Operational
Coordination Mechanism camp, consisting of mixed units, is being refurbished by
MINUSMA, and the company is being accommodated temporarily at the regional
headquarters of the national armed forces. A total of 289 members of the recon stituted
unit of the national armed forces arrived in Gao on 21 February, of which 85 personnel
deployed to Ménaka on 11 March. While on their way to Ménaka, two members of
the reconstituted unit were killed and three were injured as a result of an improvi sed
explosive device attack on the convoy, which was escorted by international forces.
12. Once operational, the reconstituted unit will provide security to the Governor
and other State representatives, as well as contribute to security arrangements in th e
area and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
13. The “catch-up” phase of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization,
reinsertion and integration process, aimed at integrating an additional 51 0 former
combatants into the national armed forces, is still under way. Those efforts would
increase the number of former combatants of the signatory movements who are
integrated into the national army from 1,330 to 1,84 0. The National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, with the support of the World Bank
Group and MINUSMA, is finalizing preparations for the socioeconomic reintegration
of former combatants who underwent the integration process, but were declared unfit
for integration into the national defence and security forces.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
14. On 4 February, the National Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission and the Commission on Integration adopted their respective strategic
plans for the period 2019–2023. In keeping with an agreement reached among the
signatory parties, the commissions aim to integrate 10,000 former combatants into
the security services. A total of 16,000 former combatants will be reinserted into their
communities through the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and integration
programme. It is envisaged that the remaining 48,000 demobilized combatants will
benefit from the national community rehabilitation programme.
Agreement Monitoring Committee
15. The Agreement Monitoring Committee held its fourth ministerial -level session
in Bamako on 19 January, its first meeting since August 2019. Participants endorsed
the plan to redeploy the reconstituted armed forces to northern Mali, as well as
security arrangements for the movement of convoys and heavy weapons. They also
stressed the need to operationalize the sustainable development fund to ensure the
20-03942

3/20

S/2020/223

delivery of basic social services in the northern regions. The signatory parties
reaffirmed their commitment to the peace process.
16. At the meeting, the Independent Observer of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement presented its most recent report, in which it was noted that, at the end of
2019, the implementation of the Agreement was at its lowest point since the
Independent Observer had begun its mandate.
17. On 27 February, the Agreement Monitoring Committee held its thirty-eighth
regular session, in Bamako. Participants welcomed the progress made in the
redeployment of the reconstituted unit and took note of the preparations for the
legislative elections while stressing the importance of continued consultations among
the Malian parties to address outstanding concerns. They decided that each signatory
party should designate two additional representatives on the Agreement Monitoring
Committee to enhance the contribution of women to the peace process.
18. The Technical Commission on Security held regular meetings to discuss
modalities with regard to the redeployment plan for the reconstituted unit. The Special
Representative chaired an extraordinary meeting of the Commi ssion on 21 January to
resolve differences among the parties, which had impeded the start of the
redeployment.
Political and institutional measures
19. During the reporting period, the percentage of civil administrators present at
their duty stations in northern Mali remained stable, at 23 per cent, with 60 per cent
of governors, 42 per cent of prefects and 16 per cent of sub -prefects deployed. In
Mopti Region, central Mali, as at 31 January, the number of civil administrators
present at their duty stations had decreased to 27 per cent, from 30 per cent in
November 2019. Officials present included the governor, 75 per cent of prefects and
19 per cent of sub-prefects.
20. Notwithstanding the Government’s efforts, the envisaged transfer of 30 per cent
of State revenue to the territorial units remained a challenge owing to the absence of
banking institutions and financial services in northern Mali.
21. Consultation among the signatory parties continued regarding the establishment
of a territorial police force, including its role, funding and oversight mechanisms.
Justice and reconciliation measures
22. As at 1 March, the percentage of magistrates who had taken office in Mopti
Region and in the northern regions had increased slightly compared with that of the
previous quarter, about 93 per cent, leading to an approximate 82 per cent rate of
deployment of judicial authorities. However, insecurity continued to cause
absenteeism and the relocation of staff.
23. The Mission continued to provide material and technical support to enhance
security and working conditions for judicial officials and personnel, as well as the
security and management of prisons, including those housing inmates suspected or
convicted of terrorism-related offences. In collaboration with MINUSMA and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Malian authorities adopted a road map
and an action plan on 20 February to prevent violent extremism in prisons.
24. MINUSMA, together with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
continued to provide technical support to the Specialized Judicial Unit to Combat
Terrorism and Transnational Organized Crime, including mentoring on case
management and judicial investigations.

4/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

B.

Stabilization and restoration of State authority in the centre
25. The Malian authorities continued their efforts to facilitate dialogue and
reconciliation initiatives in central Mali under the framework of the Cadre politique
de gestion de la crise au centre du Mali. From 10 to 14 February, the consultation
framework of the Permanent Secretariat held a series of meetings in Mopti with local
authorities, civil society and technical partners involved in reconciliation efforts, as
well as with Dogon and Fulani representatives from Bandiagara, Bankass, Douentza
and Koro, with support from MINUSMA. The populations in those areas are the most
affected by violence. Urgent actions identified to stabilize the area included the
disarmament of all self-defence groups, the dismantling of illegal checkpoints, the
addressing of land-related conflicts and the involvement of third-party traditional
mediators in conflict resolution efforts. In coordination with the Government,
MINUSMA facilitated a series of intercommunal dialogues that led to the signing of
a local peace agreement in Somadougou village, Mopti Region, on 25 January.
26. Mr. Cissé visited Mopti Region on 22 and 23 February, following an attack on
Ogossogou village on 14 February in which at least 37 persons were killed, 6 were
injured and 20 were reported missing. He issued an ultimatum in which he gave Dan
Nan Ambassagou, the predominantly Dogon self-defence group, three days to
dismantle its checkpoints along a main road in Mopti Region. In a communiqué issued
on the same day, Dan Nan Ambassagou conditioned such actions on the return of the
national army in those areas. On 26 February, Malian security forces enforced
Mr. Cissé’s decision to dismantle checkpoints along a main road.
27. The Mission continued to enhance its engagement with communities in
Bandiagara, Bankass and Koro districts under the framework of its Operation Buffalo
(see paras. 47 and 48 below). The Mission’s presence and force projection operations,
which include the reinforcements of armed helicopters and additional troops, have
enabled the national army to increase its operational tempo and protect civilians.
28. MINUSMA continued to support the Government’s community rehabilitation
programme in Mopti Region. Thus far, a total of 352 former combatants from self defence and militia groups have voluntarily joined the programme, which is aimed at
facilitating reinsertion into civilian life for 3,387 former combatants and vulnerable
young people associated with self-defence and militia groups.
29. In several incidents, MINUSMA patrols were blocked by local populations
believed to have been mobilized by local armed groups. In response, the Mission
stepped up its outreach and communication activities fu rther, in coordination with the
Malian authorities. The efforts led to an overall improvement in the situation. From
9 to 11 January, the Minister of Environment and Sustainable Development visited
Bandiagara, Bankass and Koro districts. In his interaction s with local populations,
including representatives of organizations of women and young people, traditional
leaders and members of militia, the Minister clarified the Mission ’s role and
encouraged close collaboration between the populations and MINUSMA.

C.

Regional developments
30. On 13 January, I attended a summit of the Heads of State of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G5 Sahel), convened in Pau, France, by the President of that country.
In a declaration issued at the conclusion of the summit, the Heads of State reaffirmed
their commitment to combating terrorism in the subregion and stepping up their
efforts under a joint command of the Joint Force of the G5 Sahel and the Barkhane
force that was focused on the Liptako-Gourma triangle. They welcomed the actions
already taken and emphasized the need for greater cooperation. In addition, they

20-03942

5/20

S/2020/223

announced the establishment of a coalition for the Sahel, a new framework bringing
together security, the restoration of State authority and capacity -building, as well as
development initiatives.
31. On 6 February, the Government of France announced the deployment of 600
additional troops to reinforce Operation Barkhane, bringing the total number to 5,100.
Czechia, Denmark, Estonia and Sweden indicated that they were considering making
contributions to the special forces operation task force Takuba, led by France. Those
special forces from European countries will be deployed in Mali alongside French
special forces to pass on specialized know-how to the national armed forces.
32. The Heads of State of the G5 Sahel held their sixth conference, in Nouakchott,
Mauritania, on 25 February, at which they reaffirmed their commitment to continuing
to combat the threat posed by terrorist armed groups in the Sahel and reitera ted their
call for increased international support for the Joint Force of the G5 Sahel. On the
margins of the conference, the G5 Sahel, the European Union and the United Nations
signed an addendum to their technical agreement to ensure its alignment with t he
relevant provisions of Security Council resolution 2480 (2019). During the reporting
period, the Joint Force was reportedly involved in coordinated operations with the
French forces and the national armies of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger in the
tri-border area. As at 29 February, of the first tranche ($6.2 million) transferred by
the European Union to MINUSMA in February 2018 for support for the Joint Force,
in line with the technical agreement, a total of $1,841,743.06 had been spent,
representing a rate of expenditure of 30 per cent. Most of the expenditure was made
on the provision of fuel, followed by combat rations and ingredients.
33. At the conclusion of its thirty-third ordinary session, on 10 February, the African
Union requested its Commission to develop a framework for a possible deployment
of a force composed of the Multinational Joint Task Force and 3,000 troops for six
months in order to further deter terrorist groups in the Sahel.

III. Major security developments
34. The period under review was marked by an increase in the activities of terrorist
groups in northern and central Mali and clashes among those groups, as well as the
consolidation of the influence of the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad in
northern Mali and the persistence of violence across community lines in the centre.
Northern Mali
35. Terrorist attacks remained the main threat in northern and central Mali. Such
attacks were recorded in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu Regions in the north and in Mopti
and Ségou Regions in the centre. Most of the attacks were attributed to or claimed by
Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin or Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. The
national defence and security forces, MINUSMA and international forces continued
to be their main targets. Civilians were targeted as well, mostly in Mopti Region.
36. Clashes between Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and Islamic State in
the Greater Sahara added a new layer of complexity to the security situation in
northern and central Mali. Islamic State in the Greater Sahara appears to have
expanded its areas of activity into parts of Gao and Timbuktu Regions, which used to
be the area of operation of Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin. Clashes were
reported between the two groups in central Mali and Timbuktu Region. The expansion
of Islamic State in the Greater Sahara reportedly also led to a split within Katibat
Macina, part of Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin, with several Fulani
combatants claiming allegiance to Islamic State in the Greater Sahara. There were

6/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

also continued reports of attacks by terrorist groups on combatants affiliated with the
Platform coalition of armed groups, which contributed to weakening the co alition
further.
37. The Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad continued to consolidate its
influence in northern Mali. Beyond its stronghold in Kidal, it continued to provide
security in the Timbuktu area while expanding its influence in Ménaka and Gao
Regions. Following clashes in December 2019 between combatants of the signatory
armed groups, the Coordination and one wing of the Platform coalition of armed
groups signed a security agreement in Ménaka on 12 January. The agreement
formalized the role of the Coordination as one of the security providers in the area.
The Coordination also strengthened its alliance with the other wing of the Platform,
thereby allowing it to establish a command post in Kidal, where the Platform had not
been present since 2014.
Central Mali
38. The security situation in the centre continued to deteriorate as a result of the
continued expansion of terrorist groups, in particular in the Bankass, Bandiagara and
Koro districts, Mopti Region, as well around Diabali, Ségou Region. Attacks against
civilians, as part of the violence across communal lines, have persisted. More attacks
on Dogon villages were recorded than on Fulani villages.
39. An attack by terrorist groups on the national guard post in Dioungani, Koro
cercle, Mopti Region, on 22 January resulted in the killing of seven members of the
national guard and the wounding of eight. A subsequent attack on and burning of
Dioungani town on 24 January led the national armed forces to retreat from their
position and the displacement of 880 civilians.
40. On 30 January, Mr. Keita signed a decree launching Operation Maliko, with the
objective of restoring the sovereignty of Mali over the regions of Gao, Kidal,
Timbuktu, Ménaka, Taoudenni, Mopti and Ségou. In the decree, it was st ated that the
commanders of the central and northern Mali military regions have authority over
security and paramilitary forces. In addition, the consolidation of the national forces
in larger, better protected camps and the withdrawal from smaller bases w ere
announced.
Asymmetric and other attacks
41. MINUSMA and international forces continued to be the targets of asymmetric
attacks. There were 22 attacks against MINUSMA, including 7 in Mopti Region, 6 in
Kidal, 2 in Ménaka, 3 in Timbuktu and 4 in Gao. The attacks resulted in the injury of
43 peacekeepers. In the previous reporting period, a total of 20 attacks against
MINUSMA had caused the death of 1 contractor and the injury of 25 peacekeepers.
42. The number of attacks against national and intern ational forces involving
improvised explosive devices increased during the reporting period, in particular
against national defence and security forces in the centre and MINUSMA forces in
the north. Such incidents remained a primary threat to all forces, i ncluding convoys
on the main supply routes and those on secondary roads. The number of complex
attacks targeting national defence and security forces and MINUSMA camps has
decreased.
43. On 9 January, a coordinated indirect fire attack was launched against the camp
occupied by MINUSMA, the national armed forces and the international forces in
Tessalit, Kidal Region. A total of 15 mortar shells and rockets landed in and around
the facility, wounding 20 persons, including 13 MINUSMA peacekeepers and 2

20-03942

7/20

S/2020/223

national staff members working for international forces. Jama ’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin claimed responsibility for the attack.
44. On 13 January, a MINUSMA vehicle hit an explosive device in Kidal, injuring
two peacekeepers. On 23 January, unknown assailants targeted the MINUSMA camp
in Kidal in an indirect fire attack. Ten mortars were fired at the facility, injuring one
peacekeeper seriously.
Attacks against civilians
45. Civilians continued to be the victims of attacks by terrorist groups,
intercommunal violence, improvised explosive devices and banditry. During the
reporting period, 266 incidents were reported, in which 247 civilians were killed, 119
injured and 72 were abducted. The figure represents an increase from the previous
reporting period, during which 200 civilians were killed in 269 incidents. More than
60 per cent of the deadly attacks against civilians took place in Mopti Region. A total
of 218 persons were killed in central Mali between 1 January and 4 March.
46. On 16 January, armed elements attacked Sinnda village, Mopti Region, killing
at least 14 civilians and injuring dozens of others. The deadliest attack recorded took
place on 14 February, when armed elements attacked Ogossogou, Mopti Region,
killing at least 37 civilians, mainly Fulani, and burning houses and granaries. Such
attacks against civilian populations, as well as intercommunity violence, have led to
further displacements of populations, including to Mauritania, and prompted civilian
administrators to abandon their posts.

IV. Protection of civilians
47. The increase in the activities of terrorist groups in northern and central Mali and
the withdrawal of national defence and security forces from some areas generated
new displacements of populations and increased the number of civilians under threat
of physical violence. The Mission’s Operation Seka, in the north-east, and Operation
Buffalo, in the centre, were aimed at minimizing the vacuum left by the withdrawal
of national defence and security forces in some areas. In Gao Region, a total of 64
protection of civilians incidents was recorded since January, compared with 72
recorded during the previous reporting period. The modest decrease in the number of
incidents could be a result of the continuation of Operation Seka along the
Ansongo-Labézanga axis.
48. In Mopti Region, the border areas with Burkina Faso in Koro district were
particularly affected by insecurity. Recurring attacks led to the displacement of
civilians to Douna-Pen village, Dioungani commune, where an estimated 880 of them
sought refuge. Operation Buffalo was deployed to the area and provided protection to
the main displacement site in Douna-Pen. The MINUSMA force also responded to an
attack on Gourti village on 29 January to prevent further human rights violations.
Placing the Mission’s temporary operation bases closer to local populations yielded
positive results and contributed to improving communities’ perceptions of
peacekeepers and reducing the number of protests against MINUSMA patrols in
Bandiagara and Bankass districts.
49. To enhance the Mission’s response through early warning mechanisms, the
Mission piloted a hotline project in Mopti Region. The toll-free number was activated
on 16 January. Some of the calls prompted the deployment of MINUSMA ground
forces to Goni village, Koro cercle, on 7 February, as well as to Ogossogou village,
Bankass cercle, on 14 February. While the deployment to Goni was a successful

8/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

intervention, operational constraints with regard to navigation and communication
hampered the deployment to Ogossogou.
Support for national defence and security institutions
50. MINUSMA continued to support the national security forces and the specialized
investigation brigade, including in crime scene examination and through the provision
of specialized training.
51. The Mission conducted a series of force projection operations, including
Operation Windstorm, to rapidly deploy and reinforce the national armed forces camp
in Diabali. MINUSMA also conducted a similar operation, Operation Guardian, in
Tessit, in coordination with the Joint Force of the G5 Sahel.
52. In coordination with the European Union, MINUSMA conducted training in
Bamako for 12 officers of the national police in combating terrorism, as well as one
training session in professional intervention in Mopti, involving 28 officers. Three
joint training sessions on the topics of preventive search related to incidents of
improvised explosive devices and securing the electoral process were also conducted.
53. In January, the national armed forces completed their first weapons and
ammunitions management storekeeper induction training for the gendarmerie in
Bamako. MINUSMA handed over the recently built national weapons and
ammunition management training centre in Kati, Koulikoro Region, to the Malian
authorities. As part of efforts to enhance national capacity in explosive hazard
management, MINUSMA provided training to national defence and security forces in
explosive device search and detection and explosive ordnance disposal, as well as a
staff officer-level course.

V. Human rights situation
54. The human rights situation remained of serious concern. MINUSMA
documented 123 cases of human rights violations and abuses, 51 more than in the
previous reporting period, including 114 abuses perpetrated by armed groups and
9 violations perpetrated by the national forces. The 123 cases comprised 222 civilians
killed, 20 cases of enforced disappearance, 72 individuals injured and 46 persons
abducted or missing. Slightly more than half the cases (62) were reported in Mopti
Region. Incidents were also recorded in the regions of Gao (20), Kidal (6), Ménaka (14),
Ségou (6) and Timbuktu (15).
55. As in the previous reporting period, violent extremist armed groups were
responsible for the highest number of cases (66) of human rights abuses. The majority
of the cases (49) occurred in areas where Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin and
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara were active, with at least 10 other cases attributed
to Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and 7 to Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin.
While close to half the cases (27) were recorded in Mopti Region, the others were
documented in the regions of Gao (14), Kidal (4), Ménaka (6), Ségou (1) and
Timbuktu (14). The cases included indiscriminate and targeted killings, abductions
and the burning of health centres.
56. Instances of violence along community lines persisted, with serious
consequences for human rights, in particular those of women and children.
Community-based armed groups were implicated in 31 abuses in the context of
violence across community lines, all recorded in Mopti Region. Armed elements from
Fulani communities were responsible for 24 cases, which resulted in 80 civilian
deaths, whereas armed groups from the Dogon community perpetrated 7 cases, which
were more targeted and coordinated and accounted for at least 67 civilian deaths. The
20-03942

9/20

S/2020/223

two emblematic cases during the period were both attributed to armed groups from
the Dogon community. Between 15 and 16 January, a group of dozos (traditional
hunters) conducted a targeted attack on Sinnda village, killing 14 civilians from the
Fulani and Tamasheq communities. The attack in Ogossogou on 14 February, which
resulted in the killing of at least 37 civilians, was allegedly executed by armed men
from the Dogon community.
57. A total of 10 abuses, attributed to signatory armed groups, were recorded in the
regions of Gao (2), Kidal (2) and Ménaka (6). The cases included killings attributed
to the Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad and the Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad,
a theft imputed to the Coordination des mouvements et fronts patriotiques de
résistance and an arbitrary deprivation of liberty involving the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad.
58. National defence and security forces were involved in nine instances of human
rights violations, including extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances, during
military operations in the centre. On 19 December, 26 men from the Fulani
community were reportedly executed. Following their arrest by the national armed
forces in Malémana, Mopti Region, their remains were found in a well in Ndoukala,
Ségou Region. In a communiqué dated 29 December 2019, the Government
announced the opening of an investigation into the incident. MINUSMA is
investigating allegations of the extrajudicial killing of three men and the enforced
disappearance of three others, imputed to national armed forces from Diabali, in the
aftermath of a 26 January attack against the gendarmerie camp in Sokolo, Ségou
Region.
59. On 28 January, the Court of Appeal in Bamako ordered the provisional release
of General Amadou Haya Sanogo and his co-accused pending their trial, which has
been postponed sine die. They had led a coup and seized power in 2012. The decision
by the court was publicly criticized by human rights activists.
60. MINUSMA continued to support the activities of the Truth, Justice, and
Reconciliation Commission, which, since its establishment, has received more than
16,183 testimonies, 60 per cent of which have been given by women. Two thematic
public hearings are scheduled for June.
61. MINUSMA documented eight cases of sexual violence perpetrated by terrorist
groups, signatory armed groups and the national armed forces. The cases included the
forced marriage of four girls by alleged extremist elements in Timbuktu Region; the
rape of two women, reportedly by Mouvement pour le salut de l’Azawad members in
Ménaka; the gang rape of a girl, imputed to elements of the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad et Front patriotique de résistance in Gao; and the sexual
assault of a 5-year-old girl, perpetrated by a member of the national armed forces in
Gao.
62. In its efforts to involve civil society in the prevention of and the response to
conflict-related sexual violence, MINUSMA hosted a workshop on 21 January with
113 Islamic religious leaders to discuss the role that the High Islamic Council could
play in addressing this serious issue in Mali. Following the workshop, the President
of the High Islamic Council signed a declaration, making relevant commitments,
including the issuance of a fatwa to denounce conflict-related sexual violence.
63. Children continued to suffer violence. Overall, 174 grave violations against 103
children were documented during the reporting period, a 23 per cent increase
compared with the previous reporting period. A total of 10 children were killed and 9
maimed. While some of the perpetrators remain unidentified, 97 of the cases were
attributed to violent extremist armed groups that also conducted 39 attacks on
educational facilities, killed or abducted teachers, destroyed educational materials,
10/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

burned classrooms, demanded the closure of secular or mainstream schools and called
for the establishment of Qur’anic schools, in particular in Mopti and Timbuktu
Regions. The number of schools that are closed in northern and central Mali increased
further, to 1,151.
64. In all, 75 children were recruited and used by the signatory armed groups,
including 52 by the Coalition des mouvements de l’Azawad and 23 by the Platform
coalition of armed groups. The United Nations is currently advocating with the special
prosecutor on counter-terrorism for the transfer to child protection structures of 17
presumed minor boys, who were detained in Bamako for alleged association with
armed groups.
65. To enhance respect for human rights and humanitarian law, MINUSMA and its
partners continued to conduct capacity-building sessions for representatives of civil
society, defence and security forces, the Bar Association, the Supreme Court and the
Constitutional Court, including on human rights and rule of law in efforts to combat
terrorism.

VI. Humanitarian situation
66. Since my previous report, the number of internally displaced persons in Mali
has increased, reaching a total of 218,000, an increase from 199,385 in N ovember
2019. Women represented 54 per cent of the population of internally displaced
persons. More than 30 per cent of internally displaced persons have been displaced
more than once since fleeing their homes. Violent attacks in the centre caused daily
waves of displacement. In the humanitarian response plan for the period 2020 –2022,
estimated humanitarian funding requirements are set at $390 million, an increase of
20 per cent over the previous year.
67. The number of Malian refugees in Burkina Faso, Mauritania and the Niger
remained stable, at 140,800, compared with that of the previous reporting period. Mali
continues to host some 26,670 refugees from neighbouring countries, with the number
of asylum seekers remaining constant, at 1,008. Since the start of 2020, there has been
significant cross-border displacement, with more than 2,000 Malian and Nigerian
families seeking refuge in Anderamboukane. Between 10 and 20 February, more than
1,000 Malian refugees arrived in Mauritania.
68. Humanitarian access to the populations in need of protection and assistance in
central and northern Mali remained a challenge as a result of banditry, terrorist group
activity, damaged infrastructure and the withdrawal of the national armed forces from
some areas in those areas of Mali, notably in Gao and Ménaka Regions. State services
continued to withdraw from the areas most affected by violence, such as Ansongo
cercle. A total of 1,151 schools are not functioning in the north and the centre, leaving
more than 330,000 children without access to education. In addition, continuing
strikes by teachers are keeping many more children out of school for long periods of
time.
69. Some 4.3 million persons are expected to need humanitarian assistance in 2020
as a result of the deteriorating security situation, compared with 3.2 million persons
at the end of 2019. Among them, 1.1 million persons are expected to face crisis levels
of food insecurity during the lean season, June to September, which would be the
highest number recorded in the past five years.

20-03942

11/20

S/2020/223

VII. Economic situation
70. The economy of Mali is forecast to grow at a rate of 5.0 per cent in 2020, which
is below the 5.4 per cent average recorded from 2015 to 2019. Inflation is projected
to grow at a rate of 1.9 per cent in 2020, 2.0 per cent in 2021 and 2.1 per cent in 2022.
Insecurity continued to negatively affect agriculture and fishing and livestock, two
economic sectors that account for 80 per cent of the labour force. Notwithstanding
overall economic growth, the rising level of income inequality and poverty contribute
to increasing socioeconomic tensions, manifested in particular by an ongoing
teachers’ strike.
71. During the reporting period, 70 MINUSMA quick-impact projects and 13 trust
fund projects, totalling $2.45 million and $3.61 million, respectively, were approved
for funding. The projects fund activities related to social cohesion and conflict
prevention, technical support for the Permanent Secretariat of the Cadre politique de
gestion de la crise au centre du Mali, construction of police stations in Mopti Region,
consolidation of judicial power and the organization of the legislative elections. In
addition, the Peacebuilding Fund launched seven new projects, totalling $16 million,
in support of conflict prevention and mediation programmes, the improvement of
access to justice, action against impunity and gender and youth promotion initiatives.
72. On 6 February, Mr. Cissé chaired the first Steering Committee meeting of the
sustainable development fund. The meeting validated the fund’s manual of
administrative, financial and accounting procedures.

VIII. Capacities of the Mission
Military
73. As at 10 March, a total of 12,179 military personnel had been deployed,
corresponding to 91.6 per cent of the authorized strength of 13,289 personnel. The
personnel included 35 military observers, 477 staff officers and 11,667 contingent
personnel. Women accounted for 3.8 per cent of military personnel. The deployment
of a medium utility helicopter unit to Timbuktu was completed with the arrival of
remaining cargo and personnel. The deployment of a light infantry battalion to the
same location is under way, with the first infantry company operational on the ground
since February.
Police
74. As at 10 March, a total of 1,726 police personnel, or 90 per cent of the authorized
strength of 1,920, had been deployed. Among them were 298 individual police
officers, 79 of whom were women, and 1,428 formed police unit personnel, including
156 women.
Civilian
75. As at 5 March, 89 per cent of all MINUSMA civilian staff had been deployed,
including 93 per cent of international staff, 79 per cent of United Nations Volunteers
and 88 per cent of national staff. Women held 25 per cent of international posts (t he
same level as during the previous reporting period), 28 per cent of United Nations
Volunteers positions and 16 per cent of national staff posts.
Implementation of the Mission adaptation plan
76. MINUSMA continued to strengthen its presence and activities in central Mali
in order to enhance its support for the Government’s Cadre politique de gestion de la
12/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

crise au centre du Mali and strengthen the protection of civilians. A total of 19
additional civilian personnel, including a planning officer, have been redeployed to
Mopti.
77. MINUSMA and the Secretariat have further intensified outreach to troopcontributing countries in order to generate the capabilities envisioned by the Mission
adaptation plan. The plan includes the establishment of a mobile task force to respond
to emerging situations, thereby enabling the Mission to mobilize at any given time
required capabilities, including two quick reaction force units; three special forces
units; two long-range reconnaissance units; four medium utility helicopter units; three
armed helicopter units; one attack helicopter unit; one C -130 tactical airlift aircraft
unit; two fixed-wing intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance units and four units
with unmanned aircraft systems; two forward surgical teams and eight explosive
ordnance disposal teams. The Mobile Task Force would be a force multiplier and
enhance the Mission’s ability to engage with communities daily. The Mission will
also establish a forward command post to deploy with the mobile task for ce to
command this enhanced element for the time of the intervention.
78. Statements of Unit Requirements have been updated to meet the increasing
security challenges on the ground. MINUSMA and the Secretariat further developed
an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance statement of operational
requirements that defines the Mission’s capability gaps and requirements in
delivering against the mandate. The statement of operational requirements has guided
the development of the new Statements of Unit Requirements for intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance units and will also support the procurement process
of commercial capabilities.
79. The Secretariat has begun preparations for a force generation conference for
MINUSMA. Some troop-contributing countries have already indicated their intention
to pledge new capabilities to MINUSMA, while others have noted their readiness to
reconfigure units already on the ground to meet the requirements of the plan, notably
by increasing the number of tasking lines for helicopters and unmanned aircraft
systems.
80. The adaptation plan, including the establishment of the mobile task force,
requires the expansion of existing bases in Gao and Mopti, as well as the construction
of a new airstrip in Kidal. The Government has allocated an additional 49.45 ha to
MINUSMA in Gao. The Mission has cleared and secured the area, and construction
is expected to begin in April. The Government has yet to respond to the Mission’s
request for additional land in Mopti. The Government a pproved the construction of a
new runway in Kidal, where demining and construction commenced in late February.
81. The Mission’s budget proposal for 2020/21 includes costs associated with the
adaptation plan, resulting in a net increase of 5 per cent over its budget for 2019/20.
Efforts to optimize performance
82. The performance of seven military units was evaluated by the Force
Commander. Six units performed satisfactorily. Several best practices were identified,
including the installation of cameras and night vision observation equipment for camp
security and the organization of training. In one unit, there were shortcomings in
mandate comprehension and understanding of the zero-tolerance policy regarding
sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as caveats regarding its ability to conduct
patrols outside the camp. Targeted measures are being implemented to address the
shortcomings.
83. The case outlined in my letter dated 27 December 2019 (S/2019/1004) of a
contingent denying access to the part of the United Nations camp that it was
20-03942

13/20

S/2020/223

occupying has been resolved, and MINUSMA emergency response teams have acc ess
to airport facilities.
84. Six formed police units were evaluated during the reporting period. It was
concluded in the evaluations that all six units performed satisfactorily. Good practices
included the collection of intelligence on patrols as a result of good community
relations and enhanced logistical support.
85. In line with the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, pre-deployment and inmission training sessions on explosive threat awareness and mitigation were
conducted to enhance the preparedness of MINUSMA uniformed and civilian
personnel. The light coordination mechanism assisted two member States in
conducting two mobile training teams in Gao and Kidal to improve the performance,
safety and security of the contingents. In addition, two troop -contributing countries
deployed 17 and 24 additional armoured personnel carriers to Sector Centre and
Sector North, respectively.
Integrated strategic framework
86. Efforts continued to strengthen coordination and promote integration between
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team, in line with the overall vision and
joint priorities outlined in the integrated strategic framework.
87. In support of upcoming legislative elections, MINUSMA and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) have created a joint support team with specific and
complementary tasks. MINUSMA provides political, security, technical and logistical
support, while UNDP manages a basket fund for electoral bodies, supports civic
education and communication initiatives, the resolution of disputes and conflicts and
capacity-building.
88. In Mopti, under the leadership of regional authorities, MINUSMA, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and UNDP established a coordination mechanism to support the return
of internally displaced persons. The mechanism helped to mobilize resources for such
persons, including by providing security and income-generating activity.
89. In Timbuktu, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Mission are developing a project to promote the education of
young people through university. The project, funded through the trust fund for peace
and security in Mali, will contribute to promoting the retur n of state services to the
region, as well as social cohesion and conflict prevention.
Safety and security of United Nations personnel
90. MINUSMA continued to enhance security at its camps with regard to identified
and anticipated threats. The integrated security plan for MINUSMA headquarters in
Bamako was finalized and approved, and related standard operating procedures were
established.
Conduct and discipline
91. Two allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were recorded. MINUSMA
continued to implement its strategy to prevent misconduct, in particular sexual
exploitation and abuse, through induction and refresher training of all categories of
personnel, as well as by conducting risk assessments and outreach activities and
recommending mitigating measures in its areas of operations.

14/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

Environmental issues
92. MINUSMA continued to take steps towards improving its waste management,
water supply and sanitation, as well as towards managing environmental emergencies.
During the reporting period, the Mission concluded the review of its waste
management plan.

IX. Observations
93. Notwithstanding progress made in the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
the situation in Mali and the Sahel region continued to be of serious concern, with
deteriorating security and increasing attacks in the region. Terrorist groups allied with
Al-Qaida and Islamic State gained more ground and are competing for influence.
Attacks on national and international forces persisted, with the national defence and
security forces suffering the greatest losses. More than half of all attacks during the
reporting period occurred in central Mali, and civilians represented nearly one third
of the victims thereof. I strongly condemn attacks against civilians, MINUSMA
peacekeepers and national and international forces and call upon the Malian
authorities to step up efforts to hold the perpetrators of those crimes accountable. I
pay tribute to the courage and sacrifice of all men and women who continue to operate
in such a highly challenging and dangerous environment in order to implement their
respective mandates.
94. I welcome the renewed commitment of the Heads of State of the Group of Five
for the Sahel and the President of France at their summit in Pau, France, and at t he
sixth conference of Heads of State of the G5 Sahel in Nouakchott to join forces and
strengthen cooperation and coordination in order to combat terrorism in the Sahel, as
well as the establishment of the coalition for the Sahel. A concerted multidimensio nal
response involving an integrated approach by political, security and development
actors is necessary to stabilize the situation in Mali and across the region. MINUSMA
remains one of the many key actors.
95. Notwithstanding the dire security situation, there have been significant
advances in the peace process and towards the full implementation of the Peace
Agreement, which remains the only viable path to address the crisis in Mali and
stabilize the situation. The conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue resulted in a
more positive dynamic and enabled the parties to refocus their attention on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. I am encouraged by the redeployment of the
reconstituted unit of the national armed forces to northern Mali, the resu mption of the
meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee and its agreement to increase the
participation of women in the mechanism and, the visit of Mr. Cissé to Kidal. I am
also encouraged by ongoing preparations for legislative elections and the
consultations among stakeholders to create conditions conducive to the holding of
credible, inclusive and peaceful legislative elections. It will, however, take time for
the achievements to translate into tangible improvements in the situation on the
ground. Addressing the complex challenges facing Mali will require greater effort on
the part of the parties, as well as greater political will, resources and support.
96. The redeployment of the reconstituted unit to Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu
represented an essential step towards the restoration of State authority in northern
Mali. The arrival of the first reconstituted unit marks the first formal presence of the
national armed forces in Kidal since rebel forces took control of the main cities in
northern Mali, in March 2012. The good offices of the Special Representative have
been essential for the parties to overcome mistrust and numerous problems and
prejudices and reach agreement on the modalities for the redeployment. MINUSMA
has also provided critical logistical support to the redeployment, which illustrates the
20-03942

15/20

S/2020/223

pivotal role that the Mission continues to play in Mali to support the parties involved
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement and create the space in which the peace
process can unfold. Once fully operational, the reconstituted unit will help to
reinforce national armed forces in northern Mali, which is fundamental to the
restoration of State authority and efforts to combat terrorism in order to pave the way
for a more significant deployment of State administration and justice. I welcome the
agreement reached by the signatory parties to organize a catch-up phase aimed at
integrating an additional 515 former combatants through the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or integratio n programme for
redeployment to northern Mali as part of the reconstituted unit.
97. As outlined in my previous reports, the participation of women in the Malian
peace process has been marginal. The holding of the high-level workshop, which
brought together more than 200 Malian women representing the Government, the
signatory armed movements and civil society, was an important opportunity to discuss
measures to address the current situation. I welcome the recommendations made at
the workshop to enhance participation of women, as well as the agreement of the
signatory parties to include women in the mechanisms for monitoring the Agreement,
which is an important first step. The low number of women candidates registered to
run in the forthcoming legislative elections is a reminder that longer-term measures
are needed to increase the participation of women in public and political life in Mali,
as well as to ensure that women represent 30 per cent of elected officials, as stipulated
in Malian law.
98. The upcoming legislative elections are part of the political process to address
grievances. Peaceful and credible elections within the established timeline are
essential for the stability of the country. I call upon all national stakeholders to pursue
their political ambitions in a constructive manner and to address differences through
dialogue.
99. In central Mali, civilians continue to bear the brunt of intensifying violence
along community lines exacerbated by the presence of terrorist groups. I welcome the
initiatives by the Malian authorities to stem the violence, including through multiple
local peace and reconciliation initiatives and increased cooperation and coordination
with MINUSMA. I call upon the Government to continue efforts to dismantle militia
groups, while stepping up efforts to restore State authority to avoid dangerous security
vacuums. The Mission’s support remains essential in support of the Malian security
forces to protect civilians.
100. The Mission has made great strides towards better positioning and equipping
itself to implement its expanded mandate in a more people -centred, integrated and
proactive manner and has further refined its adaptation Plan. The Plan envisages the
reconfiguration of the military component which includes the e stablishment of a
Mobile Task Force to enhance the Mission’s ability to project force throughout the
country. This will also facilitate the mobility of civilian and police personnel and
enable the Mission to operate in a more proactive and community -oriented manner.
The successful implementation of the adaptation plan is contingent on the support of
partners. I reiterate my call upon all Member States to contribute the required
capabilities and to match the Mission’s mandate with adequate resources in keeping
with their commitments under the Action for Peacekeeping framework. I call upon
the Government of Mali to facilitate the deployment of the additional capabilities,
including by finalizing the agreement on the designation of additional land for the
Mission’s camps in Mopti. The step is critical to allow MINUSMA to increase its
civilian and uniformed presence in the centre and better assist the Malian authorities
in their efforts to stabilize the area and better protect civilians.

16/20

20-03942

S/2020/223

101. The humanitarian situation in Mali remains dire. A total of 3.2 million Malians
required humanitarian assistance in 2019, and that number is expected to increase in
2020. Some 1.1 million persons are at risk of food insecurity. To meet those
humanitarian needs, additional resourcing is required. I call upon international
partners to fully resource the humanitarian response plan. Adequate funding is
necessary, in particular ahead of the lean season, to meet the needs of the most
vulnerable communities.
102. I am equally concerned by the deteriorating human rights situation, which is
marked by terrorist attacks in northern and central Mali targeting national security
services, peacekeepers, international forces and, increasingly, civilians. Malian
security forces themselves were involved in human rights violations. Civilians also
fell victim to attacks by self-defence groups, including as a result of their perceived
support for Islamist groups. Impunity is one of the aggravating factors in the current
violence in Mali, and perpetrators of violence must be held accountable.
103. I wish to express my deep appreciation to the Special Representative for Mali
and Head of MINUSMA, Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his outstanding leadership and
dedication. I commend United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel for their
commitment to peace and stability in Mali. I also extend my sincere gratitude to the
troop- and police-contributing countries, members of the international mediation
team, regional and multilateral organizations, donor countries, non-governmental
organizations and all other partners for their steadfast support for Mali.

20-03942

17/20

S/2020/223

Annex I
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali: military and police strength as at
10 March 2020
Military

Police

Experts on Mission,
staff officers and units

Individual police officers

Country

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Armenia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Austria

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1 280

16

1 296

1

1

237

43

280

238

43

281

Bangladesh

Formed police units

Total police

Belgium

33

6

39

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Benin

242

18

260

16

1

17

133

5

138

149

6

155

Bhutan

5

–

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

1

1

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Burkina Faso

1 045

35

1 080

19

9

28

130

10

140

149

19

168

Burundi

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cambodia

266

25

291

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Cameroon

–

1

1

7

3

10

–

–

–

7

3

10

Canada

4

1

5

8

6

14

–

–

–

8

6

14

Chad

1 406

41

1 447

12

1

13

–

–

–

12

1

13

China

410

16

426

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Côte d’Ivoire

355

8

363

12

14

26

–

–

–

12

14

26

Czechia

4

1

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Denmark

65

8

73

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

1 069

2

1 071

–

–

–

130

10

140

130

10

140

Egypt
El Salvador

190

16

206

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Estonia

4

–

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ethiopia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Finland

4

–

4

1

1

2

–

–

–

1

1

2

France

23

1

24

13

1

14

–

–

–

13

1

14

Gambia

4

1

5

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Germany

340

20

360

8

7

15

–

–

–

8

7

15

Ghana

135

19

154

3

–

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Guinea

841

30

871

5

6

11

–

–

–

5

6

11

Indonesia

10

–

10

4

1

5

–

–

–

4

1

5

Iran

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ireland

12

–

12

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Italy

1

1

2

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

Jordan

64

–

64

8

–

8

–

–

–

8

Kenya

13

–

13

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Latvia

1

–

1

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Guatemala

18/20

8

20-03942

S/2020/223
Military

Police

Experts on Mission,
staff officers and units

Individual police officers

Country

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Men

Women

Total

Liberia

102

15

117

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Lithuania

35

2

37

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Luxembourg

2

–

2

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Madagascar

–

–

–

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Mauritania

4

–

4

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Mexico

2

1

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Nepal

154

4

158

–

1

1

–

–

–

–

1

1

4

1

5

5

1

6

–

–

–

5

1

6

Niger

861

12

873

24

10

34

–

–

–

24

10

34

Nigeria

75

8

83

1

1

2

101

39

140

102

40

142

Norway

10

4

14

3

2

5

–

–

–

3

2

5

Pakistan

56

–

56

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Portugal

2

–

2

2

1

3

–

–

–

2

1

3

Romania

120

6

126

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Senegal

997

52

1 049

14

7

21

281

30

311

295

37

332

Sierra Leone

18

4

22

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Netherlands

Spain

Formed police units

Total police

1

–

1

2

–

2

–

–

–

2

–

2

Sri Lanka

249

–

249

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Sweden

193

35

228

3

2

5

–

–

–

3

2

5

Switzerland

7

–

7

–

1

1

–

–

–

–

1

1

Togo

885

49

934

14

2

16

260

19

279

274

21

295

Tunisia

79

7

86

30

1

31

–

–

–

30

1

31

Turkey

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Ukraine

8

1

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United Kingdom of
Great Britain and
Northern Ireland

3

–

3

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

United States of
America

9

–

9

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

11 711

468

12 179

219

79

298

1 272

156

1 428

1 491

235

1 726

Total

20-03942

19/20

S/2020/223

Map
20/20

Annex II

20-03942
