S/2017/969*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 November 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2347 (2017)
I. Introduction
1.
In its resolution 2347 (2017), the Security Council reaffirmed that terrorism in
all forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security, and noted with grave concern the involvement of
non-State actors, notably terrorist groups, in the destruction of cultural heritage and
the trafficking in cultural property and related offences. The Council encouraged
Member States to take preventive measures to safeguard cultural property in the
context of armed conflict and to provide assistance in demining cultural sites. In
paragraph 8 of that resolution, the Council requested Member States to take
appropriate steps to prevent and counter the illicit trade and trafficking in cultural
property and other items of archaeological, historical, cultural, rare scientific, and
religious importance originating from armed conflict areas, notably from terrorist
groups, including by prohibiting the cross-border trade in such illicit items,
particularly when there was reasonable suspicion that such items had been illegally
removed from Iraq since 6 August 1990 and from Syria since 15 Marc h 2011. The
present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 22 of resolution 2347 (2017), by
which the Council requested me to report on the implementation of that resolution.
2.
The report was prepared by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) and the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities. The information and
observations herein are based on submissions by 29 1 Member States and other
international governmental and non-governmental bodies, such as the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), the World Customs Organization
(WCO), the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT)
and the International Council of Museums (ICOM).

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 28 November 2017.
1
Argentina, Armenia, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Ecuador, Estonia, France, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Latvia, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Myanmar, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uruguay
and Ukraine.

17-19070* (E)

281117

*1719070*

S/2017/969

3.
Given the relatively short time since the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017), it
is difficult to evaluate its impact on the ability of Member States to counter threats.
More time is needed for Member States and art market actors to adjust their
legislation and business procedures, respectively. Therefore, the present report takes
stock of the existing situation, including prior to the adoption of the resolution, and
provides a baseline against which future developments can be assessed in
subsequent reports, should the Security Council request them.

II. Recent developments
4.
Out of the 82 UNESCO World Heritage properties in the Arab States region,
17 are inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger owing to armed conflict. In
Iraq, the World Heritage Sites of Hatra and Ashur have sustained damage. Nimrud
and the Ancient City of Nineveh, both on the country’s Tentative List, have also
been severely affected. In addition, over 100 other Iraqi cultural heritage sites have
been damaged or destroyed. All six World Heritage Sites in the Syrian Arab
Republic have been severely affected by armed conflict, notably the Crac des
Chevaliers and the Ancient Cities of Aleppo and Damascus. Key components of the
World Heritage Site of Palmyra have been intentionally destroyed and, on 18 August
2015, its former Director of Antiquities, Khalid al-Asaad, was killed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh). 2 Eight sites on the
country’s Tentative List, as well as many other heritage sites, have been damaged,
destroyed or severely affected, notably by looting and illegal excavations. In Yemen,
the World Heritage Sites of the Old City of Sana’a and the Historic Town of Zabid,
in addition to the Old City of Sa’adah and the Marib Dam, both on the country’s
Tentative List, have been repeatedly damaged. The cultural heritage sites of Libya
have also been affected by damage, looting and destruction, including at least eight
religious sites in the Old Town of Tripoli and its surroundings throughout 2014 and
2015, as well as the World Heritage Site of Sabratha in 2017.
5.
While reliable estimates of the overall value of antiquities smuggling are not
available, information provided by Member States from 2015 onwards reveals the
development by ISIL of administrative structures designed to manage looting
activities and evidence of the “taxing” of looted antiquities. This suggests that ISIL
organized the large-scale looting and smuggling of cultural artefacts as an important
source of income.
6.
Satellite-based monitoring revealed a marked increase in looting in ISIL -held
areas in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic in 2014 and 2015. In addition, images
taken of Yemen on 29 October 2015 revealed increased looting activities within the
Ancient City of Marib, 3 where Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (QDe.129) is
active.
7.
Although ISIL has continued to lose territory in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic, reducing its opportunities for looting (see S/2016/501, para. 11), the
Monitoring Team and UNESCO continue to receive reports from Member States and
international organizations of seizures of antiquities originating in these countries,
as well as the ongoing exploitation of cultural sites under the control of terrorist
groups. A recently filed complaint in a national court indicates that ISIL had been
professionally marketing excavated antiquities for international sale. 4
__________________
2

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
Information provided by the Operational Satellite Applications Programme (UNOSAT) of the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR).
4
United States Department of Justice, “United States files complaint seeking forfeiture of
3

2/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

III. Implementation of resolution 2347 (2017)
8.
In response to the above-mentioned challenges, the international community
has launched a number of initiatives aimed at strengthening the protection of
cultural heritage in conflict situations and combating the illicit trafficking of
cultural property. In addition to resolution 2347 (2017), the Security Council has
adopted the following resolutions related to cultural heritage: resolution 2199
(2015), adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations; and
resolutions 2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017), in which the Council recognized the illicit
trafficking of artefacts as a source of financing of terrorism and called on Member
States to take appropriate measures to prevent the trade in cultural property from
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Council has further considered culture and
its protection in the context of United Nations peacekeeping and political missions,
in its resolutions 2100 (2013) and 2233 (2015), establishing the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, respectively.
9.
The strategy for the reinforcement of actions by UNESCO for the protection of
culture and the promotion of cultural pluralism in the event of armed conflict, 5 and
the action plan for its implementation, 6 are aimed at integrating culture, and in
particular the protection of cultural heritage, in humanitarian, security,
peacekeeping and human rights policies and operations, including through
operational partnerships, such as the memorandum of understanding signed between
UNESCO and the International Committee of the Red Cross in February 2016.
Several related resolutions and declarations have been adopted by other Unite d
Nations bodies, including the General Assembly 7 and the Human Rights Council. 8
Two reports by the Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural rights have focused on
the intentional destruction of cultural heritage. 9

__________________

antiquities associated with the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)”, press release,
15 December 2016.
5
UNESCO, Records of the General Conference, Thirty-eighth Session, Paris, 3–18 November
2015, vol. 1: Resolutions, resolution 48; and “Reinforcement of UNESCO’s action for the
protection of culture and the promotion of cultural pluralism in the event of armed conflict”,
document No. 38 C/49 (2 November 2015). Available from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/
0023/002351/235186e.pdf.
6
UNESCO, “Follow-up to decisions and resolutions adopted by the Executive Board and the
General Conference at their previous sessions”, document 201 EX/5, part I, 24 March 2017.
Available from http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002477/247706e.pdf .
7
Resolutions 69/281 of 28 May 2015, on saving the cultural heritage of Iraq, and 69/196 of
18 December 2014, on International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and Other Related Offences. The
latter is the first international instrument specifically developed to address criminal justice related aspects of combating trafficking in cultural property, and is applicable to all Member
States at all times. The Guidelines are aimed at assisting legislators and policymak ers, as well as
law enforcement officers, prosecutors, magistrates, and public and private institutions in
effectively protecting cultural property from being trafficked and in effectively responding to
trafficking, with a view to bringing perpetrators to justice and to returning the confiscated
property to the legitimate owners.
8
Human rights Council resolution 33/20 of 30 September 2016.
9
A/HRC/31/59 of 3 February 2016, on the intentional destruction of cultural heritage as a
violation of human rights, and A/71/317 of 9 August 2016, on a human rights approach to the
intentional destruction of cultural heritage, in conflict and non-conflict situations, by States and
non-State actors.
17-19070

3/21

S/2017/969

A.

Ratification of international instruments
10. The strength and effectiveness of multilateral legal instruments depend on
ratifications by States parties. The status of ratification of international instruments
relevant to the implementation of resolution 2347 (2017), as at November 2017, can
be found in annex to the present document.
11. To further promote ratification of these instruments, in February 2017 an
informal ratification task force for the UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or I llegally
Exported Cultural Objects was established at United Nations Headquarters in New
York, and will meet annually. A regional initiative to encourage ratification of the
UNESCO Culture Conventions 10 in East Africa and the adjacent Indian Ocean
islands was also spearheaded by UNESCO, in collaboration with the authorities of
Mauritius, in July 2017.

B.

Institutional strengthening
12. In July 2016 in Brussels, the 180 members of the WCO Council unanimously
adopted a resolution on the role of customs in preventing illicit trafficking of cultural
objects, 11 outlining tools and measures necessary to counter this phenomenon.

1.

Creation of specialized units in central and local administrations
13. Prior to the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017), in which the Council called
for the creation of specialized units in central and local administrations, a number of
Member States had already taken similar measures. The Carabinieri Command for
the Protection of Cultural Heritage (Italy), created in 1969, was the first specialized
law enforcement department dedicated to the protection of cultural heritage. More
recent initiatives include the creation by Mexico in October 2015 of a unit for
investigating and prosecuting the illicit trafficking of cultural goods and the
establishment by Sweden in April 2016 of a unit within the national police focused
on crimes related to wildlife and cultural heritage. Estonia reported on the creation
of a dedicated e-commerce control unit within its Tax and Customs Board, and
Ecuador reported putting in place a specialized investigation unit for crimes against
cultural heritage within its Judicial Police in 2010. In 2005, Switzerland created a
specialized body within the Federal Office of Culture to deal with the international
transfer of cultural property. Romania reported that the Inspectorate General of its
national police had specialized personnel for the protection of national cultural
heritage.

2.

Tools and training for customs and law enforcement dedicated personnel and
public prosecutors
14. In 2017, Sweden established a common platform for internal and external
communication among relevant authorities, including its National Commission for

__________________
10

Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions (2005);
Convention for the Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003); Convention on the
Protection of Underwater Cultural Heritage (2001); Convention concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972); Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property (1970);
Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1954); and
Universal Copyright Convention (1952 and 1971).
11
Available from www.wcoomd.org/-/media/wco/public/global/pdf/about-us/legal-instruments/
resolutions/resolution_cultural-objects.pdf?la=en.
4/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

UNESCO, National Museums of World Culture agency, customs officials and
police, on issues related to illicit trafficking of cultural property.
15. Myanmar had trained focal points within national authorities for the protection
of cultural heritage, while Armenia and France had trained their customs officials on
illicit trafficking.
16. Canadian customs officers and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police had
received general training on the import and export control aspects of that country’s
cultural property law, as well as documentation co ncerning cultural property, with a
particular emphasis on objects from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Russian
Federation had put in place similar measures regarding objects from Iraq.
17. In its capacity-building programmes, UNESCO 12 works in close cooperation
with partners such as INTERPOL, WCO, 13 ICOM, 14 UNIDROIT and UNODC to
ensure the complementarity of their activities.
3.

Creation or improvement of procedures or databases to collect information on
criminal activity related to cultural property and its illicit trade
18. The Carabinieri Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage has
developed a database of illegally removed cultural heritage, the largest and most
effective of its kind. Colombia and Romania reported the creation of a special ized
database containing information on illegally exported cultural property and “stolen
cultural goods”. Japan, the Russian Federation and Slovakia maintained records of
stolen cultural objects. Further information related to international databases is
provided in section III.E below.

C.

Legal and judicial measures

1.

Adoption of legal measures to prohibit cross-border trade of illicitly traded or
trafficked cultural property originating in contexts of armed conflict
19. All 28 States members of the European Union prohibit the sale, supply,
transfer or export of cultural objects removed from the Syrian Arab Republic since
9 May 2011 15 and exported from Iraq since 6 August 1990. 16 In June 2017, the

__________________
12

UNESCO has undertaken various capacity-building programmes for heritage professionals, and
police and customs officials, particularly in countries in conflict, such as Afghanistan, Iraq,
Libya, Mali, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen, in response to the heightened risk of
trafficking in cultural objects. These programmes build the capacities of participants in the
implementation of preventive measures and practical tools, such as updatin g databases on looted
artefacts and improving inventories and restitution provisions. Following a training -of-trainers
programme in 2013, six instructors from the Afghan National Customs Academy trained 150
customs officers from across the country between 2014 and 2016; further training sessions were
held throughout 2017.
13
In April 2017, in cooperation with the embassy of France for Libya in Tunis and with the support
of Tunisian customs officials, WCO organized the first regional workshop for the Middle East
and North Africa region on the topic of “The role of customs in security and development: the
function of cultural heritage protection”, held in Hammamet, Tunisia, which brought together
customs officials from 11 countries.
14
The International Council of Museums ICOM has developed several tools to fight illicit
trafficking, including the Red Lists, which classify the endangered categories of archaeological
objects or works of art in the most vulnerable areas of the world, in order to prevent them be ing
sold or illegally exported. To date, 16 Red Lists have been published. Updated Emergency Red
Lists of Iraqi cultural objects at risk and of Libyan cultural objects at risk were issued following
the adoption of resolution 2199 (2015).
15
In conformity with Council of the European Union Regulation No. 36/2012 of 18 January 2012
(amended by Regulation 2015/827 of 28 May 2015) concerning restrictive measures in view of
17-19070

5/21

S/2017/969

European Commission presented a draft regulation on the illegal import and
trafficking of cultural goods from outside the European Union, stressing the
importance of a common European Union framework in this regard. The regulation
would provide customs officials with a legal means to seize and retain goods in
cases of doubtful certification.
2.

Adoption of sanctions to ensure that no funds, other financial assets or other
economic resources are made available, directly or indirectly, by their nationals
or persons within their territory for the benefit of ISIL and individuals, groups,
entities or undertakings associated with ISIL or Al-Qaida, in accordance with
relevant resolutions
20. Since its inception, the Al-Qaida sanctions regime has implemented a global
asset freeze against listed individuals and entities. Consequently, any activity that
directly or indirectly generates assets for a listed individual or entity falls under this
provision. This includes the looting and smuggling of artefacts. Any individual or
entity involved in such a trade that directly or indirectly benefits ISIL or Al -Qaida is
liable to be sanctioned under this regime, and Member States are encouraged to
propose listings of such individuals and entities.
21. In order to counter the threat posed by the large-scale organized looting of
cultural artefacts by ISIL, 17 the Security Council, in its resolution 2199 (2015),
included a moratorium on trade in cultural items illegally removed from the Syrian
Arab Republic and reiterated a similar moratorium on trade in Iraqi artefacts applied
in 2003. Subsequently, the Monitoring Team developed a range of recommendations
for countering this threat and strengthening mechanisms of control for the
international antiquities market, 18 which are reflected in paragraph 17 of resolution
2347 (2017).
22. Canada reported on its contribution to the Financial Action Task Force, its
participation in the “Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS” working group to counter ISIL
financing and its efforts to protect its own financial system from abuse. Romania
reported that the sanctions adopted by the Security Council since 2008 were directly
applicable at the national level. 19 Jordan reported that it had shared the names of
individuals involved in terrorism and illegal financing through the antiquities trade
with relevant agencies and had enforced the related sanctions. France reported that
its sanctions regime had been strengthened in 2017 to include asset freezes.

3.

Criminalization of illicit trafficking of cultural property
23. Since the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017), there have been no reports of
new legal measures on the criminalization of the illicit trafficking of cultural
property. Nevertheless, Italy reported that legislation to that effect was currently
being discussed by its Senate, while Mexico reported that it had been reviewing
related legislation since 2014. 20 In addition, Ecuador, 21 France, 22 Japan, 23 Jordan, 24

__________________

the situation in Syria and repealing Regulation (EC) No. 442/2011.
In conformity with Council of the European Union Regulation No. 1210/2003 of 7 July 2003
concerning certain specific restrictions on economic and financial relations with Iraq and
repealing Regulation (EC) No. 2465/96.
17
First reported by the Monitoring Team in 2014 in its special report on ISIL (see S/2014/815,
paras. 72–73).
18
See S/2015/739, paras. 6–7; S/2016/210, paras. 8–13; S/2016/213, paras. 24–36; S/2016/629,
paras. 83–90; S/2017/35, paras 67–68; and S/2017/573, paras. 67–69.
19
Article 3, paragraph 1, in conjunction with article 1, paragraph 1, of Government Emergency
Ordinance 202/2008.
20
Federal Law on Archaeological, Artistic and Historic Areas and Monuments.
21
Section 5 of the Comprehensive Organic Penal Code, arts. 237 –240.
16

6/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

Romania, 25 Saudi Arabia, 26 Serbia, 27 Slovakia, 28 Spain, 29 Turkey, 30 Ukraine 31 and
Uruguay 32 reported that such legal measures were already in place.
24. In the framework of international assistance provided through the Fund for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, Mali reported on
elaborating, updating and adopting legislation to incorporate the provisions of
chapter 4 of the Second Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict into its national legislation, in order to
criminalize theft, pillage or misappropriation of cultural property.
25. At the regional level, the Council of Europe adopted the Conventio n on
Offences relating to Cultural Property in May 2017, which is aimed at combating
the illicit trafficking of cultural property.
4.

Establishment of regulations for the import and export of cultural property,
consistent with international standards and the improvement of
restitution mechanisms
26. By establishing well-designed import and export regulations, Member States
are better positioned to counter the illegal export of cultural objects and to address
gaps in the legal framework. In this regard, Ecuador, Portugal, Slovakia, Spain and
Ukraine reported the existence of regulated processes and conditions for the
movement of cultural objects.
27. Since 1993, the European Union has regulated the return of cultural objects
unlawfully removed from the territory of member States under Council Directive
93/7/EEC of 15 March 1993 on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed
from the territory of a Member State, which was updated in 2014 with the support
of UNESCO, resulting in new Directive 2014/60/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on the return of cultural objects unlawfully
removed from the territory of a Member State and amending Regulation (EU)
No. 1024/2012 (Recast).
28. UNESCO and the WCO developed guidelines for model export certificates to
assist Member States in developing and updating their national customs certification
models according to an international standard.

5.

Establishment of standards of provenance documentation among relevant
business associations and participants in the antiquities market
29. Collectors, art dealers, auction houses and online platforms can serve as the
last line of defence against the sale of artefacts looted by terrorist organizations in
conflict zones. Nevertheless, they face a significant risk of being involved in this

__________________
22

Law No. 2016-731 of 3 June 2016 on strengthening the fight against organized crime, terrorism
and their financing.
23
Act on Protection of Cultural Properties, art. 193; Act concerning Controls on the Illicit Export
and Import of Cultural Property, art. 4; and Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Act, arts. 52
and 69.7.
24
Antiquities Law No. 21 of 1988 and Customs Law No. 20 of 1998.
25
Romanian Criminal Code, Law No. 286/2009.
26
Antiquities, Museums and Urban Heritage Law No. 15883.
27
Serbian Criminal Code, Law Nos. 85/05, 88/05–correction, 107/05–correction, 72/09, 111/09,
121/12, 104/13, 108/14 and 94/16.
28
Slovak Collective Criminal Code, as amended, Act No. 300/2005.
29
Organic Law No. 10/1995.
30
Turkish Criminal Code.
31
Criminal Code of Ukraine.
32
Law No. 18.494 on the Control and Prevention of Money-Laundering and the Financing of
Terrorism.
17-19070

7/21

S/2017/969

illicit trade. The global trade in art and antiquities uses the concept of “provenance”,
loosely defined as proof of the legality of prior ownership, as its central compliance
instrument. Indeed, there is currently no consensus on the optimal contents of such
documentation, however, nor on the handling and storage of documentation related
to the sale of antiquities. This situation is exacerbated by the increasing
sophistication of forged provenance documents, particularly as regards the trade in
ancient coins, for which provenance documents are rarely produced or archived (see
S/2016/213, para. 34, and S/2016/629, para. 89). This presents a challenge for
sellers and buyers of antiquities, as well as law enforcement agencies.
30. In the light of the growing number of cultural objects of doubtful origin for
sale on the Internet, States increasingly recognize the need to take measures to
counter this form of illicit trafficking. For example, Argentina reported that it had
enhanced the monitoring of online sales, and Estonia and Switzerland reported that
they had increased cooperation with online auction platforms.
31. Many countries, such as Canada, have adopted and impleme nted the UNESCO
International Code of Ethics for Dealers in Cultural Property 33 and the ICOM Code
of Ethics for Museums. 34
32. Other means applied by Member States 35 to regulate the art market include
overseeing art market professions through general trade re gulations, licensing and
requirements to maintain registers to track transactions, or applying obligatory
provenance-check provisions in accordance with national legislation.
6.

Establishment of differentiated due diligence among relevant business
associations and participants in the antiquities market
33. The notion of due diligence expressed in the UNIDROIT Convention on
Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects and the criteria set by article 4 (4) of
that Convention have become benchmarks for due diligence evaluations in national
legislation and case law, independent of a State’s ratification of the Convention. It
inspired the requirement of due care and attention included in European Union
legislation (Directive 2014/60/EU), as well as in the European Convention on
Offences relating to Cultural Property.
34. While most banks, companies and industries have extensive experience with
sophisticated compliance structures and due diligence processes, including know your-customer procedures, such procedures are generally not well developed in the
antiquities market and market participants have only limited experience in the
implementation of sanctions (see S/2016/213, paras. 35–36). Furthermore, some
market participants have been reluctant to consider the looting and illicit trafficking
of antiquities from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic as potentially significant
revenue sources for terrorists. 36
35. An agreed standard of provenance, common rules of compliance, due diligence
and know-your-customer procedures would not only enable market participants to
better identify potentially problematic antiquities, but also would allow law

__________________
33

UNESCO, Records of the General Conference, Thirtieth Session, Paris, 26 October –
17 November 1999, vol. 1 and corrigendum: Resolutions. Available from
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001213/121320M.pdf.
34
Available in 41 languages, the Code of Ethics for Museums is a reference tool that sets minimum
standards of professional practice for museums and their staff. The Code establishes the
obligation to exercise due diligence when acquiring an object. Al l ICOM members are required
to agree to respect this code.
35
For example, Armenia, Romania, Spain and Turkey.
36
Based on various consultations between the Monitoring Team and private sector stakeholders
between 2014 and 2017.
8/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

enforcement investigators to access data on past sales more easily, introducing
additional risk factors and obstacles for smugglers and their intermediaries (see
S/2016/629, para. 89).
36. Estonia reported on provisions in its national legislation on due diligence,
which requires museums to ascertain the origins of cultural property to prevent the
registration of cultural property that has entered the country unlawfully.
37. Launched in April 2017, the joint UNESCO-European Union capacity-building
project, which is aimed at engaging the European art market in the fight against
illicit trafficking, foresees a comprehensive training programme on due diligence
issues.
38. ICOM reported on its role in educating museum professionals and art
collectors on standards of provenance documentation, differentiated due diligence
and measures to prevent the trade of stolen or illegally traded cultural property.

D.

Inventorying and documentation
Inventorying and documentation of national cultural property
39. Canada, Colombia, Ecuador, Estonia, Mexico, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Spain, Turkey and Ukraine reported on the existence or development of inventories
of cultural property. It appears, however, that not all reporting States have
established comprehensive national inventories. Rather, in Bulgaria and Canada, for
example, inventorying is the responsibility of each individual museum or institution
and inclusion in a comprehensive database is voluntary, when such a database
exists. In Estonia and Turkey, inventories for national monuments and collections
are distinct. France reported on inventorying the archives of French archaeological
missions to the Syrian Arab Republic; it has also digitized archives related to the
Middle East.
40. Colombia and Ecuador reported on developing software and digitizing
physical inventory sheets. Turkey has developed a geographic information system based inventorying system for built heritage and protected areas. Saudi Arabia
reported on the inventorying of archaeological monuments and objects, which is
accessible via an online database.
41. In Iraq, Libya, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen, satellite imagery is being
used to document damage to cultural sites, including through a collaboration
between UNESCO and the Operational Satellite Applications Programme of
UNITAR (UNOSAT). 37 Italy is supporting the documentation of the Nineveh
Governorate and the area around Mosul in Iraq through satellite ima gery and the
provision of technical expertise.
42. UNESCO supported a field mission to eastern Mosul, Iraq, in April 2017, to
assess the destruction and document new archaeological remains discovered in a
tunnel network excavated by ISIL.

__________________
37

17-19070

A memorandum of understanding was signed between UNESCO and UNOSAT in June 2015, and
cooperation is ongoing for the monitoring of destruction and damage via satellite imagery in
Iraq, Libya, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. In this framework, UNOSAT provides images
and image analysis to UNESCO, while UNESCO provides the names of experts to conduct the
analysis. Following a comprehensive report on damage assessments of Syrian cultural heritage
sites published in 2014, a joint summary report on assessments of cultural heritage sites in the
framework of UNOSAT cooperation with UNESCO over the course of 2015 was published.
Currently, an update of the 2014 report on the Syrian Arab Republic is under preparation in
collaboration with UNESCO, with a special segment on the Old City of Aleppo.
9/21

S/2017/969

43. In Yemen, local authorities and UNESCO have agreed to establish a standard
database for the documentation of monuments and sites throughout the country, in
partnership with the Oxford University Endangered Archaeology in the Middle East
and North Africa project.
44. In Afghanistan, UNESCO continues to implement the World Bank -funded
project on mapping and management planning for archaeological sites, particularly
those which are susceptible to threats from mining and infrastructure development.
45. Concerning intangible heritage, a strategic inventorying plan was established
in Mali and 249 stakeholders received training in this field. Eritrea inventoried its
intangible cultural heritage from June to August 2017, with support from UNESCO.
46. Since March 2014, in the framework of the Emergency Safeguarding of Syrian
Cultural Heritage project, funded by UNESCO and the European Union, and other
initiatives, technical support for inventorying and documentation has been provided
through several activities, including training in the digitization of archives, held
between September and November 2016. Emergency recording and archiving of
cultural heritage were delivered as part of Project Anqa, a joint initiative of the
International Council on Monuments and Sites and CyArk, mo st notably in January
2017, when the project focused on data collection and analysis.
47. ICOM, together with international organizations such as INTERPOL and
UNESCO, national law enforcement personnel and museums, promoted the use of
the Object ID standard as a good inventorying practice. The standard is
systematically used by a number of Member States for the inventorying of their
cultural property, as reported by Italy and referenced in alerts on stolen items
received by UNESCO and INTERPOL, as well as national reports on the
implementation of the 1970 Convention. 38

E.

International cooperation among judiciary, customs, law
enforcement agencies and cultural institutions on investigations,
seizures, returns and restitutions

1.

Listings of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities involved in the illicit trade in
cultural property
48. To date, no listing request has been proposed in the context of resolutions
2253 (2015) 39 and 2347 (2017), despite media reports of ongoing investigations and
trials against relevant traffickers and intermediaries by Member States.

2.

Development of law enforcement and judicial cooperation in preventing and
countering all forms and aspects of trafficking in cultural property that may
benefit organized criminal groups, terrorists or terrorist groups
49. Jordan reported on the establishment of administrative cooperation agreements
in customs affairs with Arab and other countries, with a view to exchanging
information on suspects and violations of customs legislation. France reported on its
close cooperation with INTERPOL, notably in the framework of inv estigations.
50. Colombia reported having signed several bilateral agreements on the fight
against illicit trafficking, including with Mexico, Honduras and the United States of

__________________
38

Object ID is an internationally recognized tool initiated by the Getty Research Institute and
managed by ICOM. It consists of a standardized checklist available in 17 languages, listing basic
information on an object in order to facilitate inventorying.
39
Paragraph 14.
10/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

America. Uruguay reported on the creation of the Technical Committee to Prevent
and Combat Illicit Trafficking in Cultural Goods of the Southern Common Market
and Union of South American Nations, in April 2017, to facilitate regional
cooperation in the fight against illicit trafficking and the recovery of cultural
property.
51. As per its usual practice, WCO regularly informed customs directors general
of Security Council resolutions, European Union regulations, new restrictions and
prohibitions that may have an impact on the work of customs officers on the ground.
As at September 2017, 21 Member States had contacted the 27 focal points on the
application of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime, with the goal of preventing and combating trafficking in cultural property
under paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 68/186. These contact points
have been included in the ongoing publication of the directory of competent
national authorities, integrated into the Sharing Electronic Resources and Laws on
Crime (SHERLOC) database. 40
52. Following the successful Operation Pandora of INTERPOL in November
2016, two additional operations organized by Europol (Pandora 2) and WCO
(Athena) were to take place in November 2017 to counter illicit trafficking of
cultural property, focusing on objects coming from the Middle East. In this
framework, three workshops were organized in October 2017, in Albania, Argentina
and Romania. In Cyprus in November 2017, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, with the support of INTERPOL and UNODC, organized a
workshop on trafficking of cultural property and antiquities smuggling with special
attention given to Security Council resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2347 (2017).
3.

Requests for and provision of cooperation in investigations, prosecutions,
seizure and confiscation, as well as return, restitution or repatriation, of
trafficked, illicitly exported or imported, stolen, looted, illicitly excavated or
illicitly traded cultural property
53. With regard to its efforts to prevent the import of illicitly trafficked objects,
Canada reported on the existing procedures used when diplomatic requests
concerning cultural property stolen or looted from cultural institutions were
received. The conclusive identification and authentication of such property required
cooperation and assistance from government agencies and cultural experts in the
country of origin in order to pursue the property’s return under Canadian law.

4.

Requests for and provision of cooperation in judicial proceedings
54. UNODC has engaged in capacity-building activities aimed at supporting States
in enhancing their international cooperation in combating trafficking in cultural
property. Training has been provided on criminal justice treaties, notably the
Organized Crime Convention, as a basis for international judicial and law
enforcement cooperation in criminal matters, especially those involving offences
related to trafficking in cultural property, as well as on the International Guidelines
for Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in
Cultural Property and Other Related Offences.
55. In August 2017, a booklet outlining statistics on crimes against cultural
property in 58 countries was issued by INTERPOL. This will allow INTERPOL to
enhance its operations at the regional level, as well as to share sensitive information
about the channels used for the illicit export of stolen objects.

__________________
40

17-19070

Available from www.unodc.org/cld/v3/sherloc.
11/21

S/2017/969

56. Greater efforts are being undertaken by international organizations such as
UNESCO and INTERPOL to collect data on damage and theft, to facilitate
investigations and cooperation with law enforcement authorities, as well as the
prosecution of crimes committed against cultural heritage.
5.

Enhanced cooperation at the bilateral, subregional and regional levels within
the scope of relevant programmes of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
57. In May 2015, Egypt, under the auspices of UNESCO, hosted an intra ministerial conference in Cairo on “Cultural property under threat: the cultural,
economic and security impacts of antiquities theft in the Middle East”, which
culminated in the adoption of the Cairo Declaration. 41

6.

Support for and contribution to updating the World Customs Organization
Harmonized System Nomenclature and Classification of Goods
58. As part of its work on measures to prevent artefacts looted by ISIL from
reaching the international market, in 2016 the Monitoring Team identified
administrative changes to the WCO Harmonized System Nomenclature and
Classification of Goods as a potentially effective measure (see S/2016/213, para. 28).
Chapter 97 of the Nomenclature, which is currently organized by type of antiquities,
could be modified to include additional subheadings, including, for example, the
age of an item. This would ensure that all members of WCO amend their national
regulations in a harmonized manner, preventing regional market distortions (see
S/2016/629, paras. 83–84) and allowing national authorities to better identify
potentially relevant antiquities and hold those which have been wrongly declared,
all of which would provide more time for investigations into their origin and
ownership history (see S/2016/213, paras. 29–30).
59. Romania reported using the TARIC customs tariff database, integrated at the
European Union level 42 and based on the WCO Harmonized System.

7.

Use of and contribution to relevant databases
60. Canada, Estonia, Italy, Romania and Spain reported using the INTERPOL
Database on Stolen Works of Art. To date, more than 50,000 stolen objects have
been recorded in that database, including 1,099 from the Syrian Arab Republic,
2,786 from Iraq, 684 from Afghanistan, 176 from Libya and 1 from Yemen.
Information on some of these artefacts have been disseminated on special posters
(see para. 101 below). INTERPOL recognizes that, as a result of the transnational
nature of crimes related to culture, the involvement of several national jurisdictions
leads to gaps and loopholes which are exploited by individuals and organized
groups. The main challenge facing law enforcement is the lack of priority given to
this type of crime. Therefore, INTERPOL encourages the creation of specialized
units and dedicated national databases to combat illicit trafficking of cultural
property.

__________________
41

In response to the threat to cultural heritage in the Middle East, the Governments of Egypt, Iraq,
Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Saudi Arabia and the Sudan agreed during the conference to
unite their efforts against the trafficking, destruction and looting of cultural heritage. The
Declaration is available from http://theantiquitiescoalition.org/wp -content/uploads/2015/05/
Cairo-Declaration-final-version-May-2015.pdf.
42
Using TARIC is mandatory for all 28 States members of the European Union, owing to the
common customs territory at the European Union level and the resulting requirement that States
use the same classification code (regarding the same good) in all European Union customs
offices. The legal base of TARIC is Council regulation (EEC) No. 26 58/87 of 23 July 1987 on
the tariff and statistical nomenclature and on the Common Customs Tariff.
12/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

61. Canada, Estonia and Romania reported on their contribution to and use of the
UNESCO Database of National Cultural Heritage Laws.
62. To date, the ARCHEO platform of WCO contains 145 vetted contacts from
53 countries, international organizations and academia. In order to implement
Security Council resolutions 2199 (2015) and 2347 (2017), there have been specific
efforts to promote and enhance the use of ARCHEO in the Middle East and North
Africa region. In addition, Bulgaria, Estonia and Romania reported on their use of
the ARCHEO platform.
63. In Switzerland, the University of Geneva has created the ArThemis database,
an open source and publicly available database that records cases of return and
restitution of cultural objects that have been resolved without litigation.
8.

Provision of data and information on the investigation and prosecution of
relevant crimes and related outcomes to the Sharing Electronic Resources and
Laws on Crime database and on seizures of cultural property to the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
64. UNODC continues to collect national legislation and case law decisions on
cultural property offences for inclusion in its SHERLOC database, aimed at
facilitating communication between States, police, civil society and other
organizations. The database was developed to provide easy access to legislation and
cases related to the implementation of the Organized Crime Convention by its States
parties. Estonia and Romania reported using SHERLOC.
65. In paragraph 15 of resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council called upon
Member States to report interdictions of antiquities to the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities. To date, the Monitoring Team continues to receive
information concerning seizures of such items by Member States, confirming that
several thousand artefacts have been seized within the conflict zone, neighbouring
regions and in transit and potential market countries.
66. Member States have highlighted several challenges in this area. Owing to the
lack of documentation for existing cultural artefacts within the conflict zones, it is
difficult for Member States to confirm that the seized artefacts were looted there.
Despite the existence of the global moratorium on the trade of artefacts illegally
removed from Iraq or the Syrian Arab Republic, 43 Member States must verify that
the seized artefacts fall under this moratorium. Member State authorities explained
that linking the seized artefacts to the illegal trade by terrorist organizations such as
ISIL or Al-Qaida required long-term investigations. The exchange of information in
different languages remained a technical challenge and at times slowed down
exchanges between Member States.
67. Consequently, the Monitoring Team recommended that Member States actively
exchange information on seized antiquities via the INTERPOL Database on Sto len
Works of Art (see S/2016/210, para. 10) and information on seizures and
investigations via the ARCHEO platform of WCO (see S/2016/629, para. 86). In
addition, investigations into seized antiquities are complex and require a significant
level of expertise. Therefore, the creation and maintenance of specialized law
enforcement and customs authorities by Member States is considered necessary (see
S/2016/213, para. 30).

__________________
43

17-19070

Security Council resolution 2199 (2015), para. 17.
13/21

S/2017/969

9.

Provision of lists of archaeological sites, museums and excavation storage
houses located in territories under the control of ISIL or any other listed group
to relevant industry stakeholders
68. The documentation of existing artefacts at risk of looting within conflict zones
remains a priority. ISIL systematically robbed the storage depots of museums and
former archaeological digs. Many artefacts in areas currently under the control of
ISIL have been identified and documented. A significant proportion of these items
have been catalogued by the museums concerned and archaeological expeditions.
Currently, there are several projects under way to enable the collection and
digitalization of relevant information (ibid., para. 32).
69. The creation of systematic databases would enable market participants to
secure information regarding the identity of objects that have likely been traded by
ISIL-related individuals, which would then allow them to vet the antiq uities
encountered in the course of their business activities (ibid.). Such data can only
protect artefacts already unearthed and catalogued, and therefore represents only
one of many measures necessary to counter the threat of antiquities looted from
conflict zones.
70. As a founding member of the International Committee of the Blue Shield,
ICOM participates in different projects aimed at mapping sites and museums located
in territories under the control of armed groups. The creation of watch lists of
museums and sites in regions at risk has added an essential tool to assess damages
and monitor international support.
71. UNESCO, ICOM and their networks have provided information on cultural
property in Libya, Mali, the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and northe rn Iraq for
inclusion in military “no-strike” lists.

F.

Operational actions on the ground

1.

Measures to protect and secure cultural property at risk of looting in the
context of armed conflict
72. To ensure the protection of the site of Nimrud (Iraq), a protective fence was
set up, and tarpaulin material provided to protect archaeological remains. As part of
a project for emergency interventions to secure museums and monuments,
UNESCO, in collaboration with the Department of Antiquities of Libya, pu rchased
anti-intrusion and security materials for museums and provided support for the
construction of secured storage for movable heritage and reinforcement of security
perimeters around heritage sites. As a follow-up to several activities implemented
by UNESCO in 2016 for the emergency protection of cultural heritage in the Syrian
Arab Republic and to the emergency mission to the Ancient City of Aleppo in
January 2017, an agreement was concluded with the Aleppo City Council, the
Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums of the Syrian Arab Republic and
non-governmental organizations to take a set of emergency measures. These
included consolidation work to prevent buildings from collapsing, debris
management to prevent looting and documentation for the Citadel of Aleppo and
other major historic structures. A technical coordination meeting was convened by
UNESCO at the request of the Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums in
March 2017 in Beirut.
73. A workshop on emergency safeguarding measures was conducted by the
Carabinieri Command for the Protection of Cultural Heritage for officers from the
Ministry of Interior and the Ministry of Culture, Tourism and Antiquities of Iraq in
July 2017 in Baghdad. Another training session was held in Erbil in J uly 2017,

14/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

targeting Kurdish police forces, cultural heritage experts and academics. Similar
workshops on the conservation and management of archaeological sites at risk were
organized by the Iraqi-Italian Institute of Archaeological Sciences in April 2017 in
Baghdad.
74. Other training courses were conducted in countries neighbouring conflict affected areas, including a workshop on the protection of cultural heritage in
emergency situations, jointly organized in June 2017 by the British Institute at
Ankara, the American Research Institute in Turkey — Ankara, the embassy of the
United States in Ankara and the General Directorate for Heritage and Museums of
the Turkish Ministry of Culture and Tourism.
75. Through their network of heritage professionals, the ICOM Disaster Risk
Management Committee and Blue Shield promote best practices to protect and
secure cultural property and support capacity-building to develop emergency
planning in museums. Recently, the Smithsonian Institution, an active ICOM
member, elaborated a data set for the study of the intentional destruction of
historical sites. Through a new partnership with the United States Department of
State, fieldwork was conducted to document and stabilize the recently liberated
ancient city of Nimrud.
2.

Measures taken to prevent and counter trafficking in cultural property and
related offences
76. Prior to the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017), many Member States began
fine-tuning their national legislation, adjusting administrative procedures,
particularly in free ports, and raising public awareness of the issue of antiquities
smuggling. Several Member States continued reporting on seizures of antiquities,
including those potentially related to conflict zones and the financing of terrorism.
The work to implement the various provisions of resolution 2347 (2017), in
particular the measures outlined in its paragraph 17, will take time. Once
implemented, however, these measures have the potential to increase significantly
the ability of the international community to counter this threat and the capacity of
the global art market to resist attempts to misuse it for illegal activities.
77. Five countries reported on the implementation of concrete measures aimed at
identifying trafficking offenses. Armenia conducts comprehensive operative -search
measures on the detection and prevention of activities of any organizations, groups
and individuals associated with ISIL, the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida via its
National Security Service. Jordan reported using X -ray scanners to uncover
smuggling operations. In 2012, Switzerland strengthened the control of imports and
exports of cultural objects from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, including those
stored in free ports, by using risk profiling. Turkey reported raising awareness with
regard to Iraqi and Syrian cultural heritage among its law enforcement and customs
authorities. The Russian Federation reported on the monitoring of auctions for
listings of stolen cultural objects.

3.

Efforts undertaken by Member States with regard to the recovery of
cultural heritage
78. Afghanistan continues to work with UNESCO to implement several projects to
rehabilitate and recover heritage. It has also established a multi-partner trust fund
supporting a national programme for culture and the creative economy.
79. Six “first aid meetings” since 2014 on a wide range of specific aspects of
technical recovery have been organized by UNESCO in the Syrian Arab Republic
with the support of the Directorate General of Antiquities and Museums of that
country. The World Heritage Committee, at its forty-first session, held in Krakow,

17-19070

15/21

S/2017/969

Poland, in July 2017, requested that the Syrian Arab Repub lic invite joint reactive
monitoring missions of UNESCO, the International Council on Monuments and
Sites and the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration
of Cultural Property to its six World Heritage Sites as soon as the sec urity situation
allowed, to assess the state of conservation of the properties and to formulate, in
consultation with the State party, measures for their recovery. Since April 2017,
UNESCO has had a national officer for culture in Aleppo to ensure coordina tion
with local and national authorities and to follow up on the implementation of
recovery actions for the city.
80. Concerning Iraq, an international coordination conference on the safeguarding
of cultural heritage in liberated areas of Iraq, organized at UNESCO headquarters in
Paris in February 2017, resulted in the mapping of ongoing and planned activities,
and the planning of short- and medium-term actions, including the creation of a
Baghdad-based joint steering committee responsible for implementing the action
plan adopted at the conference. UNESCO is mobilizing funding for implementation
of the action plan.
81. Following insurgent attacks on the Nigerian World Heritage property Sukur
Cultural Landscape in December 2014, Nigeria submitted a request f or international
assistance under the UNESCO World Heritage Fund in October 2016 to support the
provision of local building materials for its restoration. The project was approved in
March 2017.
82. Mali reported the establishment of a conservation and safeguarding
programme for all of its World Heritage properties and those on its Tentative List, to
which three new properties were added in 2017.
83. Following the sentencing by the International Criminal Court of Ahmad
Al Faqi Al Mahdi to nine years in prison for intentionally directing attacks against
religious and historic buildings, including the mausoleums of saints, in the World
Heritage Site of Timbuktu, Mali, 44 the Court’s member States, via the trust fund for
victims, are reviewing the modalities for the awarding of reparations, assessed at
$2.7 million, to the victims of these crimes, notably for moral harm and with a view
to supporting the recovery of the affected community. 45 UNESCO is assisting the
trust fund in implementing the reparations plan, and is contributing to the
elaboration by the Court of a policy on cultural property, participating in a
multi-stakeholder expert consultation meeting in July 2017 in The Hague.
4.

Protection of cultural property in safe havens within the territory of each
Member State
84. France reported incorporating into its law the legal principle of safe havens for
the protection of cultural objects at risk from conflict or natural disaster, as well as
the designation of a safe haven in France for its own cultural objects, as well as
those from other countries, upon request.

__________________
44

International Criminal Court, The Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi, case No. ICC-01/1201/15, judgment and sentence on the situation in the Republic of Mali, 27 Se ptember 2016.
Available from www.icc-cpi.int/CourtRecords/CR2016_07244.PDF.
45
International Criminal Court, The Prosecutor v. Ahmad Al Faqi Al Mahdi, case No. ICC-01/1201/15, reparations order on the situation in the Republic of Mali, 17 August 2017 . Available from
www.icc-cpi.int/CourtRecords/CR2017_05117.PDF.
16/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

5.

Assistance provided for the demining of cultural sites and objects upon the
request of affected States
85. The Russian Federation reported on its involvement in the demining of the
World Heritage Site of Palmyra via the Anti-Mine Centre of the Russian Armed
Forces.
86. Mali reported cooperating with the United Nations Mine Action Service on a
general demining programme in the conflict areas affecting its natural and cultural
heritage sites.
87. France expressed its readiness to consider requests for support from Member
States regarding the demining of cultural sites.

G.

Educational and awareness-raising programmes

1.

Creation of educational programmes on protecting cultural heritage
88. To increase awareness of the importance of protecting cultural heritage,
particularly among children and youth, an increasing number of countries have
reported implementing educational and recreational programmes on this subject.
89. Estonia, Japan, Romania, Spain, Turkey and Ukraine reported creating
curricula on the protection of cultural heritage through their ministries of education;
Ecuador reported that it intended to do the same between 2018 and 2021. Saudi
Arabia had approved a comprehensive educational programme on cultural heritage
aimed at anchoring culture in daily life.
90. Colombia reported on the creation of a virtual training programme entitled
“Vivamos el património”. Spain reported on its annual youth programme on
heritage.
91. Several Member States, including Estonia and Turkey, have established
educational centres within their museums, while others are creating museums with
an educational focus. In Afghanistan, the Republic of Korea is supporting the
establishment of the Bamiyan Cultural Centre for the promotion of cultural
education for the general public. Saudi Arabia is planning the construction of 13
new regional museums.
92. Colombia, Ecuador, Estonia, France, Italy, Mali, Romania, Spain and Turkey
reported on providing training and educational modules to art market professionals,
museum experts, the media and traditional mediators.
93. Estonia, France, Japan and Sweden reported developing awareness -raising
material on cultural heritage protection, such as brochures, websites and cartoons.
94. UNESCO also develops and implements educational programmes and
activities for the protection of cultural heritage, such as the World Heritage
Education Programme, the World Heritage in Young Hands educational resource kit
and the World Heritage Youth Forums.

2.

Raising public awareness with regard to illicit trafficking and its prevention
95. Member States have undertaken various measures to raise public awareness of
illicit trafficking of cultural objects and how to prevent it. Many of these initiatives
were conducted in the framework of the #Unite4Heritage campaign, launched by the
Director-General of UNESCO at the University of Baghdad in March 2015, which
is aimed at fostering global citizenship and tolerance, while addressing a lack of
belonging as one of the root causes of radicalization.

17-19070

17/21

S/2017/969

96. Bulgaria, Estonia, Sweden and Ukraine reported on disseminating — via the
Internet, printed materials, the media and social media — information regarding
import and export restrictions governing trade in cultural objects.
97. Italy, France and Sweden have mounted exhibitions on illicit trafficking and
the destruction of heritage, and Mexico organized events celebrating the return and
restitution of looted or stolen objects. Turkey reported orga nizing symposiums and
conferences on related topics.
98. Switzerland supported the creation of a UNESCO video clip on the protection
of cultural heritage aimed at Iraqi youth. With support from Norway, the children ’s
game “Sarmad the Adventurer” was developed to raise awareness of the cultural
heritage of Iraq and the importance of protecting it from illicit trafficking. In
support of Syrian youth, the University of Tsukuba, in Japan, translated the well known children’s book A History of Syria in One Hundred Sites into Arabic, and
distributed it in schools within camps for refugees and internally displaced persons
in and around the Syrian Arab Republic.
99. As part of a wider initiative to raise awareness of the destruction of heritage in
Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, UNESCO developed animated videos to inform
local communities about actions to be taken to protect their heritage, as well as
about the illicit trafficking of Syrian cultural property. UNESCO also raised
awareness of illicit trafficking through travel guides and billboards in international
airports. In addition, it organized a regional conference entitled “Cultural heritage
and identity: an Arab youth perspective”, held in Tunisia in March 2017, to promote
new models of youth-led and gender-sensitive social and private entrepreneurship.
100. At the eighth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, held from 17 to 21 October
2016, UNODC launched a public awareness campaign on combating trafficking in
cultural property. 46 The campaign highlights this form of crime as an urgent
transnational threat involving organized criminal networks that requires closer
cooperation at the international and national levels.
101. INTERPOL issued a special poster in 2015 for Iraq displaying 94 objects
stolen from the Mosul Museum 47 and another poster in January 2017 featuring 22
funerary limestone relief busts stolen from Palmyra, Syrian Arab Republic. 48 ICOM
disseminates practical tools such as the ICOM Red Lists of cultural objects at risk
(see footnote 14 above) through its worldwide networks.

H.

Support for international funding mechanisms
Contributions by Member States to the Heritage Emergency Fund, Second
Protocol Fund and the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage in
Conflict Areas to support preventive and emergency operations, as well as fight
against the illicit trafficking of cultural property
102. Eight Member States, 49 as well as private individuals, have contributed
approximately $2,450,000 to the Heritage Emergency Fund of UNESCO. Additional
contributions for the protection of cultural heritage in emergency situa tions have
been made to other UNESCO funding mechanisms.

__________________
46

See unodc.org/culturalproperty.
Accessible from www.interpol.int/Media/Files/Crime-areas/Works-of-art/Poster/Objects-stolenfrom-Mosul-Museum,-Iraq.
48
Accessible from www.interpol.int/Media/Files/Crime-areas/Works-of-art/Poster/Sculpturesstolen-in-Palmyra,-Syria.
49
Andorra, Estonia, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Qatar and Slovakia.
47

18/21

17-19070

S/2017/969

103. Eight State Parties 50 have contributed to the Fund for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, totalling approximately $350,000.
104. Since its launch in December 2016, $75 million has been pledged to the
International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas 51 from a
variety of donors.

I.

Support for United Nations peacekeeping operations
105. Based on its cooperation with MINUSMA and the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), UNESCO is currently developing training modules for
peacekeepers on the protection of cultural property. The first regional training for
the Southern African Development Community, organized by UNESCO in
cooperation with the Regional Peacekeeping Training Centre in Harare was held in
September 2017 with the participation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.
106. Italy reported that the protection of cultural heritage was to be among its
priorities during its mandate on the Security Council in 2017. Italy intended to
support the inclusion of the protection of cultural heritage in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions, as well as the establishment of new training activities for
peacekeepers, and international and regional forces.

IV. Observations and recommendations
107. Countering looting and the flow of cultural artefacts from conflict zones
constitutes a complex task for the international community. Nevertheless, this
objective must be pursued, not only to limit the large-scale destruction of cultural
heritage but also to prevent terrorist organizations, such as ISIL, from developing
new means of financing activities. This will require the continuing engagement of
Member States and relevant international organizations, including the strengthening
of inter-agency cooperation and coordination across the United Nations system, to
provide multidisciplinary training, support and technical assistance to Member
States.
108. Concerning the looting and illicit trafficking of cultural objects, the continued
sharing of disaggregated data on criminal proceedings and seizures of such objects
between United Nations entities and Member States is essential to the monitoring of
progress in this area. I encourage such cooperation, especially with a view to
making more readily available data on the objects identified, recovered and returned
to their origin, as well as on the impact of these efforts on the financing of terrorist
groups.
109. Effective measures to counter and report on the threat posed by the looting of
artefacts in conflict zones will require stronger cooperation between Member States
__________________
50
51

17-19070

Czechia, Estonia, Finland, Greece, Netherlands, New Zealand, Slovakia a nd Switzerland.
The Conference for Safeguarding Cultural Heritage in Conflict Areas, organized by France and
the United Arab Emirates in Abu Dhabi in December 2016, resulted in the endorsement of a final
declaration by all participants, with several objectives, in particular the establishment of an
international fund for the protection of cultural heritage at risk as a result of armed conflict. The
bylaws of the fund were registered in Geneva on 8 March 2017. The International Alliance for
the Protection of Heritage in Conflict Areas is a financial institution whose purpose is to attract,
mobilize, manage and distribute resources to enable the implementation of prevention
programmes and the urgent protection of cultural property under the threat of destr uction,
damage or looting as a result of armed conflict, and to participate in its rehabilitation.
19/21

S/2017/969

and the private sector. As highlighted above, the development of mutually agreed
standards of provenance certification and documentation, as well as differentiated
due diligence procedures, has proven effective. Although such standards would
entail adjustments to the operation of the global art market, they can protect it
against misuse and close a potential strategic gap in the defence against terrorist
financing. I therefore encourage the practice of Member States of adjusting
legislation and regulations and introducing due diligence, compliance and know your-customer procedures to address this issue.
110. Data from market actors and researchers demonstrate that the profit margins
for looted antiquities at the first point of sale near conflict zones are small (see
S/2016/213, para. 26). Enhancing compliance structures and administrative
measures designed to inhibit illicit trade in transit and potential market countries
should decrease the commercial viability of looting in conflict zones. Further
distribution and use of the International Guidelines for Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Responses with Respect to Trafficking in Cultural Property and
Other Related Offences 52 would help Member States to develop codes of conduct,
best practices, training and partnerships with Internet providers and web-based
auctioneers and vendors.
111. In addition, greater understanding of terrorist financing risks would help
identify the kinds of financial transactions that might be involved in the transport
and sale of looted and smuggled artefacts, allowing for more preventive action. To
this end, I encourage Member States to consider the provisions of Security Council
resolutions 2199 (2015), 2253 (2015) and 2368 (2017) concerning terrorist
financing streams, including those which relate to the smuggling of antiquities, as
complementary to their implementation of resolution 2347 (2017).
112. As the standard-setting specialized agency for cultural heritage protection,
UNESCO plays a central role in supporting the development of documentation
standards and tools for cultural heritage. These standards are key to the archiving of
materials, the establishment of baseline data and the processes of rehabilitation and
recovery. Moreover, in the light of the valuable work undertaken by UNESCO in the
context of UNIFIL and MINUSMA, I will encourage United Nations entities and
relevant Secretariat departments to consider the protection of cultural property in
the event of armed conflict in their training of personnel, as appropriate, and in their
planning processes ahead of mandate renewals or the establishment of new
missions. This includes the Syrian Arab Republic, where the protection of cultural
heritage, as well as its rehabilitation for post-conflict recovery, would need to be
considered as factors in resilience, reconciliation, social cohesion an d economic
development.
113. Finally, recognizing the importance of protecting cultural heritage as part of
the protection of the social and cultural rights of the population is a first step in
galvanizing an effective response in this regard. In this ligh t, I welcome the
initiative of various Member States to increase awareness and understanding of the
importance of protecting cultural property from destruction, looting and illicit
trafficking. Further engaging and creating partnerships with civil society,
communities and youth through heritage education and other activities that promote
respect for cultural diversity, tolerance and inclusive societies would help to harness
these national efforts and contribute to long-term efforts to prevent the destruction,
looting and illicit trafficking of cultural property in the event of armed conflict.

__________________
52

20/21

General Assembly resolution 69/196, annex.
17-19070

S/2017/969

Annex
Status of ratification of international instruments relevant to the
implementation of resolution 2347 (2017)

Instrument

17-19070

Number of
States
parties

Ratifications or accessions since adoption of
resolution 2347 (2017)

Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict (1954)

129

United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland (12 September 2017)

Protocol to the Convention for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict (1954)

107

Botswana (23 August 2017)
United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland (12 September 2017)

Second Protocol to the Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict (1999)

73

United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland (12 September 2017)

Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and
Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property
(1970)

135

Botswana (23 August 2017)
Monaco (25 August 2017)
United Arab Emirates (October 2017)

Convention concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972)

193

None

UNIDROIT Convention on Stolen or Illegally
Exported Cultural Objects (1995)

41

Bosnia and Herzegovina (8 May 2017)
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(18 May 2017)
Botswana (28 August 2017)

Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (1998)

128

None

International Convention for the Suppression
of the Financing of Terrorism (1999)

188

Zambia (7 April 2017)

United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime (2000)

189

Japan (11 July 2017)
Fiji (19 September 2017)

Convention on the Protection of the
Underwater Cultural Heritage (2001)

57

Kuwait (30 May 2017)

Convention for the Safeguarding of the
Intangible Cultural Heritage (2003)

174

Malta (13 April 2017)
Tuvalu (12 May 2017)

United Nations Convention against
Corruption (2003)

183

Japan (11 July 2017)
Niue (3 October 2017)

Convention on the Protection and Promotion
of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions
(2005)

144

None

21/21
