General Assembly~ Thirty-ninth Session

218
I.

TRANSFER OF EXISTING RESOURCES, SOLICITATION AND
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLEDGES AND COLLECTION OF
CONTRIBUTIONS

2. The Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women and
its subsidiary Supplementary Trust Fund, which was established by a
memorandum of understanding between the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Administrator on 25 June 1980, are hereby liquidated and their assets transferred to the Fund.
3. Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other donors may contribute to the Fund.
4. The Fund shall be included among the programmes for which funds
are pledged at the annual United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities. The Administrator shall assist with the mobilization of
financial resources for the Fund. The contributions to the Fund and the
bank accounts into which they are deposited shall be in accordance with
the applicable Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations
Development Programme.
II.

OPERATIONS AND CONTROL

5. All operations of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women are hereby transferred to the Fund.
6. The Administrator, in consultation with the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women,
shall appoint a Director of the Fund, hereinafter referred to as "the Director", bearing in mind the relevant qualifications and experience with technical co-operation, including those benefiting women. The Administrator
shall appoint the staff of the Fund in consultation with the Director, pursuant to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations and the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
7. The Administrator shall delegate the management of the Fund and
its administration, including responsibility for the mobilization of
resources, to the Director, who shall have the authority to conduct all
matters related to its mandate and who shall he accountable directly to the
Administrator.
8. The operations of the Fund shall be conducted taking into account
the innovative and catalytic nature of its development co-operation activities for women and its existing criteria and operational procedures. The
present procedures of the Fund, including those governing the identification, formulation, approval, appraisal, execution and evaluation of projects
established in accordance with the requirements set out in the criteria
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 311133 and on the
advice of the Consultative Committee, shall remain in force. Subiect to the
arrangements for the management of the Fund, the regulations, rules and
directives of the Umted Nations Development Programme shall be applied
to the operations of the Fund.
9. The resources of the Fund shall be used mainly within two priont,
areas: first, to serve as a catalyst, with the goal of ensuring the appropriate
involvement of women in mainstream development activities, as often as
possible at the pre-investment stages; secondly, to support innovative and
experimental activities benefiting women in line with national and regional
priorities. Fund resources should be a supplement to and not a substitute
for the mandated responsibilities of other United Nations development cooperation organizations and agennes, including the Umted Nations Devel
opment Programme.
I 0. All the administrative and programme support costs of the Fund
shall be met from its own resource,
11. The regional bureaux, other orgamzational urnts and field office, of
the United Nations Development Programme shall continue to assist the
operations of the Fund, inter alia, by Joint programming missions to ensure
the involvement of women in technical co-operation activities financed b;
the United Nations Development Programme and by supporting the project cycle activities of projects financed by the Fund. For its part, the Fund
shall participate in existing machinenes for co-ordination of technical cooperation at headquarters and field levels.
12. The proposed bienrnal budget for the admirnstrative costs of the
Fund shall be reviewed initially by the Consultative Committee prior to its
submission by the Administrator for approval by the Governing Council of
the United Nations Developmcn1 Programme
14 8 Reporr o( !he World ( , ,nfi-rl'IIU' of the [ ·n11ed Na/ions Dc,·adc /or
Women: f,'a11ality. Devclopmc and /'race. ( ·openhai:en. 14-30 ]11/1· /980

(United Nations pubhcat1on,;. ,., N,, F.80.I\' 1 and corngendum) ,·hap 1.
sect. A

Ill

fHf l'ONSULTAllVE COMMITTEE AND THE RELATIONSHIP
OF THE FUND TO OTHER ORGANIZATIONS

11 The President of the General Assembly shall designate. with due
regard for the financing of the Fund from voluntary contributions and to
equitable geographical distribution, five Member States to serve on the
( ·onsultative Committee for a penod of three years. Each State member of
the Consultative Commmee shall designate a person with relevant expertise and experience in de,·elopment co-operation activities, including those
benefiting women, to serve on the Committee. The Committee shall advise
the Admmistrator on all matters of policy affecting the activities of the
Fund. including the application of the criteria set forth hy the General
.\ssembl; in respect of the use of the Fund.
14. The Fund shall establish and maintain close and continuous workmg relationships with ,nher United Nations organs, m particular the
Department of International Economic and Social Alfairs of the Secretariat
and its Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs, the
regional commissions, the United Nations Children's Fund, the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities and the lnternat1onal Research and
framing Institute for the Advancement of Women, as well as through the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination with the specialized agencies
and other United Nations entitles concerned, in particular the lnternat10nal Fund for Agricultural Development. Co-operation shall also be
established for the sharing of information with the Commission on the Status of Women and other relevant global and regional intergovernmental
hod1es concerned with development and with women. As appropnatc, the
activities of the Fund may be drawn to the attention of the Committee on
the Elimination of Discnmination against Women.
IV.

f{ff'ORTING AND AUDITING

I i. The Director shall prepare substantive and financial progress
reports on the use of th<" Fund for the Administrator to submit to the Consultative Committee.
16. Taking into account the advice of the Consultative Committee, the
Administrator shall submit to the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme an annual report on the operations,
management and budget of the Fund. He shall submit a similar report to
the General Assembly, to be referred to the Second Committee for rnnsiderat1on of its technical co-operation aspects and also to the Third
(·ommittee_

I'. The Commiss10n on the Status of Women shall also be provided
with the annual repo11, referred to in paragraph 16 above.
18. The Administrator shall be responsible for reporting all the financial transactions of the Fund and shall issue annual tinancial statements in
accordance with the hnancial Regulations and Rules of the l lnited
Nations Development Programme.
19. The Fund shall be subject to the internal and external auditing procedures provided for under the financial regulations, rules and directives of
the Untied Nations Dl'velopment Programme.

39/126.

Improvement of the situation of women in
rural areas

l'hc Cicneral Assembly,
Bearing in mind the objectives of the United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling its resolution 35/136 of 11 December 1980, in
which it endorsed the Programme of Action for the Second
Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 148
Recalling also its resolution 37 /59 of 3 December 1982
on the improvement of the situation of women in rural
areas,
Reaffirming the importance attached in the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women and in the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 149 as well
as in the International Development Strategy for the Third
llnited Nations Development Decade, 150 to the need to
improve the status of women and ensure their full partici149 Resolution 34 I Sil, annc,
1'iO Resolution .15 5r, annex

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

pation in the development process as agents and beneficiaries of development,
I. Notes with appreciation the organization of the
Interregional Seminar on National Experience Relating to
the Improvement of the Situation of Women in Rural
Areas, held at Vienna from 17 to 28 September 1984;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to compile the
observations and comments made on the report of the
above-mentioned Seminar at the World Conference to
Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace, to be held at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its fortieth session the report of the
Seminar, together with the observations and comments
compiled in accordance with paragraph 2 above.
101 st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/127. Senior women's programme officers posts at
the regional commissions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 33/188 of 29 January 1979, 35/
I 37 of 11 December 1980 and 37 /62 of 3 December 1982
and, in particular, its view that the appointment of senior
women's programme officers at the regional commissions
represents a valuable contribution to the implementation
of the goals of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace,
Recalling also its resolution 38/106 of 16 December
1983, in particular the reference to the question of senior
women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions contained in paragraphs 2 and 3 of that resolution,
Reaffirming that questions concerning women should be
approached and dealt with as an integral part of overall
policies and programmes in the field of social and economic development,
Convinced that further efforts are needed to ensure the
maintena~ce and continuation, at the appropriate level, of
posts assigned to women's programmes at the regional
commissions,
Recognizing that these posts are integral to the successful outcome of national and regional programmes for
women,
I. Takes due note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation of senior women's programme
officers posts at the regional commissions; 151
2. Takes note of the decision of the Secretary-General
to continue posts through temporary arrangements during
1985; 152
3. Expresses deep concern that there has been a lack of
progress in regularizing senior women's programme officers posts at the regional commissions and that work with
respect to women's programmes is thereby seriously
impeded;
4. Stresses that the appointment of senior women's
programme officers at the regional commissions represents
a valuable contribution to the implementation of the goals
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace, and beyond;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the executive secretaries of the five regional commissions,
I 51 A/39/569/ Add. I.
152 Ibid., para. 13.

219

to reassess all individual work programmes, with a view to
incorporating women's concerns at all levels in the overall
programme of work of each Commission;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the executive secretaries of the five regional commissions, to allocate sufficient budgetary resources to staff,
including, where possible, by redeployment, within the
context of the I 986-198 7 programme budget, in order to
regularize all temporary and permanent senior women's
programme officers posts at the regional commissions
before the end of the Decade, so as to allow the integration
of policies and programmes concerning women;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its fortieth session on measures
taken in implementation of paragraph 5 above.
101st plenary meeting
14 December 1984

39/128. Integration of women in all aspects of
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3 7/5 7 of 3 December I 982, as
well as Economic and Social Council resolution 1984/ I 2
of 24 May 1984,
Recalling paragraphs 190 to 196 of the World Plan of
Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the
International Women's Year, 153 in which the relevant
agencies of the United Nations and intergovernmental,
interregional and regional bodies were called upon to scrutinize all existing plans and projects with a view to
extending their sphere of activities to include women and
to develop new and innovative projects to include women,
Bearing in mind that development is one of the themes
of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling paragraph 51 of the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 154 which stated that appropriate measures should
be taken for profound social and economic changes and for
the elimination of the structural imbalances which compound and perpetuate women's disadvantages,
Looking ahead to the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, to be held
at Nairobi from 15 to 26 July 1985, and foreseeing the
need to continue such achievements beyond the end of the
Decade,
Convinced of the importance of integrating women fully
into development in its political, economic, social, cultural
and other dimensions, both as agents and as beneficiaries,
Reaffirming the central policy and advisory role of the
Commission on the Status of Women within the United
Nations in considering matters relating to women, including the achievement of the objectives of the Decade,
Recognizing the efforts made by the specialized agencies
to integrate women into their ongoing programmes,
especially into the establishment of cross-sectoral
mechanisms,
Welcoming Economic· and Social Council decision
1984/ IOI of 10 February I 984, in paragraph 7 of which
the Council decided to select the question of women in
153 Re~ort of the World Confi•rence ,>f the lnlernalion~I Women's Year.
Mex,co C /IV. /9 June-2 July 19' I (United Nations pubhcat1on, Sales No.
E. 76.IV. I). chap. II, sect. A.
15 4 R~solution 35/56. annex
