UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
wkq~@3RtA
!?v

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1881 st

MEETING:

JUL

5 1984

m/ss\
czIicx%LECTEO
27 JANUARY

1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1881) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11918). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1881

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . +) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1881st MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 27 January
President:

(United

Mr. Salim A.. SALIM
Republic of Tanzania).

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Mauritania requesting that he be
invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. Accordingly, if there
is no objection, .I propose, in conformity with the
usual practice and with the consent of the Council,
to invite the representative .I have just mentioned to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

agenda (S/Agenda/lSSl)
It was so decided.

1. Adoption
2.

of the agenda
3. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Mauritania to take the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when he addresses the Council.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1918)

At the invitation of the President,
(Muurituniu)
took the place reservedfbr
of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agendu was udopted.

Mr. El Hassen
him at the side

4. The PRESIDENT:
I have also received a letter
dated 27 January 1976 from the Rapporteur of the
Special Committee against Apartheid,
which reads
as follows:

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11918)

“With regard to the current discussion in the
Security Council on the question of Namibia, the
Special Committee against Apartheid at its 316th
meeting, held on 21 January 1976, decided that
its views on the question of Namibia should be
presented to the Security Council. Accordingly,
I should be grateful to receive, in the absence of
the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman of the Special
Committee,
an invitation to address the Security
Council in that connexion.”

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken this morning [1880th meeting], I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Egypt, Guinea, Indonesia, Jamaica, Mauritius, Nigeria and Yugoslavia to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber, on the usual understanding that they
will be invited to take a place at the Council table
whenever
they wish to address the Council. I also
invite the President and members of the delegation
of the United Nations Council for Namibia to take
places at the Council table.

5. I therefore propose, if I hear no objection, that the
Council extend an invitation,
pursuant to rule 39
of its Provisional rules of procedure, to the Rapporteur of the Special Committee against Apurtheid.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeriu). Mr. Ahdel Meguid(Egypt),
Mr. Cumura (Guinea),
Mr. Murpuung
(Indonesia),
Mr. Hall (Jamaica),
Mr. Rumphul (Muuritius),
Mr. Harrimun
(Nigeria)
und Mr. Petri& (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved
j%r them at the side qf the Council chumher; Mr. Kumunu (President
of the United Nations Council for
Numihiu) und the members of the delegution took
pluces at the Security Council table.

It was so decided.

6. The PRESIDENT:
At the appropriate time I shall
invite the Rapporteur of the Special Committee against
Apurtheid to take a seat at the Council table to make
his statement.
1

7. The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The first
speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

--Fist, it demanded the immediate withdrawal by
South Africa of all its military and police forces and its
administration
from Namibia so as to enable the
Namibian people to achieve freedom and independence.

8. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): It is well known
to all of US that the question of Namibia has been on
the agenda of every session of the General Assembly
since 1946; many resolutions have been voted since
then. The question has also been the subject of many
resolutions of the Security Council. The time has come
for the United Nations to become more vigorously
involved in promoting a peaceful solution in Namibia.
The United Nations involvement
in Namibia is of
crucial importance and must not be allowed to be put
aside or thwarted.

-Secondly,
it decided that free elections should be
held in Namibia as a matter of urgency under the
direct supervision and control of the United Nations.
-Thirdly,
it urged the United Nations Council for
Namibia to take all necessary measures for the implementation of its mandate under General Assembly
resolution 2248 (S-V), including the promulgation of
decrees designed to protect the rights of Namibians.
-Fourthly,
it urged also the Security Council to take
up again the question of Namibia and to act to give
effect to resolution 366 (1974), in which the Security
Council:

9. In its resolution 2145 (XXI), the General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia
and resolved that the United Nations must discharge
its responsibilities
with respect to the Territory.
Subsequently, the General Assembly, at its fifth special session in 1967, established the United Nations
Council for Namibia to administer the Territory until
its independence.’ Also, the General Assembly in its
resolution 3295 (XXIX) urged the Security Council
to convene urgently to take effective measures in
accordance with the Charter to put an end to South
Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia. In the same
resolution,
the General Assembly requested all
specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to take such necessary
steps as would enable the representation and participation of Namibia in their work and in consultation
with the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
the authentic representative of the Namibian people,
to render all possible assistance to the people of
Namibia and their liberation movement.

(a) Demanded that South Africa make a solemn
declaration that it would comply with the resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations and the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June
1971 in regard to Namibia, and that it would recognize
the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as a
nation;
(h) Demanded that South Africa take the necessary
steps to effect the withdrawal of its illegal administration from Namibia and to transfer power to the people
of Namibia with the assistance of the United Nations,
and that in accordance with Council resolutions 264
(1969) and 269 (1969);
(c) Demanded also that South Africa, pending the
transfer of power to the people of Namibia, should
comply fully with the provisions of the Universal
Declaration of Human Bights, release all Namibian
political prisoners, abolish the application in Namibia
of all racially discriminatory and politically repressive
laws and practices, particularly
bantustans and
homelands, and accord unconditionally
all Namibians
currently in exile for poiitical reasons full facilities
to return to their country without risk of arrest, detention, intirnidation or imprisonment.

10. It is useful to recall the latest resolution of the
General Assembly on this subject, resolution 3399
(XXX) of 26 November 1975, which reallirmed the
inalienable right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination
and independence,
endorsed
the
relevant provisions of the Dar es Salaam Declaration
on Southern Africa, adopted by the Council of
Ministers of the Organization of African Unity (OAU)
in April 1975, reiterated that SWAP0 is the authentic
representative of the Namibian people, reaffirmed the
legitimacy of the struggle of the Namibian people by
all means against the illegal occupation of their country
by South Africa; strongly condemned South Africa
for its persistent refusal to withdraw from Namibia
and for furthering its policies of bantustanization and
strongly condemend the military build-up by South
Africa in Namibia and the forcible removal of Namibians from the northern border for military purposes.

12. In resolution 3399 (XXX), in setting up the
framework for action regarding Namibia, the General
Assembly called once again upon all those States
which had not yet done so to comply with the relevant
provisions of the General Assembly and the. Security
Council concerning Namibia and the advisory opinion
of the International
Court of Justice.* It urged also
those States which had not yet done so to break off
economic relations with South Africa that concerned
Namibia and to take measures with a view to compelling the Government of South Africa to withdraw
immediately from Namibia. Moreover, it called upon
those States which had consular representatives in
Namibia to terminate such representation.

11. General Assembly resolution 3399 (XXX) also set
up the framework for action regarding Namibia.
2

13. Confirming the role of the United Nations Council for Namibia, it also requested once again all Member States to take all appropriate measures to ensure
the full application of the provisions of Decree No. 1
for the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia,3 of 27 September 1974, and also such other
measures as may be necessary to assist in the protection of the natural resources of Namibia.

cil for Namibia was established for the purpose of
administering the Territory until it achieved its independence.
19. The International Court of Justice, in its advisory
opinion of 1971, stipulated that the further presence
of South Africa in Namibia was illegal and that South
Africa was under an obligation to withdraw from the
Territory without delay. In its-recently adopted resolution 366 (1974) the Security Council condemned
the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South
Africa and called upon it to take “the necessary steps
to effect the withdrawal... of its illegal administration
maintained in Namibia”.
Furthermore,
in view of
South Africa’s persistent defiance of the United
Nations and its aforementioned decisions, the General
Assembly decided at its twenty-ninth
session to
suspend South Africa’s right to take part in its work.

14. In June 1975 [see 1829th meeting] the Security
Council was not able to take action regarding the
unacceptable situation in Namibia due to reasons we
all know. We are hopeful that some acceptable formula
can be evolved which would enable the United Nations
to respond adequately to the challenge.
15. During the thirtieth
session of the General
Assembly, the delegation of Egypt expressed once
again Egypt’s opinion
concerning
the dramatic
developments
in Namibia
and also made several
comments in this regard.4 As an African State and also
as a member of the United Nations Council for Namibia, Egypt’s position with respect to the Namibian
question can be summarized as follows: first, total and
full support to SWAPO, the authentic representative
of the Namibian people; secondly, condemnation of the
continued illegal occupation of Namibia by South
Africa and its arbitrary application of racial discriminatory repressive laws and practices in that Territory,
especially its policy of bantustanization;
thirdly,
condemnation of the South African military build-up
in Namibia and its utilization of the Teriitoe
as a
base for attacks on neighbouring countries which is
a serious threat to peace and security in Africa; and,
fourthly, condemnation of attempts by South Africa
to evade the clear demand of the United Nations for
holding free elections in Namibia under United Nations
supervision.

20. However, in June 1975 [ibid.] the Security Council was prevented from adopting a draft resolution
demanding the imposition of a total embargo on the
import of arms in South Africa,,,on the basis of Chapter VII of the Charter, owing to the veto of three
permanent members of the Council. The inability of
the Security Council to impose further measures
against South Africa encouraged Vorster’s rigime to
continue to occupy Namibia illegally, to flout the
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly and to use the Territory of Namibia as a
staging area for its aggression against the peoples of
Africa.
21. My delegation is convinced that the decision to
consider the question of Namibia by the Security
Council now is most timely, as it is becoming ever
more apparent that the continued occupation of
Namibia by South Africa is rapidly becoming an acute
hotbed of crisis, threatening peace and security in
Africa. It is clear that the responsibility
for such a
negative and dangerous development is also borne by
the Powers and the circles that support the South
African racist rkgime directly or indirectly.

16. Egypt feels that the Security Council will be able
during this series of meetings to give effect to its
previous resolutions and put an end to the racist
South African Government’s betrayal of the trust given
to it by the international community,
its insistence
on its illegal occupation of Namibia and the mockery
this racist Government is making of international conventions and its refusal to abide by the resolutions of
the United Nations.

22. The Security Council, as the United Nations
organ entrusted with primary. responsibility
for the
maintenance of international peace and security, is in
duty bound to take energetic measures in order to end
the illegal occupation of Namibia. We hope that we
shall not witness this time a repetition of the situation
of last year when three permanent members of the
Security Council, by using their veto, directly protected the racist rigime of South Africa from being
justly condemned by the international community and
prevented the Council from undertaking necessary
action aimed at terminating
South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia. In view of the foregoing and
mindful of the present circumstances, we are firmly
convinced that any country’s policy towards South
Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia and towards
apartheid is actually the touchstone of its attitude
towards Africa and towards the profound aspiration

17. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
18. Mr. PETRIC
(Yugoslavia):
The question of
Namibia has been on the agenda of the United Nations
for a number of years, although it is quite clear that,
both politically and legally, South Africa has no right
whatsoever to rule over that Territory and over the
people of Namibia. In 1966 the General Assembly
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and
established the direct responsibility
of the United
Nations over that country. The United Nations Coun3

of this great continent to liberate
from colonialism and racism.

itself completely

“The Co-ordinating Committee,
welcoming the
independence of Angola, achieved after many years
of struggle against colonialism, expresses its grave
concern at the acts of armed invasion perpetrated
against Angola by the armed forces of the racist
rkgime of South Africa, yet another attack of South
Africa on the freedom and independence of African
nations. Since a free and independent Angola is in
,the best interests of the freedom of Africa, international peace and security, and the freedom and
independence of this great African country constitutes one of the decisive blows dealt to colonialism,
racism and imperialism in Africa, and the position of
apartheid is becoming ever more untenable, the
Co-ordinating Committee condemns most emphatically the flagrant acts of aggression of the South
African racist rkgime and calls for urgent action by
the international
community in order to end this
aggression and to secure the withdrawal of South
African troops from the soil of Angola.“5

23. We are all well aware that Vorster’s racist tigime,
by resorting to brutal methods of racial segregation,
persecution and arrests as well as to the ruthless
exploitation of the people of Namibia and its natural
ressources, has the intention of keeping that Territory
under its domination as long as possible. In order to
maintain itself in Namibia, Vorster’s racist rhgime is
endeavouring
to prevent, by recourse to force,
assassinations and persecutions, all political activity
by the people of Namibia. It is striving to break up
this people into smaller communities,
to establish
bantustans. It is for this purpose that it is organizing
so-called constitutional conferences where its stooges
are trying to implement South Africa’s sinister design
to split up Namibia. In this it is abundantly helped
by foreign capital from some Western countties, capital
that is being directly invested in Namibia or in the
South African economy. This is well known to all as
well as the fact that the Governments of the countries concerned, by arguing that they are not in a
position to control their economies, and so forth, are
actually endeavouring to justify such co-operation and
to conceal thereby the obvious interests of certain
circles which are linked with the fate of racism in
South Africa.

28. A serious warning was also sounded by President
Boumeditne,
who in his capacity as co-ordinator of
non-aligned countries, stated, itzter aliu:
“I am certain that the non-aligned countries,
taking note of the solemn declaration in which the
Government of the People’s Republic of Angola
affirmed its total support for and devotion to the
principle of the policy of non-alignment, will not fail
to give the situation their fullest attention,
to
denounce and condemn the aggression to which their
brothers, the Angolan people, have been subjected,
and to express their full solidarity with the people
and leaders of Angola. That posture, which is
consistent with the ideas of our movement, is in
keeping with our long tradition of support for just
causes”

24. It should be pointed out, however, that these
very same countries and some others, which plead
their supposed inability, deriving from their systems,
to prevent their corporations from aiding apartheid
in South Africa and its occupation of Namibia, were
quite capable of imposing broad and effective embargoes whenever this happened to suit their political
interests.
25. We consider it absolutely necessary that this time
the Security Council should be able to undertake the
necessary measures to terminate all co-operation with
the racist rkgime. This applies particularly to the
unacceptable practice of some countries which cooperate with South Africa in the military
field
supplying it with sophisticated weapons and military
technology.

29. The illegal occupation of Namibia and the use of
its territory for aggression against Angola are part of
imperialist efforts to arrest the process of the final
liquidation of colonialism and racism in Africa. The
threat to the independence of African countries by the
most sinister system of slavery, assisted by colonial
and imperialist forces, is aimed at splitting Africa, at
weakening it, at breaking it up and at bringing it into
a state of mutual confrontation,
because a united
Africa, composed of more than 40 free countries,
constitutes a power that South Africa, even with the
assistance of foreign forces, could not oppose for long.
The forces supporting South Africa, or justifying by
one argument or another South Africa’s intervention
in Angola, are acting against the interests of Africa
and arti bent on impeding the process of complete
liberation of Africa
from colonialism.
i
30. As for my country, which has consistently
supported national liberation movements and their
struggle, it is acting in the same way today in supporting and assisting the struggle of the people of
Namibia and of African peoples in the south of Africa,

26. We are faced today with an even more ominous
situation, with the militarization
of Namibia on a large
scale with the aim of perpetuating South Africa’s
presence in this Territory. This imposes increased
oppression and suffering on the people of Namibia.
Furthermore, South Africa is openly using the Territory of Namibia for its aggression against, and military
incursions into, independent Angola, threatening the
security of other independent African countries as well.
27. In this connexion I should like to point out in
particular that the Co-ordinating Committee of NonAligned Countries in New York, on 12 December 1975,
adopted the following declaration on the matter:
4

as well as the struggle of independent
the aggression of South Africa.

Angola against

objection, to invite the representative of Liberia to
participate in the discussion in conformity with the
usual practice and the relevant provisions of the
Charter and the provisional rules of procedure.

31. The situation in Angola shows that some forces
have linked themselves up with interventionists
from
the most hated racist stronghold, South Africa. In this
connexion,
I can state that the Government
and
peoples of Yugoslavia
strongly condemn South
Africa’s aggression against the independent Republic
of Angola and any assistance to that aggression.

It was so decided.

36. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the renresentative of
Liberia to take the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber, on the usual understanding
that he will be invited to take a place at the Council
table when he addresses the Council.

32. In concluding my remarks, I should like to underline that the Security.Council
should condemn most
emphatically the continuation of the illegal occupation
of the Territory of Namibia by South Africa, its
militarization
and the use that is being made of its
territory for aggression against the Republic of Angola
and for threatening other African countries. The
Council should consider this to be an additional and
essential element for effective action against the
occupation of Namibia by South Africa and against
the regime of apartheid in South Africa.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Minikon,
representative of (Liberia) took the place reserved
for him at the side of the Council chamber.

37.. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Mr President, it is particularly appropriate that you, as the
distinguished representative of an African country,
should be in the Chair for this important debate. Your
knowledge of the subject, your personal contribution
to the United Nations on decolonization questions and
the respect in which you are held as a result of the
way ‘you have guided the Security Council will, I am
sure, all help us to find a way forward this week.
My delegation approaches this debate with a determination to achieve a constructive outcome, based
on understanding
and co-operation-two
qualities
which, if I may say so, were noticeably lacking in
the speech we have just listened to.

33. At the same time, the Security Council cannot
lose sight of the fact that the peopik of Namibia has
already clearly manifested its desire to be free and
that, in order to achieve this, it is seeking the support
of the international community, of the United Nations,
of the Security Council and, particularly, of all of its
permanent members. SWAP0 is widely recognized as
the authentic representative of the people of Namibia
and the political
force representing
its national
interests. SWAP0 has given proof of its strength by
proposing that free political elections should be held in
Namibia under the, control of the United Nations and
in conditions of total withdrawal of South Africa
from Namibia. It has thus responded to the demands
of some countries that the United Nations should
concentrate its attention on the realization of free
elections in Namibia, showing that Namibia desires to
be independent and free from racism. By its armed
struggle, too, SWAP0 has demonstrated
that the
people of Namibia is offering ever stronger armed
resistance to the racist rkgime. SWAP0 enjoys my
country’s support and assistance.

3% I hesitate to trouble the Council with another
survey of my Government’s policy towards Namibia.
I have spoken twice in the Council on the subject, on
17 December 1974 [1812th meeting] and on 6 June last
year [1829th meeting]. My delegation also explained
British views more recently in its statement before the
Fourth Committee of the General Assembly on 27 October.6 I believe, however, that the issue before us
is so important that I should once again briefly
summarize our position.
39. Members of the Security Council will know from
my delegation’s previous statements that we regard
South Africa’s occupation of Namibia as unlawful
and that we believe South Africa should withdraw from
the Territory, as soon, as possible. We believe that
Namibians should be allowed to exercise their right
to selfcdetermination
and independence as a single
State, in the same way as the peoples of all other
former dependent Territories in Africa. On a number
of occasions we have condemned the practice of
apartheid
in Namibia and expressed our grave concern
to the South African Government
both about its
maintenance and about the practice of detaining Namibians without trial. We believe that the future of
Namibia should be decided by the freely expressed
wishes of all its inhabitants, and that at the earliest
possible moment. We further believe that, every
political group in Namibia, including SWAP0 and all
other political parties whatever the basis of their com-

34. The Security Council is under obligation to take
active measures for the rapid liberation of Namibia
from South Africa, in order to enable the people of
Namibia to realize its right to self-determination
and
independence,
thus contributing
effectively to the
process of liquidation
of colonialism
and racism in
Africa and to the consolidation of peace in ,Africa and
in the world.
35. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the next
speaker, I should like to inform the members of the
Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Liberia containing a request that he be
invited, in accordance with rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to participate in the discussion
of the item on the agenda. I propose, if I hear no
5

position, should be allowed to campaign peacefully
for their views throughout Namibia and should have
full and unfettered freedom to carry out peaceful
political activities. Similarly, all those who are detained
should be brought to trial or else released. Only in
this way will it be possible for Namibians to decide
their future freely and for the world community to
be convinced that they have done so.

divisive in its intentions; the Declaration of Intent
has been rejected by the United Nations Council for
Namibia, and by the Assembly; there seems to be
a general pessimism about the probable outcome of
this conference. My own Government’s
view is
somewhat more open-minded. We regard it as a step
forward that representatives of the black and white
communities
in Namibia have sat down together to
discuss the Territory’s future. Again, we regard it as
of some significance that the groups represented at the
conference appear to have expressed themselves in
favour of independence and, though the wording of the
Declaration is obscure, in favour of a single State.
It has been pointed out indeed, even by a prominent
leader of white opinion inside the Territory, that the
Declaration of Intent talks about drafting a constitution, not constitutions in the plural, and that it talks
about the interests of the Territory in its entirety.
These are perhaps some indications of the way things
are moving.

40. I might add that, quite apart from the normal
bilateral contacts between my Government and the
Government of South Africa, during which we have
made our point of view very clear, we have taken the
opportunity to convey our views, in conjunction with
the Governments of France and the United States,
in two separate demarches of 24 April and 23 October last year. This weekend the Netherlands Ambassador to South Africa, on behalf of the countries of the
European Community,
of which my country is a
member, made a dimarche
on the subject of Namibia
[S//1945].

44. What can be said now, however, is that the
composition
of the conference is inadequate.
Its
representation is limited to ethnic groups, and those
who believe that Namibia should become a unitary
State have, in fact, been excluded from the conference
since they are reluctant to take part in the ethnic
elections from which the conference has drawn its
representation. The Minister of State of the Foreign
and Commonwealth Offrce, Mr. Ennals, has publicly
made it clear that in our view the current talks do
not constitute a process of self-determination.
Some
useful proposal may, however, be made at the conference, but these will need to gain the approval
of the Namibian people as a whole, and that through
a single electoral process conducted throughout
Namibia. In calling for free countrywide elections,
we do so not only because these have been a general
feature in all dependent or Trust Territories in the
stages before their accession to independence. We
do so also because we believe sincerely that it is in
Namibia’s own interests to be welcomed and accepted
upon independence by the whole of the international
community. It is the right of the people of Namibia
as a whole to decide whom they want as their future
leaders. It is their right equally, as a whole, to
pronounce upon the form of constitution they want.
Whatever their choice may be, I am sure that the
international community will accept it, provided that it
has been established that this choice has been arrived
at freely, fairly and openly.

41. We believe, furthermore, that the Organization
has a special responsibility for Namibia. I do not have
to enter into detailed argument about the legality or
otherwise of South Africa’s presence in the Territory or about the effect of General Assembly resolutions. It is undeniable, whatever view one takes of
the juridical issues, that Namibia has been the concern
both of the League of Nations and then of the United
Nations for over 50 years. Had Namibia become a
Trust Territory
after the war, like other former
Mandated Territories of the League of Nations, we
could reasonably have expected the Territory to have
undergone the same political development that took
place in Trust Territories elsewhere-and
Council
members will know that the Trusteeship Council’s
work is now, happily, almost done. The participation
of the United Nations in the process of self-determination in Namibia is, therefore, both right and
indispensable.
42. Against this background, I should like to review
briefly the developments
which have taken place
inside the Territory itself since the Council last met,
in June 1975. At that time, it will be recalled,
the South African Government was in the process of
convening a constitutional
conference composed of
representatives of the various ethnic groups inside the
country. The conference duly met on 1 September
and proceeded to adopt a Declaration of Intent [see
S/11948 crnd Add./].
It met again briefly between 10
and 13 November for a second phase of discussions
and then went into recess after setting up four committees on education, social development,
economic
development
and employment
practices. It is our
understanding that these committees are due to meet
shortly and that they will prepare reports which the
conference as a whole will examine when it reassembles on 2 March.
43. There has been widespread international
demnation of this conference as unrepresentative

45. The working paper which has been circulated
informally to members of the Council goes into some
detail about constitutional
advance in Namibia.
It
will, I hope, be clear from what I have already said
that we endorse the view that the United Nations
should effectively exercise its supervision over the
holding of a democratic electoral process throughout
the whole of Namibia. Nor do we quarrel with the
proposition that the Security Council needs adequate
time to determine the date, timetable and modalities

conand
6

in which the demands of Namibians, both those inside
and outside the Territory, the position of the South
African Government and the views of this world body
dan be reconciled in a way which reaffirms and
strengthens the principles of the Organization.
My
Government,
for its part, will do all it can to that
end.

for such elections. These matters need careful thought,
but happily there are precedents in the arrangements
made for United Nations supervision of elections or
referenda held in a number of Trust Territories before
they achieved independence.
The high degree of
United Nations
supervision
on those occasions
reflected the common view that the inhabitants of
Trust Territories were entitled to the full association
of the United Nations with their electoral process,
precisely because they were Territories in which this
organization had a legitimate and direct concern. I
believe that the same is true of Namibia.

49. The PRESIDENT:
Before I call on the next
speaker, I should like to inform members of the
Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of South Africa containing a ‘request
that he be invited in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. I
propose, if I hear no objection, to invite the representative of South Africa to participate in the discussion in conformity with the usual practice and with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and the provisional rules of procedure.

46. But any United Nations supervision of elections
in Namibia would have to address itself to a number
of practical questions, which inevitably occur whenever and wherever elections are held. It would seem
perfectly appropriate to my delegation that a United
Nations supervisory team should be consulted by the
authorities in the Territory about all such matters.
From what I have already said it will therefore be
clear that the United Kingdom endorses the general
proposition that the electoral process should be closely
monitored, and that the United Nations team should
report back on the conduct of the elections.

It was so decided.

50. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative
of South Africa to take the place reserved for him
at the side of the Council chamber on the usual
understanding that he will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when he addresses the Council.

47. I must, however, make a plea for realism in the
handling of this issue. It is by no means certain that
the South African Government will accept the principle
of United Nations supervision. Indeed, it has been
totally opposed to the idea up till now, not least
because it believes or claims to believe that the United
Nations is determined
to impose a preconceived
pattern of political development upon the Territory.
It would help perhaps if members of the Council
and indeed those other nations that participate in our
debate were to reaffirm that this is not so. It was
said time and time again last year during the course of
debates in the Fourth Committee that the people must
choose what is best for them, that neither the
Administering Authority nor the United Nations could
choose on their behalf. I believe that this is right. It
is in our view both unwise and inappropriate for the
United Nations to seek to play a greater part in an act
of self-determination
in Namibia than that which I
have just outlined. Strict supervision is certainly
necessary. We do not quarrel with that for one
moment. But we think it would be unrealistic to
demand that the South Africans should leave the
Territory before any act of self-determination
takes
place. Some administration must remain in being. That,
incidentally, is one of the reasons why we advocated
contacts betwen South Africa and the United Nations
last year and why we continue to advocate such
contacts as the only way of narrowing the existing
differences and bringing the authorities both in South
Africa and in Namibia to accept the principle of United
Nations supervision.

At the invitation
of the
(South Africa)
took the place
side of the Council chamber.

President,
Mr. Botha
reserved for him at the

511 The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Rapporteur of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
Mr. Valderrama. I accordingly invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
52. Mr:VALDERRAMA
(Rapporteur of the Special
Committee against Apartheid):
Mr. President, it is my
great pleasure, on behalf of the Special Committee
against Apartheid
and on my own behalf, to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January and
to wish you as President all success in your work
during the remaining days of your incumbency, which
has been distinguished by your diplomatic skills and
statesmanship.
53. I am honoured to represent the Special Committee
against Apartheid
at the discussions in the Security
Council on the question of Namibia.
The Special
Committee against Apartheid
values highly the close
co-operation between it and the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples of which you, Mr. President, an eminent son of Africa, are the able and
devoted leader. We in the Special Committee against
Apartheid
are sure that this co-operation will be further
strengthened in the common struggle for the total
eradication of colonialism,
racism and apartheid
on

48. The Council faces a practical problem, and I
think we must try to solve it in a practical way. Given
time and patience, we may yet find a way forward
7

the African continent. May I express to you, Mr. President, and to all the members of the Security Council
the deep appreciation of the Special Committee against
Apurtheid for this opportunity
to participate in the
discussions on the question of Namibia and to present
its views on this subject to the Council.

also constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. The South African racist regime-addresses
open threats to neighbouring
independent African
States which provide facilities to SWAPO, the liberation movement which has been recognized by the
international
community,
indeed by the United
Nations,
as the authentic representative
of the
Namibian people.

54. The Special Committee
against Apartheid
at
its meeting on 21 January 1976 decided to participate
in the discussions on the question of Namibia in the
Security Council. Since the Chairman of the Special
Committee, Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisd of Guinea, has
already left on a mission for the Committee, I have
been authorized to make a statement on behalf of the
Special Committee against Apartheid.

59. The Special Committee has launched an urgent
appeal to all Governments and organizations to support the efforts of the United Nations and the liberation movement of Namibia. In this connexion, the
Special Committee against Apartheid draws attention
to the request made by the General Assembly to the
Security Council in its resolution 3411 G (XXX) of
10 December 1975

55. I had the honour to represent the Special Committee twice at the meetings of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, in commemoration
of Namibia
Day in 1974 and last year. As I stated on Namibia
Day 1974, the Secretary-General,
addressing the
eleventh session of the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity
at Mogadiscio, on 12 June, gave the following warning
concerning the dangers of the situation in Namibia:

“to consider urgently the situation in South Africa
and the aggressive actions of the racist regime...
with a view to adopting effective measures, under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
to resolve the grave situation in the area”
and, in particular, to ensure the full implementation
of the arms embargo and related measures.

“But when fundamental rights are denied, when
the advocates of orderly change are ignored or
suppressed and when the avenues of political, legal
and economic redress are closed, no one should be
surprised if violent conflict results:”

60. In October 1,974 when the Security Council was
considering the relationship of the United Nations and
South Africa [see 179&h-179&h,
1800th-1804th and
1806th-1808th meetings],
three permanent members
of the Security Council which exercised their veto
against the expulsion of South Africa assured us that
they would use their influence to persuade the Pretoria
regime to mend its ways. The representative of that
regime told the Security Council that it would move
away from racial discrimination
and apartheid and
that changes in the situation in South Africa would be
made in a peaceful and orderly way.

We in the Special Committee hope that the Council
will do its utmost to prevent such a dire situation
coming to pass.
56. As representative
of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, I have the duty to convey to you
the grave concern of the Special Committee over the
situation in Namibia.
The special Committee,
as
representatives know, has been following the situation
in Namibia in the discharge of its mandate to follow
all aspects of the policies of upurtheid of the racist
regime of South Africa and their international repercussions, including the efforts of the regime to extend
its inhuman policies beyond the borders of South
Africa.

61. Sixteen months have passed and there has been
no meaningful change in the policies and actions of that
regime. Instead, there has been a rapid expansion
and build-up of its military forces and establishment
of new military bases in Namibia. Indeed there has
been an escalation of repression in South Africa and
Namibia, so that South African commentators have
indicated that talk of detente abroad and detentions
inside are two sides of the same coin. There has been
a desperate effort on the part of the racist regime in
South Africa to rush the creation of bantustans both
in South Africa and Namibia.

57. The Special Committee
has thoroughly considered the racist policies of the Pretoria regime and
decided to issue a statement on 22 January 1976
drawing the attention of Member States to the military
operations launched by the Pretoria regime against
the Namibian people, both in .Namibia and beyond
the borders of Namibia, as well as to its use of
Namibia as the base for aggression against other
African countries.

62. The offer to move away from racial discrimination and upurtheid has meant little more than the
opening of a few hotels and bars to black visitors to
South Africa and to ’ bantustan chiefs. The highly
publicized abandonment of upurtheid in Namibia has
resulted in no more than the admission of a few
blacks to three hotels in Windhoek.

58. The Special Committee against Apartheid has
stressed on a number of occasions that the apartheid
regime of South Africa not only continues its criminal
policies of racial oppression inside the country but

63. However, on the essential aspects of upurtheid
-such as the creation of bantustans and the dispos8

session of the black people-the
Pretoria regime has
not made the slightest retreat. It is in fact proceeding
ahead with greater speed and with even more brutal
repression of the black majority. The period since
October 1974 has seen a tremendous escalation of
repression in Namibia and has now been followed by
large-scale military operations which can only be
described as a colonial war.

69. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Mauritania.
I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
70.

Mr. EL HASSEN
(Mauritania) fintermetation
First of all,‘1 should like, through you,
Mr. President, to thank the members of the Security
Council for giving me the opportunity to participate in
the Security Council debate on Namibia. .Last year
-more
precisely, last May and June-when
the
Council met in accordance with its resolution 366
(1974), the Namibian .people and the international
community were hoping that a decision would be taken
which would open up new prospects for a settlement
of the Namibian problem. Such a decision was all
the more expected since the question of the illegal
presence of South Africa in Namibia had for a long
time preoccupied the Organization and was each day
constituting a threat to the peace and security of the
area.

from

64. There is no secret about the aims of the South
African racist regime, which uses all the means at its
disposal, including insidious propaganda, to suppress
the liberation movement of the Namibian people to
convert that international Territory into a refuge of
neo-colonialism
and South African racism,
65. Under these circumstances,
the international
community
cannot idly stand by while the South
African racist regime ruthlessly
suppresses the
Namibian
people and undertakes to destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia and
while the apurtheid regime desperately builds up its
military forces and continues illegally to occupy the
Territory of Namibia and to use it as a base for intervention against independent neighbouring countries.

II

.

French):

71. The Security Council, which met at that time,
studied the reply of the South African Government,
following upon the request addressed to it in resolution 366 (1974) that

66. The Special Committee
against Apartheid
considers that the Security Council must take urgent
and effective measures against the South African racist
regime, particularly
by enforcing an embargo on
military supplies to end any form of military cooperation with that criminal and aggressive regime.

‘South Africa make a solemn declaration that it
will comply with the resolutions and decisions of
the United Nations and the advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971 in
regard to Namibia and that it recognizes the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation,
such declaration to be addressed to the Security
Council”.

67. On behalf of the Special Committee,
I wish to
express our hope that the three permanent members
of the Council which exercised their vetoes in June
1975 to prevent a decision on an arms embargo against
South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter will
reconsider their position and now facilitate adoption
by the Security Council of effective measures against
the South African racist regime. We are aware that the
South African racist regime has amassed a large
armoury of military equipment and established a
sizeable arms industry with ‘foreign assistance. That
is why the Special Committee considers that an arms
embargo against South Africa would be an effective
measure aimed at preventing the further deterioration
of the dangerous situation in southern Africa ‘in
general and in Namibia in particular.

72. The reply that the South African Government
then sent to the Secretary-Genera1 [S/f/70/] left no
doubt as to the true intentions of South Africa and the
role that it plans to play in Namibia. Flouting the
request addressed to it by the Security Council, the
South African regime, in its reply, reiterated its traditional position. Indeed, it expressed its refusal to
accept that the United Nations had any right to concern
itself with Namibia. The South African Minister of
Foreign Affairs went even further by stating that his
Government would pursue its bantustan policy to its
completion.
73. It is that reply of the South African Government
that the Security Council had to study in the deliberations which lasted from 30 May to 6 June 1975. The
length and scope of those debates illustrate the
particular interest of the United Nations and the
Security Council in this question, which continues
to be a source of constant concern for the international
community.
I
74. My delegation, as a Security Council member at
the time, participated in the lengthy negotiations aimed
at finding a solution acceptable to all and which would
take account of the many decisions of the ‘General
Assembly as well as the categorical advisory opinion

68. The Special Committee considers further that
if there is the will on the part of a few Western
Powers-namely,
France, the United Kingdom, the
United States of America, the Federal Republic of
Germany and Italy-it
is possible even at this stage to
defuse the grave situation in southern Africa and to
contribute to the maintenance of peace and security
by an effective embargo on arms and strategic
commodities. The Special Committee earnestly hopes
that such action will be taken in order to promote
the process of bringing an end to the illegal occupation
of Namibia by the racist regime of South Africa and
put an end to the uparfheid regime itself.
9

of the International
Court of Justice. At the close
of these very long and difficult negotiations, the nonaligned countries of the Security Council submitted a
draft resolution, [S/11713]. Instead of the strict application of Chapter VII of the Charter-which
in fact
went without saying but which was not accepted by
certain Security Council members-that
draft resolution requested the implementation
of certain provisions of the Charter itself, provisions which should
be interpreted as calling for a military embargo and
economic sanctions.

79. In the interval between the Security Council
meeting of 6 June 1975 and today’s meeting, the situation in Namibia has assumed dramatic proportions,
and every day the sufferings of the Namibian people
are increasing. Everything is happening as if the triple
veto cast in June 1975 had been interpreted by the
South African Government as a diplomatic victory
and an endorsement of its policies in Namibia. Such
an attitude of the South African Government hardly
needs comment,
if one observes the geopolitical
upheavals that have been occurring in southern Africa
since that time.

75. It should be emphasized that this proposal by the
non-aligned
countries,
which came after many
approaches had been made to the Pretoria authorities
and, above all, after numerous General Assembily
warnings and condemnations
of the South African
policy in Namibia, contained only a set of limited
measures the aim of which was above all to avoid
placing certain countries in a difficult position. It
was thus a spirit of conciliation and compromise that
the non-aligned members of the Council displayed at
that time.

80. The thinly veiled challenges issued at that time
by South Africa have today become direct threats to
security and peace in Africa. The Council’s meeting
today, therefore, because of the present tragedy in
southern Africa to which the whole woild is a witness,
is of particular importance and significance. My delegation has always had the hope that the prudent attitude
observed by some members of the Security Council
will not constitute an endorsement and a sign of
political or diplomatic support of the racist policy
followed by Pretoria in Namibia.

76. The fact that such a proposal was made after
more than a quarter of a century of fruitless negotiations with South Africa demonstrates how hard the
non-aligned countries sought to avoid any break with
those who persisted in thinking that the time for the
application of enforcement measures had not yet come.
Furthermore, the measures sought by the non-aligned
countries fell far short of what was expected of the
Security Council, if we bear in mind the challenge
proffered by the South African Government to the
United Nations in the reply addressed by the Minister
of Foreign Affairs at Pretoria to the Secretary-General.

81. The decision that the Security Council will take
shortly and that will be strengthened by the support of
the countries I have mentioned, will determine the
attitude of the Namibian people, which has waited all
too long. We must know once and for all whether the
Security Council is able to carry out the sacred mission entrusted to it, or whether it is going to allow the
Pretoria rigime to pursue with impunity the policy of
Bantustanization
that it has undertaken in Namibia.
We are personally convinced that the Security Council
will not abdicate its responsibilities and will not allow
the law of the jungle to the only means of settling
this conflict.

77. Thus, we were deeply disappointed. when this
non-aligned draft resolution was rejected. We were all
the more disappointed because that rejection could but
encourage a policy that had been condemned for more
than a quarter of a century by the entire world community, not only because it contravened the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations but,
above all, because it made the domination, exploitation and humiliation
of man the very basis of its
philosophy. Regardless of whether some were right or
wrong in feeling that the rejection of the draft resolution of the non-aligned would not harm the prestige of
the United Nations and ihat time would work in its
favour and in favour of the Namibian people this
vision of the future did not, in any case, induce South
Africa to change its behaviour of more than 25 years.

82. In speaking today before the Security Council,
my delegation is speaking not merely in the name of
African solidarity; but also and above all to defend a
people that has been deprived of its most sacred rights.
The Namibian people is suffering today not because
it is incapable of taking up arms and defending itself,
but because it believed and still believes in the noble
ideals that inspired the founders of the United Nations
and which are still today the reason for its existence.
Such faith in the mission of the United Nations must
not be disappointed.
83. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa. I accordingly invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

78. For this reason the Council’s meeting today
-after the many meetings that have preceded it and
after the important decision taken unanimously by
the Security Council on resolution 366 (1974), and
especially after the meetings held in May and June of
1975-seems to be the final step in a process of negotiation which has lasted only too long.

84. Mr. BOTHA (South Africa): Mr. President, I am
deeply appreciative of this opportunity of addressing
the Security Council, more especially since it falls
this month under the presidency of another African
country. Congratulations
are your due, Sir, on this
mark of distinction.
10

Court of Justice which contain fulIy documented
facts on conditions in South West Africa are available:
the invitation extended to the Court in 1956 to inspect
South West Africa and to see whatever it wished; the
active participation by the South African delegation
in the General Assembly debate on South West Africa
during the twenty-first session in 1966; the publication
and distribution
to Governments and international
organizations,
including the United Nations, of the
South West Africa Srrrrey 1967 and various communications addressed by the South African Foreign
Minister to the Secretary-General, in particular those
of 26 September 1967, 15 February 1968, 27 March
1968 [S/8506, annex I], 30 April 1969, 26 September
1969, 30 April 1973 [S/10921, annex l] and 27 May
1975 [S/11701], which are noteworthy examples.

85. In a communication
addressed to the SecretaryGeneral today [S/11948 and Add./], 1 dealt at some
length with salient aspects of my Government’s views
on the question of South West Africa, and I respectfully commend that document to the attention of the
Council, as it deals with the substantive issues of
South West Africa in greater detail than I shall have
time to do today. While it should serve to remind
the Council of the incontrovertible
realities of the
Territory, it also outlines the most recent developments there, summarizes my Government’s position,
especially as expounded in recent pronouncements,
and refutes many of the allegations brought against
South Africa, principally at the United Nations and in
this debate. It shows clearly why we believe that
Security Council and other United Nations action on
South West Africa has been and remains one-sided,
unrealistic
and contrary to the interests of the
peoples of the Territory.

89. It is clear that no serious attempt has as yet been
made by the United Nations fully to. acquaint itself
with the facts concerning the peoples of South West
Africa and their conditions and standards of living.
Therefore, it is not the South African Government that
is defying’the United Nations but the true facts and
situation ofSouth West Africa which are defying the
United Nations. This is the point: it is the truth about
South West Africa that is defying the Security Council.

86. The first irrefutable fact about the Territory which
it is essential to grasp if its problems are to be
approached with a minimum of realism is that my
Government did not in some magical way create the
peoples of South West Africa, their languages, or their
cultures, nor was it responsible for their history. For
example, the Owanbo, Kavango and East Caprivi
peoples, who comprise 60 per cent of the total population, migrated from other parts of Africa in previous
centuries and settled, long before the Mandate of the
United Nations came into being, in the northern part
of the Territory where they live to this present day.
This is not surprising, since’ most of the best grazing
and arable land is to be found there. As a result of
these historical
and physical factors, .therefore,
different peoples exist in the Territory,
not as a
result of my Government’s
policies or of any other
policy.

90. One fact has clearly emerged: namely, that any
information and findings favourable to South Africa are
summarily rejected and ignored by the United Nations,
while mere assertions are eagerly accepted, provided
that they further the political objectives of the majority
within the United Nations. Nevertheless, the facts
concerning the high standards of development already
achieved in South West Africa cannot be assailed.
What is of even greater importance is that those facts
belie any allegation of a threat to peace. Those facts
make it clear that there exist no grounds for Security
Council intervention.

87. The significance of these and similar basic facts
will not be lost on the Council. It is that nothing the
United Nations, including, with respect, the members
sitting around this table, can propose or do can alter
them. It is beyond the power of man-made institutions
to change the heterogeneous complexion of the population, the low rainfall and water scarcity, the vast arid
areas, the low population density and so on. The
formidable obstacles to economic development are a
reality. I bring these facts to the attention of the
Council not to obstruct but to help it, because no
discussion of South West Africa or any other question
can achieve meaningful results except on the basis of
correct basic information
about prevailing circumstances and conditions.

91. I would emphasize that, despite a natural environment which is basically inimical to economic development, substantial progress has been achieved in the
Territory in a!1 fields of human endeavour. The results
of progress are there for everybody to see. Who can
doubt them? I would. refer the Council to my letter
to the Secretary-General today,
to which I have already
referred, for statistics. The South African Government
asserts that these achievements compare favourably
with those of any other country of the world under
comparable circumstances.
92. The South African Government
does not
recognize and has never recognized any right on the
part of the United Nations to supervise the affairs of
the Territory.
Moreover,
the Government
cannot
be expected to agree to United Nations supervision
of any electoral process as long as the majority of
Members of the United Nations continue for their own
interested purposes to conduct a virulent, malicious
and completely biased campaign in regard to the
Territory.
Despite this hostile attitude, we have,

88. In this connexion, I wish to remind the Council
of the many efforts made by my Government to ensure
that full information on the Territory is available for
everyane genuinely interested in acquainting himself
with the conditions in South West Africa. I need only
refer to the following to substantiate this statement.
Thousands of pages in the record of the International
11

nevertheless, over the years repeatedly endeavoured
to find an acceptable basis for negotiations with the
United Nations with a view to solving the problem.

96. As no homogenous people exists in S,outh West
Africa, progress towards self-determination
must
necessarily proceed, if it is not to be imposed, along
the lines of agreement between the different peoples
concerned. The role of South Africa thus becomes
obvious: it is to promote agreement between the
peoples of the Territory without imposing a solution
on them. This is the course that South Africa is
purs.uing, and the peoples fully realize that all options
are open to them. I ask the Council: “What is wrong
with this approach? What can possibly be wrong with
this approach?”

93. The record of South African efforts to co-operate
with the United Nations and the inflexibility
of the
United Nations in return is a long one. Examples
are the 1951 Principal Allied and Associated Powers
proposal, the 1952 report of the United Nations Committee concerned, the 1958 Arden-Clarke
Good
Offices Committee, the 1962 Carpio-De Alva mission,
the contentious proceedings at the International Court
from 1960 to 1966 and the consultations with the
Secretary-General in 1972 and 1973. All these initiatives reflect South Africa’s goodwill and willingness
to accept challenges and to explore possibilities of
reaching a solution. On the part of the United Nations,
as the record shows-and we rely on the record-they
reflect absolute unwillingness to consider any positive
suggestion: rejection without exploration of recommendations, expungement from the records, denunciation of signed agreements, unwillingness to accept the
judgement of the world’s highest judicial authority,
resort to revengeful actions in an attempt to nullify
the Court’s Judgment. It is important that the Council
should realize that it is South Africa which has every
reason to be sceptical of the good faith of the United
Nations and not vice versa. I urge those who have
doubts about this to look at the records of,the Fourth
Committee in particular in relation to the initiatives
I have mentioned.

97. As a result of progress achieved in all walks of
life and as a result of improved relations between the
different peoples of the Territory, a historic event
took place in Windhoek on 1 September 1975, when a
Constitutional
Conference was convened at which
delegates representing all the population groups met for
the first time to discuss the constitutional future of the
Territory.
98. The Conference at its first session produced a
“Declaration
of Intent” which envisages the drafting
of a constitution for the Territory, if possible, within
three years of September 1975, inter aliu mindful of
the interdependence of the various population groups
and the interests .of South West Africa in its entirety.
The participants
in the Conference also resolved
inter aliu “to devote ourselves to the promotion of
and respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without discrimination
merely on the
basis of race, colour or creed”. Four Committees
set up at the second session of the Conference in
November 1975 are currently considering important
aspects of discrimination,
economic
upliftment,
social upliftment and education and will report to the
third session when it resumes in March 1976 or as soon
as possible thereafter.

94. The present course of action ‘in the United
Nations commenced in the emotional atmosphere
which. followed on the 1966 Judgment of the Intemational Court of Justice,’ which generally went in
favour of South Africa. South Africa did not appoint
the,Court, nor did South Africa elect the judges; the
judges were elected by the United Nations. However,
that .Judgment constitutes the only legally binding
pronouncement on the subject of South West Africa.
I say respectfully: the law is not on the part of the
United Nations, neither are the facts. The 1971
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
on which many States take their stand, is not only
entirely untenable but is clearly and demonstrably the
result of political manoeuvring instead of objective
jurisprudence,
and we all know that-at least if we
want to speak the truth. Furthermore, the opinion was
advisory and, therefore; not binding on any State. Its
,political acceptance by any number of States cannot
make it law, no matter how oft repeated.

99. The achievements of the Conference in a verv
brief space of time deserve the commendation of the
Security Council-not
condemnation.
I cannot think
of a more constructive way in which south West
Africans could decide their future. Yet there has been
little positive response in the United Nations to these
events which are, in the context of the realities of
South West Africa, truly of historical significance.
The United Nations seems to have painted itself into a
corner by clinging uncompri.singly to its earlier decisions based on ‘outdated concepts and superseded
situations. The differences between the position of
South Africa and the leaders of South West Africa,
on the one hand, and the United Nations, on the
other, are not that substantial-provided
‘double
standards are not applied and regard is had to the
basic realities in the Territory.

95. States which accept that opinion should also
declare whether they accept the Court’s underpinning
reasoning and its inescapable implications--inter
aliu, that the powers of the General Assembly are
not limited to discussion and recommendation
but
include the making of decisions binding even on nonconsenting and non-Member
States. Clearly we are
all agreed that the General Assembly. does not have
such powers.

100. South Africa respects the separate status of the
Territory and stakes no claim to one inch of it; it
agrees that the peoples themselves should decide
their future, which they are indeed engaged in doing;
12

.’

South Africa remains in the Territory only at the wish
of the peoples there; all political groups may participate peacefully in the political processes in the
Territory. The Conference has invited such groups to
submit proposals. While the United Nations calls for
the territorial integrity of the Territory-although
I
must say the Charter does not preclude the peoples
from deciding otherwise-South
Africa has declared
all options to be open to the inhabitants. The delegates
to the Conference, furthermore, were resolved, as I
have just stated, to devote themselves to the promotion
of and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without discrimination merely on the basis
of race, colour or creed.

troops, a platoon, arrived there with the intention
of holding discussions with a view to re-establishing
order, so that the workers could return. However,
discussions proved impossible as the platoon was fired
upon. In the course of the resulting exchange of fire
the South African troops occupied Calueque.
:
105. South
Africa
immediately
informed
the
Portuguese authorities
and also informed
other
Governments of this development. The inabihty of the
Portuguese authorities prior to 11 November
1975
and of anyone thereafter to guarantee the security of
the dam was a grave development.
In the circumstances, South Africa had no alternative but to provide
the necessary protection itself and did so, although
this was intended as an interim
measure. The
Secretary-General
was informed of this action in a
letter dated 5 September 1975 and the Portuguese
authorities were at that time requested, and they
agreed, to assume responsibility
for protecting the
dam, which, however, they never did. Protection of
the dam remained South Africa’s principal preoccupation in Angola after Portugal’s withdrawal and no one
else was in a position to afford that protection in
respect of a very important developmental project for
Africans, not for whites, in the Republic of South
Africa. But let me state it here clearly. To avoid
any controversy in this respect and to make it easier
for any Government in Angola to avoid a conflict
over this matter, I propose that the Security Council
should assume responsibility
until such time as a
Government
in Angola can handle the situation
satisfactorily.

101. The clear and fundamental issue in South West
Africa is self-determination
by the inhabitants. This
not only is conceded by all of us-the leaders of
South West Africa, South Africa and the United
Nations-but
is actually in the course of realization
now in a rational and peaceful way.
102. The common border between South West
Africa and Angola can be a focus of constructive cooperation or a line of division and dissension. The
Calueque Dam on the Cunene River is a concrete
example of one of the reciprocal intefests of Angola
and South West Africa. It is a symbol of the positive
results that have been and can be achieved by cooperation.
The dam, still under construction
by
workers who travel from South West Africa, is situated
some 15 kilometres inside Angola and ensures a water
supply to the Owambo people in the north of South
West Africa. It was built as a result of an agreement
negotiated with the Portuguese Government in January
1969. The water is’currently being used for hospitals,
industry and agriculture in Owambo and any interruption of its flow could have serious humanitarian
consequences for the local black population, certainly
not for South Africa, which is more than 1,000 miles
away from that dam. The security situation in the
vicinity of the dam, however, grew increasingly
unsettled with the launching of periodic terrorist
attacks and the murder of innocent persons in Owambo
and the escalating unrest and chaos in Angola.

106. The geographical contiguity
of South West
Africa and Angola necessarily imposes a concern in
South West Africa for that which-occurs in Angola.
It is thus that South West Africa has been forced to
take note of the war in Angola because of the thousands
of refugees and displaced persons ,who have crossed
the border and are still seeking to do so in ever
increasing numbers. South Africa, as the Council
will know from letters dated 12 September 1975 and
22 January 1976 [S/11938, umwx], addressed by my
Foreign Minister to the Secretary-General,
has made
a substantial contribution
at a cost of $5 million,
to relieving their plight. However, the situation remains
precarious from a humanitarian
point of view and
contains an inherent disruptive potential.

103. In April 1975 South Africa approached the
Portuguese High Commissioner
at Luanda with a
request for help to ensure the safety of the workers
at Calueque in order that they could continue with
their work. Nothing came of that request. In August
1975 the workers were endangered by fighting between
contending factions in Angola and did not see their
way clear to continue with their work. The Portuguese
authorities
were again immediately
informed and
discussions with Portuguese emissaries took place in
South Africa in order to establish which steps could
be taken to protect the interests of the workers and
the safety of the dam.

107. The plight of the refugees is of great concern
to my Government and we have therefore asked the
Secretary-General to request the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to assist in resolving this
s&rious problem. I would request the Security Council
also to do all it can to assist in this problem, the problem
of the refugees, until such time as a Government in
Angola can take responsibility for them.
108. My country has been attacked today in’ the
Council for having committed
aggression ‘against
Angola and for using South West Africa as a base for

104. On 9 August 1975, following the flight of the
workers from the dam, a small unit of South African
13

intervention in other African countries. I cannot let
these accusations pass unanswered. South West
Africans are in fact directly affected by events in
Angola. The peoples of South West Africa wish at
all costs to avoid a repetition in their own country
of massive foreign armed intervention. They have seen
refugees, hungry, homeless,
maimed and sick,
streaming through their country from a war-tom and
ravaged Angola and they fear that these blatant
aggressors will wreck the peace that has been South
West Africa’s for decades.

113. There was a time when we in Africa looked
forward to the possibility of a peaceful transition of
power in Angola. What role has the Soviet Union
played to destroyed those hopes? The clue is to be
found in the shiploads of Soviet armaments and equipment unloaded in Luanda.
114. Our continent has many serious problems to
overcome and my Government
feels that every
endeavour should be made to overcome them in a
climate of peace and with the mutual co-operation of
all concerned. Without
peace there can be no
development.

109. We in South Africa are Africans. South Africa
and South West Africa are part of continental Africa,
a continent of potential greatness if its disparate
elements co-operate, but, I say in the same breath,
a continent of disaster if it is manipulated into dissension by outsiders. It is essential that the Council
should understand,-and that my African friends should
understand, that South Africa’s actions and reactions
are predicated upon this fundamental fact of our being
an African people.

115. It cannot be too strongly deplored that just at
a time when the leaders of southern Africa, the
leaders of the whole subcontinent, are reaching understanding in their search for peaceful solutions to their
problems, at that time the Russian bear has arrived to
claw a festering wound in Africa’s side-a wound that
can infect the whole of Africa.
116. The leaders of southern Africa have indicated
their desire to work towards a peaceful solution of
differences. The South African Prime Minister has
made it clear &hat he stands for the way of peace, of
sound understanding and the normalization
of relations between ourselves and other countries of Africa.
The South African Prime Minister, for instance,
commented as follows in this regard recently, on
10 December 1975:

110. What do representatives around this table think
the reaction of the inhabitants of South West Africa is
when they observe fellow Africans to the north,
recently released from the bondage of colonial oppression, being crushed under the heel of the greatest
imperial Power of modem times. If accusations are
levelled, let us speak candidly then. Can any member
of the Council tell me in all truth that it would regard
with equanimity the establishment of an aggressive’
military presence by force of arms near its borders?

“As a result of the fact that South Africa has
made incontrovertible
progress recently, it is being
much more severely attacked than possibly ever
before in its history. These attacks-it
appears
very clearly in their motivation-have
a common
purpose. South Africa is being attacked because it
has, particularly recently, received credit for being
and wishing to be a peacemaker, and secondly
because South Africa has received acknowledgement for its positive and strong anti-communist
stance which is no secret. South Africa wishes to
live in peace with all its neighbouring States. It has
proved this over and over again in recent years.”

111. I .ask the Council and I ask fellow Africans:
What possible advantage can be derived by Africa
from the establishment of Russian hegemony even in
the smallest sector of Africa? The only advantage
accrues to the Soviet Union itself. Why is Moscow,
situated some 7,000 miles away across oceans and
continents, engaged in a war of destruction in Angola?
Why have Cuban troops come 7,000 miles to invest
that country?
112. The Soviet Union, beginning even before 11 November 1975, has pumped between $200 million and
$300 million worth of armaments into Angola. The
12,000 Cubans now in Angola and being transported
there by Russian aircraft at the rate of 200 per day
approach 15 per cent of the whole Cuban army. They
are being blatantly used as infantry troops to kill,
maim, humiliate and intimidate black Africans, using
Russian tanks, artillery, mortar, missiles, machineguns, bombs, landmines and soon fighters and bomber
aircraft. Massive quantities of lethal Soviet arms are
being used to destroy and devastate African villages,
towns, roads, bridges, schools and hospitals. The
economy of Angola has been dealt a severe blow;
large areas are threatened by famine; thousands of
Angolans have been forced from their homes and are
in a state of deprivation and misery. And this the
Soviet Union claims is its peculiar way of assisting
an African people.

Referring to South Africa’s immediate
Prime Minister stated that

neighbours,

the

“it is not necessary for them to spend a single
cent of their budget on defence. They do not need
a defence budget because they know, in spite of all
propaganda to the contrary, that they have nothing
to fear from South Africa, that South Africa desires
nothing that belongs to them, that South Africa does
not want any land which is theirs and that South
Africa is at all times willing to meet their wishes.
“This is true of all our neighbouring States and is
valid also for the State of Angola, a State on which
South Africa similarly has no territorial claims and
where South Africa desires no sphere of influence
14

whatsoever for itself. Indeed,
recognized Angola as a State.”

South Africa

has

Angolans the time. to achieve a settlement for themselves around a conference table, or failing that an
opportunity for OAU to find a political solution without
outside interference. The situation in Angola must
obviously exert a strong influence in South West Africa
and other neighbouring countries. There is a real
danger that the consequences of aggression in Angola
could spill over into those countries.

117. And, in a New Year message on 31 December
1975, my Prime Minister, dealing inter alia with the
Angola situation, said the following:
“Our only involvement is that of the free world
and the substantial interest of Owambo in the
Cunene scheme-and
the protection of the border,
for which we are responsible-will
at all times
dictate our actions, regardless of the attempts to
make us the scapegoat in the matter. We have
recognized the State of Angola; we have committed
no act of aggression or subversion; we are in favour
of a political settlement and we have no claims on
anything in Angola.. . We have established our
bona fides and we have proved beyond all doubt
that we are as good as our words. Channels of
communication have been opened, bridges ‘of understanding built and a solid foundation laid for the
future.‘*

122. Numerous
and wild allegations have been
levelled at my Government.
Representatives
have
heard these allegations. I have also made allegations
concerning Soviet and Cuban aggression, and I submit
that it is for the Security Council to apprise itself
forthwith of the facts. I propose that the only effective
way to do so is for the Council to take the necessary
steps, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to go to Angola and establish for itself who
is posing a threat to peace in that area-South
Africa
or Soviet Russia and Cuba. My Government would
welcome an on-the-spot investigation now and will lend
the Council its willing co-operation in the matter.
I challenge our accusers to do the same.

118. The change in the Rhodesian situation from
“violent confrontation and terror to hopeful talks in
a much calmer atmosphere” was the result of South
Africa’s “peace offensive” on the African continent,
Mr. Vorster said. My Prime Minister, in concert with
other African leaders, has undertaken bold initiatives
in an endeavour to bring together opposing groups to
work out a peaceful solution to the problems of Rhodesia. South African police have been withdrawn from
Rhodesia, inter alia, to contribute to a more amenable
atmosphere in which discussions could take place
between the Rhodesian political leaders.

123. We are astonished at the lack of appreciation
for the real efforts we have made to encourage and
assist the constitutional
development of South West
Africa. The great strides which have been made in
this regard, particularly
in the last year, must be
apparent to any objective observer. I repeat: for the
first time in history, representatives of all population
groups in the Territory are voluntarily co-operating to
draft a constitution
for South West Africa. This
peaceful evolution towards independence is in glaring
contradistinction
to the tragic war and bloodshed in
other parts of the world.

119. In Mozambique
the South African Government acted responsibly and constructively,
avoiding
any action which would have made the new Govemment’s task more difficult. The South African Prime
Minister has during the past year personally undertaken several journeys to black African countries in a
continuing effort to reach a modus vivendi which can
form the basis of permanent coexistence on the African
continent. We have never been a colonial Power. On
the contrary, one of the longest and most severe
struggles against colonialist imperialism was fought by
us. We neither present any threat to peace nor are we
a threat to any country.

124. South Africa believes that the peaceful course
of action adopted by the inhabitants of the Territory
reflects the true meaning of the concept of selfdetermination,
a concept which the United Nations
seems bent on ignoring as far as the Territory is
concerned. For the reaction of the Organization to
the many initiatives taken by South Africa to advance
the people of the Territory socially, economically and
politically-which
was, indeed; the task entrusted to
it by the original Mandate-has
been to reject out of
hand these advances, and the United Nations has
preferred instead to capitulate to the pressures of
the supporters of a small group of militants who
espouse an open and avowed policy of intimidation,
violence and bloodshed against South West Africa.
It is difficult to comprehend how Member States of
this world body can be so eager to accept the simplistic
and ill-founded arguments advanced by those who
advocate violence in South West Africa and to accept
without hesitation and without corroboration
the
allegations fabricated against my Government.

120. South Africa has not and will not attempt to
prescribe to other countries what kind of Government
their peoples should choose. As in the case of Mozambique and neighbouring countries, that is no concern
of ours. It is the right of those people-if
that is
their will-to
choose, for instance, a Marxist or a
Communist
Government.
It is however a totally
different matter when a foreign Power intervenes to
decide who should govern a country.

125. Despite this hostile reaction, the South African
Government reiterates its offer to negotiate with a
mutually acceptable personal representative of the

121. South Africa has played a limited role in Angola
in the hope that, inter alia, it would secure for the
15

.. I

Secretary-General
in order that he may acquaint
himself with the development of the process of selfdetermination
in the Territory. Moreover, as far as
the South African Government is concerned, there
would be no objection to such a representative’s
attending
the Constitutional
Conference as an
observer, though this is ultimately a matter for the
Conference itself to decide. This in itself would provide
a measure of international observation.

tinent’s destiny. We believe that we in Africa can
overcome our problems of economic development on
condition that the developed nations live up to their
responsibilities
towards us, particularly, by paying a
fair and stable real price for imports of raw materials
and semi-processed goods-in
times of boom.as well
as recession.
13 1. We in South Africa appreciate that the prosperity
of our neighbours is also in our interests. Their
security is our security. No other country is better
equipped to assist actively and directly in the development of our African subcontinent. We have the will
and the desire to play our role to the full in this
great adventure. South Africa looks forward to the
day when the sincerity of its purpose will be accepted
by all African States.

126. The South African Government also reiterates
its offer to discuss progress and development with
leaders of Africa, the President of the United Nations
Council for South West Africa and the Special Committee of OAU. They would also be welcome to visit
the Territory.
127. There is no legal or factual justification for the
Security Council to endeavour to impose its will on the
leaders of South West Africa. If the Security Council
genuinely desires to achieve a peaceful solution to that
question, it must have regard to the true situation
which exists in the Territory and not to the narrow
political ends of some of its members.

132. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): In view of
the late hour, I shall not detain the Security Council
members, but I must say that there has never been a
falser statement in the history of the Council than
that just made by the representative of South Africa.

128. The.South African Government expresses the
hope that the Security Council would refrain from any
action which may jeopardize the chances of success
of the Constitutional Conference, which offers a way
to achieving a peaceful future for the Territory. While
serious clashes, involving violent death, starvation
and misery for thousands of people occur elsewhere,
while stagnation and even retrogression is prevalent in
many areas, the Territory of South West Africa has
a record of impressive progress, despite the formidable
problems posed by its geographical and physical
conformation.
There is peace and progress in the
Territory. Its inhabitants live in security and enjoy
an improving standard of living based on modern
communications
and transport systems, on scientific
and technical expertise and planned economic development. Its children go to schools and colleges; its
inhabitants benefit from medical facilities of the highest
standing; its workers enjoy increasing wages and
facilities to improve their skills. The relations between
the various groups have never been better. The leaders
of the Territory are discussing their differences around
a conference table-they
are not fighting it out. Is it
too much to expect the Security Council to have
regard to these basic facts?

133. The representative of South Africa has tried
to distract us from the subject we are discussing. We
are discussing the subject of Namibia. We are discussing what South Africa is doing in Namibia, how it
is treating the people of Namibia, how it is oppressing
the people of Namibia and how it is exploiting the
people of Namibia-how
it is treating them as if they
were not people. This is what’we are,discussing. What
have they transformed these people into? They have
transformed them into slaves-this
in the middle of
the twentieth century. But is will not wash; it will
never wash. The Security Council will not fulfil its
role unless it puts an end to these shameful practices
of South Africa in Namibia. This is what we are
discussing.
134. The representative of South Africa referred
to the question of Angola here. Today our representative issued a statement concerning our policy in Angola
[S/119473. What is South Africa doing in Angola?
Who called it there? What is it doing there? Is it to
defend its interests? We know what its interests are.
They are the interests of exploiters and colonizers;
they are the interests of slave-owners. These are not
the interests of people who are trying to help Angola
to free itself from its former backwardness. .The
representative of South Africa states that his country’s
interests are limited in Angola. We know a bit about
that, because it is not the first time in history that we
have heard such statements. This is a base assertion.
They are cowards. For this reason, they did not appear
at the thirtieth session of the General Assembly.- Why
did they not appear there? They were afraid to appear
because they would have been accused and convicted
of their criminal policy. They would have been told
how they are torturing the Namibian people, how they
are exploiting and plundering the people of Namibia

129. Finally, being an African country, South Africa
is deeply aware of the problems of our continent. We
realize that there is hard work ahead for all of us.
But we believe that we can overcome our obstacles
and differences in a spirit of co-operation based on
respect for the self-determination
of all our peoples
-black and white.
130. We believe in Africa. We are an African nation.
We believe in Africa’s inherent power and potential
to realize the greatness which should be that con16

by means of international monopolies. Do not try to
divert the Security Council from its subject.

did so in the belief that the draft resolution went far
beyond what they were prepared to accept. Above
all, they were still trying to convince us, either
publicly or privately, that there was a possibility for
movement in South Africa’s position with respect to
Namibia.

135. We have no interest in’Angola. We do not need
any land in Angola. We do not need its wealth. We
do not need its shores. We do not need the strategic
position of Angola. What we want is that the Angolan
people should freely be able to determine its own
destiny and future and to decide the form of life it
prefers. But what does South Africa want in Angola?

141. Anyone who has followed the trends of events
since last June can come to only one conclusion: there
has been no movement whatsoever as far as the South
African position with respect to Namibia is concerned.
And perhaps it is a coincidence that the South African
statement had been made only one or two hours,
perhaps less than two hours, after a letter was circulated to members of the Council by the representative of the Netherlands on behalf of the European
Economic Community (EEC) [S///945].

136. In November South Africa sent tanks against
Luanda. Were those tanks sent there for the purpose of
helping ‘the Angolan people free itself7 No. The facts
will refute the South African representative. South
Africa tried to prevent the proclamation of the People’s
Government of Angola, and now he states that their
goals in Angola are limited. No, you will not get
away with this, sir. This time you will not get away
with it. Your policy in Angola will not succeed. Our
policy in Angola is honest and open. Your policy will
not succeed in Angola or in Namibia.

142. Now we do not believe that the communication
contained in that document and submitted to the
Secretary-General by EEC went as far as we would
have wanted it to go but, even if I were to take this
document and compare it with the statement made by
the South African representative, it would be clear that
there had been no movement. The EEC countries, in
their de’marche
to the South African Government
contained therein, among other things, made two
points: first, that the people of Namibia should be
enabled to exercise their right of self-determination
in deciding their constitutional
future through a
democratic process to be undertaken under the supervision of the United Nations. The representative of
South Africa was absolutely silent in his statement
before the Council even on this elementary position
set forth by the EEC countries. Secondly, the communication says that there should be a release of all
political prisoners and the return to Namibia
of
Namibians at present in exile. Again the South African
representative was absolutely silent on this.

137. The PRESIDENT:
As there are no further
speakers, I should like, in my capacity as representative of the UNITED
REPUBLIC
OF TANZANIA,
to make a few remarks on the statement made by the
representative of South Africa.
138. I should, first and foremost, say that of course,
as in the past, we will study the statement made by the
South African representative, not that we have any
illusions about his position or about the contents of
that statement, but we normally give the necessary
courtesies to all statements made, irrespective of their
merits.
139. But there are preliminary observations which I
think I absolutely must make at this stage of our
discussion, if only to avoid certain misconceptions
and certain misdirections as far as the debate is concerned. For one thing, I should like to say that the
statement of the South African representative not
only was disappointing
but lacked anything of substance. Furthermore, perhaps in this particular case
I might sympathize with the representative of South
Africa, who decided to transform his speech in the
Security Council into a general debate speech. I
could have understood a statement of this nature being
made in the General Assembly, but perhaps because
South Africa did not take part in the General Assembly
last year he thought this might be a suitable forum.

143. Now even on this moderate dimurche
made by
the EEC countries in a genuine attempt to bring forth
some movement with respect to Namibia the South
African representative before the Council did not make
any observation. Instead, he went on a long, mudslinging exercise, not against the Africans because to
the Africans in some. cases mud-slinging exercises
have become a customary affair; not against the
United Nations as a whole because this is, now an
accepted fact, but against the Security Council. He
considers that the Council has maintained,
and is
maintaining, a hostile attitude towards South Africa,
and he says, in his own evaluation, that the Security
.Council has no justification to discuss the question of
Namibia because the question of Namibia does not
pose a threat to international peace and security.

140. I must say that his whole statement was
disappointing for a number of reasons. In the first
place, when, last June, the three Western permanent
members of the Security Council decided to cast a
triple veto against the draft resolution sponsored by a
number of delegations, including my own, a draft
resolution which in our considered opinion met with
the requirements of the situation, our colleagues, the
Western members of the Council who cast that veto,

144. Of course, such a statement should be treated
with the contempt it deserves. But more than that, it
is very depressing that, after all that has been going
on, after the realization and recognition by the intemational community of the realities in southern Africa,
17

the representative of South Africa should come to the
Council and treat members as if they had absolutely
no knowledge of what was going on in Namibia or in
southern Africa.

of 21 June 1971 in regard to Namibia and that it
recognizes the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia
as a nation, such declaration to be addressed to the
Council. I do not have to say that the South African
representative did not address himself to this specific
declaration. He did not address himself to the specific
dhmarchc
made by the countries of the European
Economic Community.
He did not address himself
to any of the demands consistently and constantly
made by the international community-not
only by
the African States, not only by the Asian States, not
only by the Latin American States, not only by the
socialist States, but indeed by the Western European
States, and in some cases by the United States and
by Canada.

145. The South African
representative
stated
passionately
that the South Africans were also
Africans, that they believed in Africa, and that they
had a vested interest in Africa. I do not believe
that there has ever been any question as to whether
the South African whites had a right to be in Africa.
The question has always been and will continue to be
that Africans can never accept a superiority status of
the whites in South Africa, and as long as there is
the uparrhrid system in South Africa it is absolutely
ridiculous for representatives of the Vorster regime to
come before the Security Council and plead and claim
on behalf of Africa’s interests. Charity begins at home,
and if the South Africans are so concerned and have
now been converted to the belief that they should
champion African interests they must start by transforming and radically changing the society in South
Africa.

149. The South African representative up to now has
not been able to tell the Council that they would respect
the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia. He says
that all options are open. We know from what has been
going on in Namibia that the process of the bantustanization of Namibia continues unchallenged. He
refers with pride to the so-called historic event which
took place in Windhoek, the so-called constitutional
conference. As far as that historic event is concerned,
I can only refer Mr. Botha to the pertinent statement
made by my colleague and brother, the President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, Mr. Kamana,
who says that the constitutional conference organized
by the South African authorities is a sham in which
hand-picked puppets and stooges of South Africa have
been portrayed as true representatives of the Namibian
people, while political parties such as SWAP0 are
excluded. So much for the so-called constitutional
conference.

146. Mr. Botha also. had the temerity to challenge
the legality of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. I presume that very soon the South
Africans will even challenge the sun and call it the
moon, because they now say the United Nations is
hostile, the Security Council is hostile, Africa is hostile,
the world is hostile, the International Court of Justice
is hostile. Who is not hostile? Perhaps the only people
who are not hostile to South Africa are those who
still believe in the outmoded system of apartheid
and in the outmoded system of colonization.

150. The representative of South Africa, in his usual
generous terms, referred to the efforts that are being
made by his Government to try to find a settlement
in Rhodesia and he said that the South African troops
had been withdrawn. I do not know whether he
said “troops” or “policemen”,
but he said they had
been withdrawn. The Security Council is supposed to
consider this an act of magnanimity. What in the first
place were the South African troops doing in Rhodesia?
Those troops were in Rhodesia in blatant contravention of the Security Council’s demands, in blatant
contravention
of the General Assembly’s position.
To come to the Council and say, “We have withdrawn
our troops from Rhodesia*‘, is only to demonstrate
further that everything the Security .Council and the
General Assembly have been saying, which he con-.
tinues to claim not to be true, is actually a fact.

147. Mr. Botha says that South Africa is not a
colonial Power. What on earth are they doing in
Namibia? How shall we categorize their position and
their status in Namibia? In fact, with the impending
liquidation
of the last remnants of European colonialism in Africa, the only colonial Power that remains
in Africa now is the South African Government. That
is so obvious that one would have believed that even
the South African representative
would not have
found it necessary to come here and rationalize
otherwise.
148. The representative of South Africa has, I believe
and dare’ suspect, disappointed
even the Western
members of the Council. Ialluded initially to thede’murthe made to South Africa reported in a letter to the
Secretary-General,
but I should further state that
Security Council resolution 366 (1974) of 17 December
1974 which was unanimously adopted--it was adopted
by all the 15 members of the Council, including those
members whose support is vital for the continuance
of South Africa’s arrogance and contempt in Africain its paragraph 3 demands that South Africa make a
solemn declaration that it will comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice

151. I know that the hour is late, but I must say that
it has not been an easy experience for me as the representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to
endure the statement of Mr. Botha, particularly when
so much had been expected from that statement and
so little, or nothing, came of it.
152. There is one final point. In the view of the
delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania, the
18

,

I’.

‘.

,

~
,.:

-.

.

in the interests of international
understanding, that
the international
community must try once again to
avoid the holocaust of a full-fledged conflagration in
Namibia. I believe that the Security Council has the
opportunity to try to do that.

Security Council is not discussing Anzola. At anv
time the .members of the Council sho$d desire tb
discuss Angola, the Tanzanian delegation would
be more than willing to make its own contribution,
but for the South African representative to try to
rationalize South Africa’s aggression and intervention
in Angola and try to give the impression that this agression, this intervention is in any way condoned by any
African in Africa is to add insult to injury. The South
Africans have absolutely no business being in Angola.
They have not beengiven any right by anybody, neither
by the Organization nor by the people of Angola, to
parade themselves as peacemakers in Angola. What is
more, it must be stressed-and
this is an ‘important
point-that
the African States in the Council, long
before Angola became a problem, drew the attention
of the international community to the danger to the
peace and security of that region, to the .peace and
security of Africa, to the peace and security of the
world as a whole, to the continued utilization
of
Namibia by South Africa in order to mount acts of
aggression against a sovereign and independent State.
So let the question of Angola not be utilized as an
excuse, as a cover-up, for the perpetual aggressive
activities of the racist regime in Pretoria. ‘I a

155. I should like, as the representative of the United
Republic of Tanzania, with all the seriousness and
all the authority that I have as-the representative of
my Government, to appeal to our Western colleagues
to understand the seriousness of the situation so that
they may join with’us in making this one more attempt
to try and find a less violent solution. I do not use
the word “peaceful”,
because to talk of a peaceful
solution with respect to Namibia would be to indulge
in an exercise of self-delusion. The South Africans
are already not conducting themselves peacefully
against the Namibian people. Therefore, what we are
trying to do is to find a less violent method-we
are
trying to find a less violent solution to the Namibian
problem.
156. I think the choice is before the Council. On the
basis of the consultations that have been going on in
the Council and on the basis of the views which
have been expressed by members of the Council, I
have no doubt in my mind that all the members of the
Council will assume their responsibility
on this
question.

153. As the representative of the United Republic
of Tanzania, of course, I shall have occasion to make
a longer statement and to examine further the statement
made by Mr. Botha and to reply to it accordingly,
but in conclusion I should like to say that the Security
Council is dealing with a problem which is ,an international responsibility.
The United Nations, .since the
revocation of the Mandate, has a legal, moral and
political responsibility over Namibia. It is an intemational Territory. The South Africans have no business
whatsoever to be in Namibia. The fact that we are
today discussing Namibia and the modalities
for
ensuring the right of the people of Namibia to selfdeterminat.ion and independence is solely due to the
continued arrogance and recalcitrance of the South
African regime in respect to United Nations decisions.

157. And now, in my capacity as PRESIDENT,
I
shall, with the consent of the Council, invite the
representative of the South West Africa People’s
Organization speak. As there is no objection, I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
158. Mr. GAROEB:
With the indulgence of the
members of the Council, my delegation has asked to
speak at this time to make one or two observations.
The first is that when you, Mr. President, called on
us to take our place at the Council table we noted that
the delegation of South Africa walked out of the
Council chamber. That proves the opinion they have of
our humanity and of ourselves as Namibians.

154. Furthermore, the fact that the United Nations
has not been able to attain its objectives is due to the
lack of the necessary political will on the part of some
of our colleagues representing some of the important
Western countries in the Council. But we do believe
and, as the representative of the United Republic of
Tanzania, I still cling to the hope that, as my brother
from SWAP0 said this morning, it is possible using
the instrumentality
of the Organization to try to find
a less violent solution to the Namibian problem. We
believe that, whether it is through peaceful negotiations or through military confrontation,
the South
Africans will eventually have to be evicted from
Namibia. We have no doubt in our mind that the South
Africans will lose in their war against the nationalist
forces of Namibia led by SWAPO. But we believe that
it is in the interests of the Namibian people, in the
interests of the African people, in the interests of
international harmony, in the interests of race relations,

159. Secondly, I should like to state here for the
record of the Security Council that the people of
Namibia never asked the South African Government
to come and rule over us. The representative of South
Africa claimed here that they are in Namibia because
they have been expressly requested by the people of
Namibia to be in our country. We should like it to be
on record that that has never been the case. We
challenge them to produce any historical documentary
evidence to prove that they were ever asked by the
people of Namibia to come and rule over us.
160. Thirdly, the representative of South Africa told
the Council of developments in the social, educational
and economic fields that have taken place in Namibia.
He brilliantly juggled figures to prove what South
19

to hoodwink the world about the truth of the situation
in our country. We shall respond in due course to the
statement made by the representative of South Africa,
but, on behalf of our de!eaation. I should like the
Council to take note of the-observations that I have
made at this time.

Africa is supposed to be doing for the people of
Namibia. But I want to submit here that whatever
is being done in Namibia has not been and never will
be in the interests of the African people of Namibia.
We claim our right before the world and the Security
Council to rule ourselves, to develop ourselves or
even, for that matter, to misrule ourselves.

The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.

161. Fourthly, I should like to endorse the views
which have been expressed here by various representatives of the attempt by the representative of South
Africa to divert attention from the question of Namibia,
which is before the Council, to the Angolan situation.
It is our sincere hope that the Council will not allow
itself to be hijacked into dealing with matters which
are absolutely irrelevant to the question before it.

Nates
1 See General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967.

z Legal Consequences
for States
South @ica
in Namibia
(South

of the Continued Presence
West Mica)
notwithstanding

of

Security CounrU Resolution 276 (1970). Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Repurts
1971, p. 16.
3 Oficial
Records of the General
Assembly,
sivn. Supplement
No. 24A, para. 84.
4 Ibid., Thirtieth
Session,
Fourth
Cummittee,

Twenty-ninth

Ses-

2152nd meeting,
paras. 61 and 62.
s See document A/104%, annex of 12 December 1975.

162. I should like to say that SWAP0 and my delegation will make a detailed statement in due course,
but we felt it our duty to intervene at this time; having
heard the most extraordinary play-acting by the representative of South Africa in the Council, who attempted

6 See O&%ial Records
of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Fourth Committee.
2155th meeting, paras.9-15.
’ South West AfXca,
Second Phase, Judgment,
I.C.J. Reports

1966, p. 6.

20

:
i
,,

(,

j

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

IRS

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans la librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr?s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous g : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAIC

IIOjIYPlfTh

HSABHHII

OpraHwsaIWi

EiBAAHEifl

OPrAHR3AqBH

O~%~AHH~HR~IX

OE’bEAliHEHHhlX
Hat&4

YO)K”o
H~BOAHT~

KynmTb

HAqHR
a KHHXCIILIX

asmax w are~~cmax
BO mex pafioxax
runpa.
cnpamcn
Bamem ~~HHXHOM ~arasmte
HIIH nmnnre
no anpecy : Oprannaannn
Haunt%. Ceunwa no npoaanre
wsnanufi,
HMO-Ropa
HAH XCetiesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

~(ara-

06 nananuax
065annnenrir.t~

B

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

o@too

83-60801~May

1984-2,200
