\'l

Resolutions adoptro on the report!' ,,,( llw l'hird ( o~mitt~-

education. training anrl l'mplovment as 11 affects the ch1lct
ren of minorities. in pan icular those of migrant workers,'"
authonzes the Secretary-General to solicit relevant information and views from Governments, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council and requests him to submit
the final study to the General Assembly at its forty-first
'iession;
7
Congratulates the Secretary-General on the organi1ation of the Round Table on International Legal Issues
relating to Apartheid, Racism and Racial Discrimination.
held at The Hague from 4 to 6 September 1985;
8. Expresses its satisfaction at the convening of the
Seminar on Community Relations Commissions and
Their Functions, held at Geneva from 9 to 20 September
1Q85, and invites the Secretary-General to disseminate the
·rport of the Seminar widely;
9. Reiterates its invitation to the Secretaf)'-General Lo
nroceed with the implementation of the activities outlined
in his report on the plan of activities for 1985-1989 and to
, uhmit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session
''1-: study on the role of private group action to combat
•acism and racial discrimination and to the Assembly at
•s forty-third session the global compilation of national
'cgislation against racial discrimination;
l 0. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and
•ssue as soon as possible a collection of model legislation
for the guidance of Governments in the enactment of further legislation against racial discrimination;
11. Invites the Secretary-General to organize in Ne"'
York in 1987 a training course for legislative draftsmen
with the aim of focusing on the preparation of national legislation against racism and racial discrimination:
12. Invites the United Nations Educational. Scient1fil
and Cultural Organization to expedite the preparation of
teaching materials and teaching aids to promote teaching,
training and educational activities on human rights and
against racism and racial discrimination, with particular
emphasis on activities at the primary and secondary levels
of education;
13. Requests the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the Commission on Human Rights to consider the possible need
for updating the study on racial discrimination; 19
l 4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to organize in
1988 a global consultation on racial discrimination involving representatives of the United Nations system, regional
intergovernmental organizations and interested non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, to focus on the co-ordination of international activities to combat racism and racial
discrimination;
15. Welcomes Economic and Social Council decision
1985/141 of 30 May 1985, by which the Council authorized the organization in 1986 in Africa of a seminar on
international assistance and support to peoples and movements struggling against colonialism, racism, racial discrimination and apartheid, and requests that the report
thereon be made available to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session;
16. Invites the Secretary,Gcncral to report to the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the implementation of the present resolution;
Ig A/40/694 and Add. l
19 United Nations pubhcauun, ~les 1',, ic /() Xl\ :
20 Resolution 2542 (XXIV).

195

1 , H.equests the Economic and Social C01mc1l. dunng
:he penod of the Second Decade. to submit an annual
report to the General Assembly, containing, inter ,ilia:
(a) An enumeration of the activities undertaken or
contemplated to achieve the objectives of the Second Decade, including the activities of Governments, United
Nations bodies, the specialized agencies and other international and regional organizations, as well as non-govern
mental organizations;
(b) A review and appraisal of those activities;
(c) Its suggestions and recommendations;
18. Decides that the item entitled "Implementation of
the Programme of Action for the Second Decade to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination" should be on
its agenda throughout the Second Decade and should be
considered as a matter of the highest priority at its fonvfirst session
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40 '23.

National experience in achieving far-reaching
social and economic changes for the purpose
of social progress

The (,eneral Assemblv,
Guided by the desire to promote a higher standard of
life, full employment and conditions for economic and
social progress and development,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Social Progress and
Development, 20
Mindful of the prov1s10ns of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 21 as well as the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States, 22
Voting Economic and Social Council resolutions 158 l A
(L)nf21 May 1971, 1667(Lil)ofl June 1972and 1746
(Ll V) of 16 May I 9 73 concerning the importance of fundamental structural socio-economic changes for the
strengthening of national independence and the achievement of the ultimate goals of social progress,
Recalling its resolutions 3273 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974, 31/38 of30 November 1976, 36/19 of9 November
1981 and 38/25 of 22 November 1983, in which it
reaffirmed the importance for every State to exercise 11~
malienable right to carry out fundamental social and economic changes for the purpose of social progress and the
necessity of studying national experience in this field,
Desirous of securing a speedy and complete removal of
all obstacles to the economic and social progress of
peoples, especially colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism,
racial discrimination, apartheid, military, political and
economic intervention and pressure, foreign aggression
and occupation or alien domination, as well as all forms of
mequality and exploitation of peoples,
Convinced that peaceful coexistence and co-operatY""
among States, as well as effective measures in the field of
disarmament, create favourable international conditions
for the socio-economic development of all countries, in
:'articular developing countries,
Considering that the exchange of national experience in
achieving far-reaching social and economic changes for thf'
purpose of social progress would contribute to the implementation of the International Development Strategy fr,."
the Third United Nations Development Decade, 8
2! Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S"VI).
22 Resolution 3281 (XXIX)

196

General Assembly - Fortieth Session

Reaffirming the sovereign and inalienable right of all
peoples freely to determine their political status and freely
to pursue their economic, social and cultural development,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
national experience in achieving far-reaching social and
economic changes for the purpose of social progress; 13
2. Calls upon all States to give special attention in their
national development plans and programmes to the social
aspects of development with a view to increasing the wellbeing of the population on the basis of its full participation
in the process of development and a fair distribution of the
benefits therefrom;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to proceed with the
implementation of Economic and Social Council resolu-tion 1985/32 of 29 May 1985, paying special attention to
paragraphs 3 and 5 thereof;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to make
arrangements for h;,lding in 1986 the interregional seminar called for in paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 38/25, within the resources allotted to the programme
for sectoral and regional advisory services;
5. Decides to include in the provis10nal agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "National experience in achieving far-reaching social and economic
changes for the purpose of social progress".
96th plenary meeting
29 November 1985

40/24.

Universal realization of the right of peoples
to self-determination

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance, for the effective guarantee
and observance of human rights, of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and embodied in the
International Covenants on Human Rights, 24 as well as in
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Welcoming the progressive exercise of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial, foreign or alien
occupation and their emergence into sovereign statehood
and independence,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of acts or threats of
foreign military intervention and occupation that are
threatening to suppress, or have already suppressed, the
right to self-determination of an increasing number of so, ereign peoples and nations,
Expressing grave concern that, as a consequence of the
persistence of such actions, millions of people have been
and are being uprooted from their homes as refugees and
displaced persons, and emphasizing the urgent need for
concerted international action to alleviate their condition,
Recalling the relevant resolutions regarding the violation of the right of peoples to self-determination and other
human rights as a result of foreign military intervention,
aggression and occupation, adopted by the Commission on
Human Rights at its thirty-sixth, 2' thirty-seventh,2 6 thirt1,
eighth, 27 thirty-ninth, 28 fortieth 24 and forty-first 30 sessions.
23 AJ40/65-E/ 1985/7 and Add I
24 Resolution 2200 A (XXI). annex
25 See Official Records of the Economi<· w1J Sona! Cduncd. I 980. Supple
ment No. 3 (E/1980/13 and Corr I). chap XXVI, sect A
26/bid., /981. Supplement /Vn , (E l9Xi 1 ~5 and<"" I). chap. XXVIII

sect. A.

27 Ibid., I 9/U. S11,,pl,-m,-nt \·o .' (I l 4K! ! 2 a11d Cnrr I). chap X "\\' I
sect. A.

Reiterating its resolutions 351:,5 B of l 4 Nnv..:u,hcr
1980, 36/10 of28 October 1981, 37142 of3 Decemlw1
1982, 38/16 of 22 November 1983 and 39'18 of 2·
November 1984,
Takmg note of the report of the Secretary-( ,cn•·ral. 11
I. Reaffirms that the universal realization ol 1he riglu
of all peoples, including those under colonial, foreign ,1nc
alien domination, to self-determination is a fondamenta1
condition for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights and for the preservation and promotion of
such rights;
2. Declares its firm opposition to acts of foreign m1li
tary intervention. aggression and occupation, since these
have resulted in the suppression of the right of peoples 1l,
self-determination and other human rights in certain part!,
of the world;
3. Calls upon those States responsible to cease imme
diately their military intervention and occupation of for
eign countries and territories and all acts of repression, dis
crimination, exploitation and maltreatment, part icularh
the brutal and inhuman methods reportedly employed fo1
the execution of these acts against the peoples concerned
4. Deplores the plight of the millions of refugees and
displaced persons who have been uprooted by the afore
mentioned acts and reaffirms their right to return to thei1
homes voluntarily in safety and honour:
5. Requests the Commission on Human Right~ lo .:on
tinue to give special attention to the violation of human
rights, especially the right to self-determination, resulting
from foreign military intervention, aggression or orcupa
tion;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report on lh1•issue to the General Assembly at its forty-first session
under the item entitled "Importance of the universal reali
zation of the right of peoples to self-determination and of
the speedy granting of independence to colonial countrie;
and peoples for the effective guarantee and observance 01
human rights".
96th plem-ir.r maung
29 Novemhl'I 198,

40/25.

Importance of the universal realization of thf
right of peoples to self-determination and of
the speedy granting of independence to colo
nial countries and peoples for the effectivt
guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its faith in the importance of the 1mplcmcn
tation of the Declaration on the Granting oflndependenn
to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in its rcsolu
tion 1514 (XV) of I 4 December 1960,
Reaffirming the importance of the universal n:ali111tirn,
of the right of peoples to self-determination, national so,
ereignty and territorial integrity and of the speedy granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples a,
imperatives for the full enjoyment of all human rights.
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to com
ply with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the resolutions of the United Nations regard
28 find., 1983. Supplem,,nr !vo 3 (E 1983 13 and Con ll ,t,,p '-X\ I

sect. A.
29 Ibid., I 984, Supplement IV,•. 4 (E1 I984/14 and ( orr. I). ch.ip I I. sn I

JO Ibid.. 1985. Supplement No
.ll A 1 40!465 and Add I and ,.

:> (f.Jl9851n). chap II. S<"<'I

·\
