S/2019/248

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 March 2019
Original: English

United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides an account of the activities of the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) for the period from 21 November 2018 to
14 March 2019, pursuant to the mandate set out in Security Council resolution 350
(1974) and extended in subsequent Council resolutions, most recently resolution 2450
(2018).

II. Situation in the area of operations and activities of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
2.
During the reporting period, the ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic was maintained notwithstanding a number of violations of the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces (Disengagement of Forces
Agreement) of 1974, which are set out below. After the cessation of fighting in August
2018 between the Syrian armed forces and various non-State armed groups, the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic regained control of parts of the areas of
separation and limitation on the Bravo side that had previously been under the control
of the armed groups. There was increased military activity across the ceasefire line,
including the firing of missiles. As underscored again by the Secur ity Council in its
resolution 2450 (2018), there should be no military activity of any kind in the area of
separation.
3.
In employing its best efforts to maintain the ceasefire and see that it is
scrupulously observed, as prescribed in the Disengagement of Forces Agreement,
UNDOF reports all breaches of the ceasefire line that it observes. All incidents of
firing into the area of separation and across the ceasefire line, as well as the crossing
of the ceasefire line by individuals, are violations of the Agreement. In its regular
interaction with both sides, the leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon both
parties to exercise restraint and prevent any miscalculation that might lead to an
escalation of the situation.
4.
During the reporting period, there were several breaches of the ceasefire line by
the parties to the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. UNDOF observed, on several
occasions, firing into the areas of separation and limitation on the Br avo side. On
29 November 2018, UNDOF personnel observed heavy explosions and tracer rounds

19-04500 (E)

210319

*1904500*

S/2019/248

of heavy and anti-aircraft machine guns in the vicinities of Turunjah, in the area of
separation, and Camp Faouar. UNDOF personnel were forced to go into shelters. T he
Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that the military activity was associated with air
defence weapons of the Syrian armed forces directed at “hostile targets”. The Israel
Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they “had not engaged any targets in the Syrian
Arab Republic” and that the remnants of a Syrian anti-aircraft missile had impacted
an area 5 km from Camp Ziouani. An UNDOF team, accompanied by the Israel
Defense Forces, visited the scene of the impact on the Alpha side (Israeli -occupied
Golan) and saw remnants of an anti-aircraft missile. On 2 December, the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations sent identical letters to the Secretary General and the President of the Security Council in which he reported that, on
29 November, the armed forces of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic had
“indiscriminately and abruptly fired a barrage of anti-aircraft missiles across a range
of at least 60 kilometres”.
5.
On 23 December, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that it had fired
towards two armed individuals attempting to cross from the Bravo side to the Alpha
side. The Syrian authorities stated to UNDOF that there had been no attempted
crossing as reported by the Israel Defense Forces. On 25 December, the Force
observed a helicopter on the Alpha side firing four rockets that impacted east of Tall
al-Gharbi on the Bravo side. On the same day, the Force heard and observed surface to-air missiles, anti-aircraft defence guns, rockets and heavy machine guns being fired
on the Bravo side. UNDOF was not in a position to ascertain the points of origin or
impact.
6.
On 20 January 2019, the Israel Defense Forces fired missiles from an Iron Dome
system against an alleged rocket attack from the Bravo side. UNDOF observed two
projectiles being fired from an Israel Defense Forces position in the northern part of
the Alpha side in an easterly direction. UNDOF personnel went into shelters. UNDOF
did not observe any rockets being fired from the Bravo side on that day. The
observations by UNDOF of military activity coincided with open source reports of
Israel confirming that it had conducted a series of air strikes on targets in the Syrian
Arab Republic in response to a missile that had been fired by the Syrian Arab Republic
on the Alpha side and intercepted by Israel. On 21 January, UNDOF personnel
observed one unmanned aerial vehicle flying from the Alpha side and crossing the
ceasefire line to the Bravo side.
7.
On 11 February, UNDOF observed one Israel Defense Forces tank firing seven
rounds into the Qunaytirah area in the central part of the area of separation and one
Israel Defense Forces tank firing four rounds across the southern part of the area of
separation. On the same day, UNDOF also observed three rockets fired from a south westerly direction impacting the central part of the area of separation, approximately
800 m from position 37. UNDOF personnel went into shelters. On 3 March, UNDOF
personnel heard a heavy explosion in the vicinity of United Nations position 10, near
Hadar. Approximately 30 minutes later, UNDOF personnel observed a heavy
explosion in the same area.
8.
On 13 March, the Permanent Representative of Israel sent identical letters to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council in which he alleged that
there was a “vast Hezbollah terror network positioned” on the Bravo side and that
“Hezbollah has seized the opportunity to establish a Syrian terror front from which to
attack Israel”. He further alleged that the terror network ranged from Hadar to Arnah,
Khan Arnabah and Qunaytirah. He also stated, inter alia, that Israel held the Syrian
Arab Republic “entirely responsible for any and all acts” from its territory.
9.
Sporadic heavy explosions and bursts of heavy machine gun and small arms fire
persisted throughout the reporting period in the northern, central and southern parts
2/8

19-04500

S/2019/248

of the areas of separation and limitation on the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that this
military activity was due to controlled detonations of unexploded ordnance as part of
clearance and training and to celebratory fire by Syrian armed forces. The occurrence
of such activity reduced in January and February. UNDOF observed an increase in
the presence of personnel of the Syrian armed forces, some of whom were armed,
staffing a number of checkpoints within the area of separation, including in the
vicinity of Ba’th and Khan Arnabah, as well as along the main road connecting
Qunaytirah to Damascus. New checkpoints were established close to the Qunaytirah
crossing and also in the southern parts of the area of separati on. UNDOF was
occasionally notified that the routes planned for patrol by the military police of the
Russian Federation may involve their entering the area of separation. UNDOF was
not in a position to confirm the presence of the military police in the are a of
separation.
10. The military violations on the Alpha side included the presence of Iron Dome
systems within 10 km of the ceasefire line. In addition, missile carriers, which are
considered unauthorized military equipment in the area of limitation pur suant to the
terms of the Disengagement of Forces Agreement, were observed within the 25 km
zone of the area of limitation.
11. UNDOF continued to observe the daily crossing of the ceasefire line by
unidentified individuals from the Bravo side. UNDOF assessed that these individuals
were shepherds and farmers from the surrounding areas tending livestock. On 8 and
9 February, UNDOF observed Israel Defense Forces soldiers firing shots from small
arms into the area of separation to scare off shepherds who had c rossed the ceasefire
line. UNDOF personnel also observed, on 12 January, one Israel Defense Forces
soldier firing six rounds from small arms into the area of separation.
12. UNDOF protested to the parties all violations of the Disengagement of Forces
Agreement that it had observed, including the crossing of the ceasefire line by
civilians from the Bravo side, the presence of unauthorized equipment and personnel
in the areas of separation and limitation and the firing into the area of separation and
across the ceasefire line.
13. During the reporting period, UNDOF did not observe any internally displaced
persons or tents in the area of separation. On 4 November 2018, UNDOF facilitated
the return of five Syrian nationals, including two children, and one chape rone from
the Alpha side through the Qunaytirah crossing. The Syrian nationals had undergone
medical treatment at hospitals on the Alpha side as part of the Israel Defense Forces
Operation Good Neighbour, carried out during the conflict on the Bravo side. Their
return to the Bravo side followed a request to UNDOF on 8 November from the Israel
Defense Forces and the agreement of the Syrian authorities. Representatives of the
International Committee of the Red Cross were present as the Syrian national s were
handed over by UNDOF to the Syrian authorities at the Bravo gate and transported to
Damascus. On 3 January 2019, UNDOF, also in cooperation with the International
Committee of the Red Cross, facilitated the return to the Bravo side of a Syrian
civilian who had been detained on 1 January by the Israel Defense Forces.
14. On 30 January, the Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that they had
detained two shepherds in the vicinity of Mu‘allaqah, north of United Nations
position 85. The Israel Defense Forces informed UNDOF that the two Syrian civilians
had been apprehended and detained for questioning because they had crossed the
ceasefire line. UNDOF could not confirm this allegation. Later in the day, the Israel
Defense Forces informed UNDOF that both shepherds had been released in the
vicinity of vacated United Nations position 85. On 31 January, UNDOF was informed
by the Israel Defense Forces that they had captured and detained one farmer for
questioning in the vicinity of Ma‘arriyah, north-east of United Nations position 80A.
19-04500

3/8

S/2019/248

On the night of that day, the farmer was released across the ceasefire line. In identical
letters sent to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council on
8 February, the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United
Nations reported that the Israel Defense Forces had on two occasions crossed the
ceasefire line, in the Mu‘allaqah area and the Yarmuk area, respectively, and
“abducted” Syrian nationals looking after livestock. The Permanent Re presentative
also reported that, on another occasion, the Israel Defense Forces had crossed the
ceasefire line in the Jubbata al-Khashab area and “attempted to abduct a Syrian
national, killing” one Syrian national and wounding three others.
15. In its regular interaction with both sides, in particular when responding to the
incidents of firing across the ceasefire line and into the area of separation, the
leadership of UNDOF continued to call upon both parties to exercise restraint and
prevent any miscalculation that might lead to an escalation of the situation.
16. Pending its return to full operations on the Bravo side, UNDOF continued to
maintain visibility, albeit limited, of the area of separation and the ceasefire line.
UNDOF maintained its positions on Mount Hermon and at Camp Faouar and United
Nations positions 32, in the central part of the area of separation, 80, in the southern
part of the area of separation, and 22, on the Alpha side. UNDOF operations continued
to be supported by the military observers of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization (UNTSO) in Observer Group Golan, who are under the operational
control of UNDOF and have maintained five fixed and three temporary observation
posts along the ceasefire line, as well as four temporary observation posts on Mount
Hermon. Observer Group Golan also continued to maintain temporary observation
posts in the vicinity of vacated United Nations observation posts 56, 71 and 72. The
military observers in Observer Group Golan will not be deployed at observation posts
in the area of separation on a permanent basis until such time as the security
conditions permit, when adequate accommodation and appropriate force protection
measures are in place. The focus of Observer Group Golan remains on con tinuous
static observation and situational awareness.
17. Through Observer Group Golan, UNDOF continued to carry out fortnightly
inspections of equipment and force levels in the area of limitation on the Alpha side.
Liaison officers from the Alpha side accompanied the inspection teams. Inspections
in the area of limitation on the Bravo side were suspended because of the security
situation and did not resume.
18. Engagement between UNDOF and the parties continued, with a view to
addressing restrictions on movement and access to United Nations positions in the
area of separation and to reducing the delays and challenges experienced by United
Nations personnel in crossing the technical fence to United Nations observation posts
and positions. The Head of Mission and Force Commander of UNDOF continued to
remind the parties of their obligation to scrupulously abide by the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel on the ground and to extend all cooperation to UNDOF in the
fulfilment of the tasks under its mandate.
19. UNDOF, in consultation with both parties, continued to review the situation in
the area of separation in order to assess whether the conditions on the ground would
permit the return to vacated positions in the area of separation. UNDOF conducted
more than 180 operational patrols on routes in the northern and central parts of the
areas of separation and limitation. In addition, the UNDOF mechanized infantry
company and force reserve company continued to carry out assessment visits and
protected patrols to United Nations positions 10, 16, 27, 60, 68 and 85 and observation
posts 56, 57, 71 and 72. Liaison officers of the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic accompanied UNDOF personnel on all patrols and assessment visits.
4/8

19-04500

S/2019/248

20. After the reopening of the Qunaytirah crossing on 15 October 2018, the Force
regularly used it to move equipment and personnel between the Alpha and Bravo
sides. Pending the completion of the refurbishment of the Uni ted Nations position at
the Charlie gate and its reoccupation, UNDOF military police continued to deploy at
the crossing point during the limited opening hours only, to liaise with the respective
sides on UNDOF personnel crossings.
21. UNDOF continued to make progress towards the limited return to Bravo side
operations, in line with the phased UNDOF plan (see S/2018/1088). UNDOF
continued to develop the infrastructure of and improve the living conditions at Camp
Faouar. Furthermore, the refurbishment and reoccupation of United Nations position
32 was completed on 30 December through the deployment of 35 UNDOF military
personnel. The reconstruction of a communications mast at United Nations position
71 is under way.
22. From 24 to 28 January 2019, UNDOF conducted a search and clearance
operation of United Nations position 37 in order to verify whether the position was
clear of potential hazards, such as remnants of war, including unexploded ordnance
and mines. The conditions at the position were verified to be safe for United Nations
personnel to continue operations. Consequently, on 28 January, UNDOF commenced
a limited reoccupation of position 37 to support engineering work related to the
refurbishment of the facilities and security infrastructure at the position. UNDOF also
conducted, for the first time, route reconnaissance patrols to United Nations
observation post 52 through the area of separation. The route was assessed to be viable
but in need of repairs in order to support future use by UNDOF vehicles, in particular
heavy vehicles.
23. UNDOF continues to assess that there is a significant threat to United Nations
personnel in the UNDOF area of operations from explosive remnants of war,
including unexploded ordnance and mines, and from the possible presence of “sleeper
cells” of armed groups, including listed terrorist groups, in particular in the southern
part of the area of separation. UNDOF continues to assess the security situation in the
southern part of the area of separation and to ascertain the capabilities that would be
appropriate for deployment in that area, conditions permitting.
24. In accordance with the provisions of Security Council resolution 2450 (2018)
and the UNDOF operational concept, UNDOF continued its efforts to deploy
appropriate technology to ensure the safety and security of UNDOF personnel and
equipment. A surveillance trailer remained deployed on the Alpha side at Camp
Ziouani and United Nations position 22, while another was maintained at Camp
Faouar.
25. UNDOF continued to resupply its positions on Mount Hermon and at Camp
Faouar from Damascus. UNDOF convoys between Damascus and the United Nations
positions were conducted almost daily, using main supply route 7 and Salam highway,
with an UNDOF security escort and accompanied by a liaison officer from the office
of the Senior Syrian Arab Delegate. UNDOF continuously monitored the situation
and took the necessary precautionary measures in planning and conducting its
convoys. UNDOF continued to conduct and update its contingency planning for the
reinforcement and evacuation of United Nations positions and observation posts on
both the Alpha and Bravo sides, as well as facilities in Damascus. UNDOF conducted
regular rehearsals, exercises and training for identified contingencies. Risk mitigation
measures, including force protection measures, continued to be developed at United
Nations positions and observation posts and at the UNDOF operational base at Camp
Ziouani and headquarters at Camp Faouar.
26. As at 20 February 2019, UNDOF comprised 939 troops, including 41 women.
Troops were deployed from Bhutan (3), Czechia (4), Fiji (248), Ghana (12), India
19-04500

5/8

S/2019/248

(194), Ireland (136), Nepal (338), the Netherlands (2) and Uruguay (2). In addition,
68 military observers from UNTSO Observer Group Golan, including 9 women,
assisted UNDOF in carrying out its tasks.

III. Implementation of Security Council resolution 338 (1973)
27. In its resolution 2450 (2018), the Security Council called upon the parties
concerned to immediately implement its resolution 338 (1973). It decided to renew
the mandate of UNDOF for a period of six months, until 30 June 2019, and requested
the Secretary-General to report every 90 days on developments in the situation and
the measures taken to implement resolution 338 (1973). The search for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East, in particular the efforts made at various
levels to implement resolution 338 (1973), was addressed in my report on the situation
in the Middle East (A/73/322/Rev.1), submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolutions 72/15 on Jerusalem and 72/16 on the Syrian Golan.
28. Since the discontinuation of indirect peace talks in December 2008, there have
been no negotiations between the parties. The Syrian conflict further reduces the
prospects for their resumption and for progress towards peace between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic. I look forward to a peaceful resolution of the conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the resumption of efforts towards a comprehensive, just
and durable peace settlement, as called for by the Security Council in its resolution
338 (1973) and other relevant resolutions.

IV. Observations
29. I am gravely concerned about the escalation of tension between the parties to
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement as shown, among others, by the events of
29 November 2018 and 20 January and 11 February 2019. I note with concern the
continued military activities and presence of the Syrian armed forces in the area of
separation on the Bravo side. The Israel Defense Forces should refrain from firing
across the ceasefire line. The continued presence of unauthorized weapons and
equipment in the area of limitation on the Alpha side is also of concern. These
developments jeopardize the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. I urge the parties
to exercise maximum restraint at all times. I reiterate that there should be no military
forces in the area of separation other than those of UNDOF. I encourage members of
the Security Council to support efforts to sensitize both parties to the risk of escalation
and the need to preserve the long-standing ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic.
30. It remains critical that the parties maintain their liaison with UNDOF in the first
instance to prevent any escalation of the situation across the ceasefire line. All
violations of the ceasefire line increase tensions between the signatories to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and undermine progress towards stability in the
area.
31. I note the continued support of the parties for the ongoing efforts of UNDOF to
return gradually to full operations on the Bravo side. It is important that the parties
provide all necessary support to allow the full utilization of the Qunaytirah crossing
by UNDOF in line with established procedures. It is critical that UNDOF carry out
its operations without facing any administrative obstacles. This is even more
important as UNDOF increases its operations on the Bravo side to facilitate effective
and efficient mandate implementation.

6/8

19-04500

S/2019/248

32. As UNDOF maintains its efforts to intensify its operations in the area of
separation, it remains critical that the safety and security of United Nations personnel
continue to be assured. The circumstances under which the troops and military
observers are operating continue to require vigilance and risk mitigation measures. I
renew my call upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to continue to fulfil
its primary responsibility for the safety and security of United Nations personnel on
the Bravo side.
33. The continued commitment of both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement and support for the presence of UNDOF remains
essential. The return of UNDOF to full operations on the Bravo side continues to be
a priority for the Force. I count on the continued cooperation of both parties to
facilitate the advancement of the Force’s plans for an incremental return to operations
and positions in the area of separation and to ensure that UNDOF can implement its
mandate. It is critical that UNDOF be able to deploy the technology and equipment
necessary to enhance its observation of the area of separation and the ceasefire line
and to augment force protection. In that regard, the support and cooperation of both
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic in ensuring that the deployment of the necessary
technology and equipment occurs seamlessly and expeditiously remain essential. At
the same time, the parties must continue to support the enhancement of the liaison
function of UNDOF.
34. It is equally important that the Security Council continue to bring to bear its
influence on the parties concerned to ensure that UNDOF is accorded the ability to
operate in a safe and secure manner and allowed to operate freely in accordance with
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The support of the parties in facilitating the
clearance of mines, unexploded ordnance and remnants of war in the UNDOF area of
operations is crucial. It is also necessary for UNDOF to continue to have at its
disposal all means and resources necessary for it to return fully to the area of
separation, conditions permitting.
35. The confidence and commitment of troop-contributing countries with respect to
UNDOF remain key factors in the Force’s ability to carry out its mandate. I continue
to count on the support of troop-contributing countries as UNDOF proceeds with the
implementation of its agreed plan to increase operations in the area of separation. I
am grateful to the Governments of Bhutan, Czechia, Fiji, Ghana, India , Ireland,
Nepal, the Netherlands and Uruguay for their contributions, commitment, resolve and
consummate professionalism. I am also thankful to the Member States that have
contributed military observers to UNTSO.
36. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Francis Vib-Sanziri, and all military and civilian
personnel serving under his leadership, who continue to perform the important tasks
assigned to them by the Security Council with efficiency and commitment under
challenging circumstances.

19-04500

7/8

S/2019/248

8/8

19-04500
