S/PV.7663

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7663rd meeting

Thursday, 31 March 2016, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gaspar Martins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Angola)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-09037 (E)
*1609037*

S/PV.7663

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission; Ms. Ellen Margrethe
Løj, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan; Mr. Stephen O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Ms. Kate Gilmore, United Nations
Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Løj, who
is joining the meeting today via video-teleconference
from Juba.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mogae.
Mr. Mogae: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to again address the Security Council.
Following my last briefing to the Council on
19 February (see S/PV.7628), I must unfortunately
report that the implementation of most aspects of
the August 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan continues to
be delayed. The key milestone for the initial element
of the Agreement — the formation of the Transitional
Government of National Unity — has yet to be reached.
Violations of the permanent ceasefire also continue,
as most recently documented by the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, in the states of Upper Nile, Western
Equatoria and Western Bahr el-Ghazal.
The Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(JMEC) has publicly released these violation reports so
that the full details of the investigation are made known
2/10

31/03/2016

to the South Sudanese and to the broader international
community. Notwithstanding the continuing trend, in
recent days there has been notable progress, and the
formation of the Transitional Government of National
Unity now seems within reach.
In response to the plan for transitional security
arrangements for Juba, the capital, which I issued
on 23 February in my capacity as Chair of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, the first
of the 1,370 troops of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) in Opposition have now returned, by a
combination of United Nations and charter aircraft.
The role of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan in the operation has been critical, not only in
terms of making aircraft available, but also in providing
crucial logistical support to this operation, both in
Malakal and in Juba. Flights are planned to continue
over the coming week, until the full complement of 1,370
has been transported. Following the arrival of these
forces, the First Vice President-designate, representing
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM) in
Opposition, has assured us that he will return to Juba,
thus permitting the formation of the new government.
SPLM in Opposition representatives have
confirmed that there are no further conditions or
obstacles to the return of the First Vice Presidentdesignate, and therefore I am cautiously optimistic
that the new Transitional Government will be in place
by the middle of next month. While this is months
behind schedule, it is a vital step forward in the
implementation of the Agreement, which I welcome.
That said, the parties can do more to prepare for the
return of the First Vice President-designate to Juba and
ensure that the formation of the new government is not
itself destabilizing.
Although developments in recent days are positive,
there is still much work to be done by the parties and
by the international community in support of a more
robust peace in South Sudan. As I observed in my
statement to the Council in February, the act of forming
the new Government will not automatically relieve the
humanitarian, development, political, military and
economic crises that the country continues to face.
While both the present Government and the SPLA in
Opposition have vowed to strengthen their cooperation
with the humanitarian response, and the Government
has formally announced that all military units have
been ordered to cooperate with the humanitarian
16-09037

31/03/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

response, the overall situation remains dire, with
millions remaining at risk. In economic terms, South
Sudan’s economy is in desperate trouble and urgent
measures are needed by both this Government and the
next to address the situation and implement agreed
reforms and procedures.
As I said to the representatives of JMEC at
our most recent meeting in Juba, without action on
economic reform and restructuring, the Agreement will
be imperilled. I urge the parties to consider what steps
can be to taken immediately to mitigate the situation, as
well as what steps can be taken immediately following
formation of the new transitional government.
The parties must also turn their attention to
the resolution of the State’s internal administrative
boundaries. The Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) communiqué of 31 January, later
endorsed by JMEC, outlines the formation of a new,
ad-hoc national boundary commission to review the
number of States and their boundaries. It is critical that
this commission be quickly established to address the
issue and prevent any further destabilization.
I wish to reiterate my firm belief that the South
Sudanese parties should continually be encouraged
by IGAD, by the African Union and by the Council
to respect the commitments in the Agreement. Such
commitment is even more vital as we reach the cusp
of the formation of the new Government. There is little
time to be lost if the next two and a half years — the
transition period provided for in the Agreement — are
to be meaningful and see genuine implementation of
the Agreement’s provisions.
I thank the Security Council for its continued
attention to the situation in South Sudan and urge that,
at this critical time, the Council continue to focus on
the situation in South Sudan.
The President: I thank Mr. Mogae for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Løj.
Ms. Løj: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to provide this brief update to the Security
Council on the situation in South Sudan. As the next
regular report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
will be available in the coming weeks and in light
of the statements of the other speakers today, I will
focus my comments on key operational developments,
including the support of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to the implementation of the

S/PV.7663

Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan.
Despite the signing of the peace agreement, violence
continues in many areas of the country. In Upper Nile,
tensions between the Dinka and Shilluk communities
remain high following the outbreak of violence that
occurred in the United Nations protection site in
Malakal in February. Since that incident, UNMISS has
been supporting humanitarian partners to re-establish
facilities and restore service delivery within the
site, while also providing force protection for food
distribution both within the site and to the internally
displaced persons who relocated to Malakal town.
We have also taken measures to increase perimeter
security at the site and we continue to engage closely
with community leaders and the local government to
prevent any resurgence of violence.
I welcome the United Nations Headquarters-led
Board of Inquiry that has been constituted to assess the
response of the Mission to the incident in Malakal, and
stand ready to provide any support the team may need to
conclude its investigation. Its findings, combined with
the recommendations of the Mission’s own preliminary
investigation, will strengthen our ability to prevent
such conflict from occurring in the future.
Elsewhere in the country, clashes between
Government forces and armed groups continued in the
Equatorias and in the greater Bahr el-Ghazal region,
with reports of civilian deaths, as well as looting and
the harassment of communities by Government forces.
Jonglei continues to see a resurgence of intercommunal
clashes, both in the Greater Pibor Area, and more
recently, between communities in Pochalla. Warrap
and Unity have also seen civilians killed in a continued
cycle of violent retaliatory cattle raids. These conflicts
are not new; they erupt out of historic social divisions
and competition over limited resources and will likely
continue to threaten longer-term peace and stability.
Furthermore, the dramatic deterioration of the economic
situation is continuing to take a heavy toll on the people
of South Sudan and could have security implications.
As an additional consequence, humanitarian needs are
escalating and spreading rapidly across the country.
This overall context only underscores the urgent
need to sustain momentum towards implementing
the peace agreement. As Chairman Mogae has just
highlighted, some very important wheels have begun
to turn, in no small part because of the continued

16-090373/10

S/PV.7663

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

commitment of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (JMEC) and partners. I wish to assure
the members of the Council that the Mission is fully
supporting this process under the coordination of
the JMEC. Allow me to provide some examples of
that support.
Over the past months, UNMISS has provided
logistical and technical assistance to the Joint Military
Ceasefire Commission in its efforts, including
the clearing of land at some designated sites and
the installation of sanitation facilities. The United
Nations Mine Action Service has also worked to
clear unexploded ordnance from the planned sites.
Meanwhile, the Mission is supporting the Commission
in the establishment of the joint Juba coordination
centre, formerly known as the Joint Operation Centre.
UNMISS continues to provide air transport to
move opposition forces to Juba, in line with the agreed
transitional security arrangements. On 24 March, the
Mission completed the first airlift of 22 high-ranking
opposition officers from Pagak to Juba, including
generals of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition, who will constitute the leadership of
the joint integrated Police and Strategic Defence and
Security Review Board. Airlifts resumed on Monday,
28 March, with the transport of an additional 39
opposition forces from Malakal to Juba, including their
light weapons, followed by a third batch of 40 the next
day. We shall continue these operations throughout the
week, weather permitting, and today 130 additional
soldiers have arrived — 40 on a United Nations flight
and 90 on a Troika-chartered plane.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism continues its
deployment across the country, with accommodation
and other logistical support, including force protection,
provided by UNMISS. The Mechanism has also taken
on the additional task of verifying the redeployment
sites for military forces outside Juba, in line with the
transitional security arrangements. These are critical
responsibilities, and we are providing the necessary
support to the monitoring and verification teams on
the ground to facilitate their investigations as much
as possible.
South Sudan is at a critical juncture. While I
am slightly optimistic that the developments that
Chairperson Mogae and I have just highlighted are
steps forward, we all know that enormous challenges
4/10

31/03/2016

and hurdles remain. In tandem with this measured
progress, continued ceasefire violations and the rise of
previously dormant intercommunal conflicts, coupled
with difficulties in meeting the country’s growing
humanitarian needs, deplorable human rights abuses
and the sharp economic downturn all threaten to derail
the peace process. Sustained progress will require
both parties to form the Transitional Government
without further delay and to demonstrate the courage
to compromise for the sake of peace. Most important,
it will require South Sudan’s leaders to begin to put the
people first.
The formation of the Transitional Government is
indeed a necessary step towards setting the country on
a path to longer-term stability and improving the lives
of the people, who have suffered far too much for far too
long. But it is just a first step. The work does not end when
Riek Machar returns to Juba to form the Transitional
Government with President Salva Kiir. In fact, that is
when the hard work of rebuilding the country has to
start and difficult decisions must be taken. That is why
we all need the continued support of the members of
the Council and the sustained effort and cooperation of
the United Nations, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union, the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission and all partners. The road
ahead will be long and difficult, but we must move
ahead. The people of South Sudan deserve nothing less.
The President: I thank Ms. Løj for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. O’Brien.
Mr. O’Brien: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in South Sudan. I thank the previous
briefers — the Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission and Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Løj — for their very
clear remarks.
When I briefed the Council last month, I drew
attention to the deepening humanitarian crisis in South
Sudan. Some 6 million people — more than half of the
population — are currently in need of humanitarian
assistance. Of these, a staggering 2.8 million people
are severely food insecure, over 2 million people have
been forced to flee their homes, and more than half of
all school-aged children are not attending class.
Despite the Council’s presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/1 of 17 March, calling on all parties to
16-09037

31/03/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

protect civilians, allow people to move freely and to
facilitate timely, full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access, yet again I have to report that the situation
remains dire. Civilians continue to be targeted, attacked
and displaced, and acute humanitarian needs persist,
exacerbated by recurrent access challenges. In addition
to the unimaginable individual and community abuses
that the people of South Sudan have sustained, I must
also highlight the fact that, despite the call for a cessation
of hostilities in the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, the geographic
scope of the conflict has grown. In recent months,
as we have just heard from Special Representative
Løj, we have seen new outbreaks of violence in areas
around Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Western Equatoria,
Jonglei and Malakal. Such violence has resulted in the
displacement of well over 150,000 people, with many
forced to flee their homes repeatedly — some more
than 10 times.
By way of example, on the same day that I briefed
the Council last month, fighting erupted in Pibor and
surrounding areas, resulting in the displacement of
around 13,000 people. Further, some 8,000 internally
displaced people seeking refuge in Mboro, Western
Bahr el-Ghazal, were forced to flee that area again
when fighting erupted on 21 March. A woman who had
sought refuge in Mboro and then had to flee to Wau
said, “We survived on leaves and turmeric; all our
belongings, including food, were looted”.
Let us not forget that nearly 200,000 people continue
to seek protection inside United Nations protection of
civilians sites, as they still do not feel that it is safe
enough to return home. Regrettably, the sanctity
of these sites has not been respected, and more than
25,000 people remain displaced as a result of the events
in Malakal. Humanitarians and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan continue to work together to
make the conditions in these sites as decent as possible.
However, the sites will never be a replacement for the
places that people call home.
Children remain particularly vulnerable to the
expanding conflict. In recent months, children have
been separated from their parents while trying to flee
the fighting, including 84 documented cases following
the events in Malakal. Moreover, schools and health
facilities, which are inviolable under international
humanitarian law, have been damaged or destroyed,
denying children access to education and health care.
These new conflict-afflicted areas are the same locations

S/PV.7663

where people are most desperate for help. Displaced,
food insecure and vulnerable, these are the populations
we must be seeking to aid and protect. However, they
cannot be reached by aid workers owing to a host of
impediments that continue to hamper aid operations. In
2015, more than 900 access incidents were reported by
humanitarian partners in South Sudan, representing a
14 per cent increase from the previous year and a 68 per
cent increase from the year before that. This year the
trend continues.
In the 14 days since the adoption of the presidential
statement of 17 March, more than 17 incidents of
obstruction of access for humanitarian activities have
been reported, comprising interference by parties
from individual armed actors through to national
authorities. The true number is likely to be far higher,
given that some humanitarian partners are reluctant
to report every incident out of fear of retribution or
harassment. For example, last week in Unity, local
authorities demanded free transport to Juba aboard the
contracted plane of an international non-governmental
organization (NGO). When the pilots refused, citing
their duty to uphold humanitarian principles, a truck
loaded with armed men arrived at the airstrip and
threatened to detain the pilots if they did not oblige.
Such action compromises the ability of humanitarians
to safely and effectively deliver humanitarian assistance
and is simply unacceptable.
In Malakal, after the horrific violence in
mid-February, humanitarians were denied river access to
Wau Shilluk for over one month, disrupting the delivery
of life-saving assistance to more than 27,000 people. In
a location where homes and businesses had been looted
or destroyed, leaving only minimal resources, the denial
of access presents a genuine threat to lives. Access was
finally granted when the remaining water and nutrition
supplies were days away from exhaustion and schools
had already closed, as supplies had run out. The lifting
of restrictions came only after interventions from the
humanitarian community, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, and visits by
several ambassadors from various countries to Malakal
to speak with the Governor.
Delays in the delivery of assistance cost lives and
expend precious resources. What humanitarians need
is timely, unimpeded access to those we assess to be
in vital need, not ad hoc, case-by-case considerations
after much attention, pressure and persuasion.

16-090375/10

S/PV.7663

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The challenge in South Sudan represents an
increasing disconnect between the assurances at the
national level and the actions of local groups. All
too often, even when official assurances are received
at the national level, they are not respected by local
actors. Illegal exactions and taxes remain rampant,
and humanitarian convoys are consistently subjected
to demands for payment at checkpoints. Despite the
Government’s statement that humanitarians should
not pay at such points, authorities at the local level
have conveyed a very different message, noting that
humanitarians should “expect” to make such payments.
Convoys travelling from Juba to Bentiu by road
recently reported more than 50 checkpoints, with each
truck required to pay a total of more than 30,000 South
Sudanese pounds, or about US $1,000, in exactions.
Such extortions are unacceptable and must stop.
The United Nations Department of Safety and
Security has also been denied access to conduct
security risk assessments in areas where fighting
has taken place. Since January 2016, security risk
assessment missions have been denied six times in
Central Equatoria alone. These risk assessments are a
critical first step to assessing, preparing and enabling
effective humanitarian action.
In addition to the expanding geographic scope of
the conflict, new drivers of crises are emerging and
vulnerabilities are being exacerbated, resulting in
additional humanitarian and protection needs. Most
notably, the deteriorating economic situation is driving
instability. As a result of the economic crisis, the
monthly cost of food and clean water for an average
family now amounts to more than 10 times the salary of
a teacher. Such pressures are felt most acutely in urban
and population centres. In the north-western areas of
Northern Bahr El Ghazal and Warrap, heightened food
insecurity, compounded by an economic downturn
and growing unrest, has resulted in the flight of some
38,000 people into East and South Darfur since the end
of January.
On average, more than half of the access incidents
reported involve violence against humanitarian
personnel or their assets. When I briefed the Council
last month, I reported that 47 humanitarian staff had
been killed since December 2013. I am appalled to
report that this number has now risen to 49. The most
recent case is that of Mr. Yien Malouth, an integrated
community caseworker for Save the Children, a husband
and the father of two children, who was tragically shot
6/10

31/03/2016

in Akobo, Jonglei. Greater action must be taken to
ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.
Since the beginning of 2016, there have been at least
four major instances of the destruction or looting of
humanitarian supplies and facilities. These have taken
place in Malakal, Pibor and Western Equatoria. Vital
goods such as nutritional supplements, educational
materials and water-treatment supplies have been
burned or deliberately destroyed. A conservative
estimate places the value of humanitarian losses since
the beginning of 2016 at around $10 million, including
more than $5 million in damages to the Malakal
protection-of-civilians site.
Much more important than the monetary losses is
the loss of human life that results from these wanton
attacks against humanitarian facilities and assets. Each
time a facility or a compound is damaged or destroyed,
and each time supplies are looted, vulnerable civilians
are denied vital assistance.
Despite the challenges, humanitarian partners
continue to stand in solidarity with the people of South
Sudan. In 2015, and despite the access challenges
presented to them, partners were able to reach more
than 4.5 million people with assistance, often in the
most remote areas. In the first two months of 2016
alone, partners reached more than 1 million people.
Humanitarians continue to find innovative ways to save
lives, even in areas where formal access is not granted.
For example, partners reached more than 100,000
people with life-saving assistance in Unity last year
amid violent conflict and access denials.
However, despite the courageous efforts of our
colleagues on the front lines and the intensive work
of humanitarian partners to scale up their capacity, a
critical lack of funding continues to severely hobble the
humanitarian effort today. Of the required $1.3 billion
earmarked to reach more than 5 million people, only
9 per cent — yes, only 9 per cent — of the funding has
been received from the international community. Amid
a food and nutrition security crisis, NGO partners are
scaling down nutrition and health programmes because
they simply have not received the funding needed to
operate. The small window of opportunity afforded
by the dry season will close in the coming weeks, and
the funding received has allowed humanitarians to
pre-position only 35 per cent of the required supplies
across the country. As a result, more supplies will have
16-09037

31/03/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to be moved by air during the rainy season, increasing
the cost of delivery by up to six times.
The Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights
will speak in greater detail to the human rights violations
and grave protection concerns in South Sudan, but what
is clear from the humanitarian perspective is that both
parties have failed to abide by their obligation to protect
civilians and civilian facilities and simultaneously
failed to allow full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian
access to those in critical need.
The terms of the peace agreement have clearly
not been enough to halt the rapidly escalating and
worsening situation and its implications for millions
of civilians across the country. We need action. To
this end, I ask the Council to call on the parties to
the conflict and all armed actors operating in South
Sudan to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law to protect civilians,
allow free and unhindered humanitarian access and to
protect humanitarian workers and their assets.
Let my message to the Council today be unequivocal.
Since my last report, since the Peace Agreement, the
hideous facts on the ground are that the humanitarian
situation has severely worsened in that short time and
continues to worsen, and the only measure I am using is
the lives, the suffering and the deaths of the millions of
innocent women, girls, boys and men caught up in the
horrendous fight between two sides that have no care
for the people they claim to represent. In that light, I call
upon Security Council members to stand in solidarity
with the people of South Sudan and to advocate within
their areas of influence to seek an end to the unfolding
humanitarian catastrophe.
The President: I thank Mr. O’Brien for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Gilmore.
Ms. Gilmore: On behalf of the High Commissioner,
I thank the Council for this opportunity to brief it on the
findings of the assessment mission to improve human
rights, accountability, reconciliation and capacity in
South Sudan.
In short, the findings are that despite the August 2015
Peace Agreement, human rights violations and abuses
against the civilian population continue unabated.
Since December 2013, all parties to the conflict
have committed gross human rights violations and
abuses, along with serious violations of international
humanitarian law, including the killing of civilians,

S/PV.7663

widespread sexual violence against women and girls, the
pillaging and destruction of civilian property, including
homes, humanitarian infrastructure, schools, medical
facilities and even hospitals. Both the Government
and the opposition have forcibly conscripted children,
some as young as nine years of age, in violation of
international human rights law, international criminal
law and international humanitarian law.
The Sudan People’s Liberation Army and allied
militia systematically perpetrated rapes and other acts
of violence against women, during its military offensive
in Unity state. Rape, in particular, was used as a
strategy to terrorize and punish civilians. From April to
September last year, the United Nations recorded more
than 1,300 reports of rape in Unity state alone. The High
Commissioner, like the African Union Commission of
Inquiry on South Sudan, finds that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that allegations of gross violations,
including those committed in 2015, may constitute war
crimes and/or crimes against humanity.
The High Commissioner’s report also finds a
new and alarming spread of violence and insecurity
to areas previously less affected by the conflict. In
Western Equatoria, for example, the Government’s
intensively militarized response to insecurity has been
met with resistance from an increasing number of
armed defence groups, but it is civilians who are caught
in the middle. Furthermore, space for the exercise
of freedom of expression, including dissent, has
narrowed considerably, with human rights defenders,
journalists and other civil society actors subjected to
intimidation, harassment, attack and detention without
due process. That curtails democratic space, violates
the State’s international human rights obligations and,
without any doubt, further undermines prospects for
sustainable peace.
A legacy of violence and revenge underscores
South Sudan’s urgent need for accountability for
both past and present-day human rights violations
and abuses, as well as violations of international
humanitarian law. Yet despite the repeated public and
formal commitments given by the parties to the conflict
to ending the violence and punishing the perpetrators,
no evidence has been found of any genuine effort on
the part of either the Government or the opposition
to live up to those undertakings. If South Sudan,
as a country, and its people, as rights-holders, are to
realize sustainable peace, security and development,
the long-standing and vicious cycle of impunity must

16-090377/10

S/PV.7663

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

be broken. The perpetrators of human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law and
of other international crimes must be held to account.
South Sudan must address the underlying problems and
root causes, including historical grievances, that led not
only to the current conflict, but undermine prospects
for its enduring resolution.
The Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, notably its provisions
on accountability and transitional justice, provides
useful elements in that regard. Chapter V, for example,
provides for the creation of a commission for truth,
reconciliation and healing, a hybrid court for South
Sudan, and a compensation and reparation authority.
However, to date, as we have just heard, the Transitional
Government of National Unity has not been put into
place, and those other mechanisms are therefore not
established, even though the African Union has taken
some steps towards discussing the establishment of the
hybrid court.
Transitional justice mechanisms should be
established in line with international norms and
standards. There must be genuine consultations based
on the informed participation of victims, civil society
actors, including women’s groups, and all other relevant
stakeholders. There must be needs assessments to
inform efforts aimed at truth, reparations, reconciliation
and ensuring non-recurrence. If such consultations
are to be comprehensive, meaningful and inclusive,
they must be conducted over a significantly longer
period than the minimum one month stipulated in the
Agreement. Above all, the necessary preconditions
for the establishment of those transitional justice
mechanisms — a complete cessation of hostilities,
improved security, commensurate resources and a high
level of political commitment — must all be met.
At its recently concluded thirty-first session, the
Human Rights Council adopted a resolution establishing
a Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan. Its
mandate is to monitor and report on the situation of
human rights and provide guidance on transitional
justice, accountability, reconciliation and healing.
The Human Rights Council also mandated the new
Commission to make recommendations on technical
assistance to the Transitional Government to support
transitional justice, accountability, reconciliation and
healing. However, the mandate is predicated on the
Transitional Government being fully operational, fully
committed to ending the violence against the civilian
8/10

31/03/2016

population and fully cooperative with the hybrid court
for South Sudan.
The formation of the accountability and transitional
justice mechanisms for South Sudan will not be without
their challenges, but they are essential. The High
Commissioner calls on the African Union to swiftly
establish the hybrid court, with a designated unit in
support of witnesses and victims, including children and
those subjected to sexual violence. However, he notes
with concern that the court will try only the most senior
officials responsible for human rights violations and
abuses. Many more perpetrators need to face the justice
that is so critical to lasting peace. That responsibility
will fall to South Sudan’s courts, which currently do
not have the capacity to conduct such trials. Failure to
address the deeply ingrained disregard for human life
will only lead to further violations.
The only lasting and viable solution to the terror and
pain perpetrated against the people of South Sudan is
to dismantle the apparatus of violence, hold to account
those who have imposed such egregious suffering and
put an end to the cycle of impunity. Hostilities must
cease promptly and conclusively, and the international
community must do what is needed to support the
Transitional Government of National Unity, once
formed, so that these transitional justice mechanisms
can be instigated to function fully and effectively
throughout their necessary life span. Enduring peace
in South Sudan and justice for its people requires that
these steps be taken immediately and with urgency.
The President: I thank Ms. Gilmore for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I am pleased and
honoured to address the Security Council under your
presidency, Sir. Permit me to begin by congratulating
you and your delegation on assuming that responsibility
for the month of March and for the manner in which you
have managed the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I would like to assure you of the full support
and cooperation of my delegation in your endeavours
for the few remaining hours of your presidency.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS); Mr. Stephen
O’Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
16-09037

31/03/2016

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Affairs; Ms. Kate Gilmore, Deputy High Commissioner
for Human Rights; and Mr. Festus Mogae, Chairperson
of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission
(JMEC), for their briefings, which have provided
more depth with regard to the issues raised during
this meeting.
First and foremost, I would like to reiterate to the
Security Council the commitment of my Government to
the implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Thus
far, we have implemented what has been required of the
parties by the Agreement. The Government of South
Sudan is grateful for and appreciative of the efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
international community, including members of the
Troika, and the European Union (EU), for enabling the
parties to sign the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in August 2015.
The implementation of the peace process is
progressing well despite the delays in the formation
of the Transitional Government of National Unity.
Nevertheless, the arrival in Juba of 22 Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition (SPLM/A
in Opposition) senior police officers, 39 and 40
commissioned and non-commissioned officers,
respectively, as well as the 15 bodyguards of Mr. Riek
Machar — we have received a total number of 130
troops in Juba — is a step in the right direction.
My Government has committed to transporting the
SPLA in Opposition forces from Kaldak to Malakal,
while some of the forces are in Bentiu and Pagak. The
forces in Pagak will be airlifted from Gambella in
Ethiopia. We acknowledge and appreciate the assistance
of UNMISS, the Troika and the EU in airlifting them
to Juba. As agreed by the parties and JMEC, by the
end of this week, if everything remains as planned and
UNMISS, the Troika and the EU continue to airlift
the SPLM/A in Opposition from the aforementioned
locations, the entire 1,370 agreed forces will be in Juba,
paving the way for Mr. Riek Machar’s eventual arrival
there. Thereafter, the formation of the Transitional
Government of National Unity will be completed.
As far as the humanitarian situation in the country
is concerned, as I stated before the Council in my
statement last month (S/PV.7628), the humanitarian
situation in my country has not been exclusively caused
by conflict, as the humanitarians would want the
world to believe. As we focus on the conflict-related

S/PV.7663

humanitarian situation, we should not forget the dire
situation caused by climate change, in particular long
drought and heavy rains, which more often than not
have a devastating effect on the population.
The 1996 World Food Summit described a state
of food security as existing when all constituents
within a nation State, at all periods of time, have both
physical as well as economic access to nurturing food
in a sufficient quantity. Dietary needs must be met
and preferences should support a healthy and active
lifestyle. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization, the four critical pillars of food security
have been identified as the availability of food,
access to the population, utilization and, finally,
stability. The principal consideration for South Sudan
as a new country is the fact that the right to food is
inherent within the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and is vitally important in order to enjoy other
rights. Similarly, while the 1996 World Food Summit
established that food insecurity should not be employed
as a tool for political or economic pressure, the reality
is less clear.
It is the hope of the Government of South Sudan that
with the implementation of the Peace Agreement and
the Non-Governmental Organization Act, governance
and the humanitarian situation will improve and allow
the displaced persons both in camps for internally
displaced persons and points of contact to return home.
The Government of South Sudan regrets the incident
reports by the humanitarian agencies and the loss of
the lives of some humanitarian workers. It is not the
wish of the Government of South Sudan to continue
to fall into the abyss. It is certainly in our interest to
promote stability and national healing. Considering the
reports on the ground, the Government of South Sudan
commits to providing as much assistance as it can to the
community of humanitarian workers in order to help
facilitate their work, as they aid our people with vital
services. It is our hope that there will be a decrease
in these regrettable incidents and that normalcy, an
unknown phenomenon in South Sudan, will begin to
become a reality.
I would like to conclude by saying that my
Government has officially responded to the recent
Human Rights Council report on my country. My
delegation also acknowledges the decision of the
Human Rights Council, at its last cycle, to establish a
three-person Commission to report annually to it. My
country is also preparing its first universal periodic

16-090379/10

S/PV.7663

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

31/03/2016

review report, to be delivered in October. Nevertheless,
my Government does not accept the allegation of
organized and systemic killing, torture and rape
attributed to the Government’s soldiers and its allied
militia. I would like to quote here from the response of
my Government:

Council for the month of March, I would like to express
the sincere appreciation of the delegation of Angola to
the members of the Council, especially my colleagues
the Permanent Representatives, their respective staff
and to the Secretariat of the Council for all the support
they have given to us.

“It is acknowledged that the SPLA, the
SPLA-IO and other criminals use the same uniform.
Unless the culprits are physically apprehended,
it is impossible to determine whether it is the
Government’s soldiers and its allied militia, the
SPLA-IO or other armed criminals who committed
the crime.”

Indeed it has been a busy month, and one in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done
it alone and without the hard work, support and
positive contributions of every delegation and the
representatives of the Secretariat, as well as all relevant
conference service officers. As we end our presidency,
I know I speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the
delegation of China good luck in the month of April.

That quote is consistent with a previous report of the
Secretary-General, which stated that the SPLA uniform
is widely available.
The President: Before inviting Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject, as this is the last scheduled meeting of the

10/10

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

16-09037
