S/2014/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 January 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the work of the
United Nations to help States and subregional and regional
entities in Africa in fighting terrorism
I. Introduction
1.
On 21 May 2013, the Security Council considered the challenges posed by
terrorism in Africa in the context of maintaining international peace and security. In
a presidential statement issued after the debate, the Council invited me to submit a
concise report providing a comprehensive survey and assessment of the relevant
work of the United Nations to help States and subregional and regional entities in
Africa in fighting terrorism, with a view to continuing consideration of possible
steps in this regard (S/PRST/2013/5).
2.
In accordance with the presidential statement, the present report provides an
overview of United Nations activities throughout Africa in assisting Member States
to address terrorism, as guided by the relevant General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. These primarily include, but are not limited to, Security
Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
1624 (2005) and General Assembly resolution 60/288 on the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy adopted by the Assembly in 2006 and its subsequent
review resolutions. The report also assesses the impact of the assistance and
provides recommendations for the future work of the United Nations.
3.
Although comprehensive in its scope of activities, the report is not a complete
listing of all counter-terrorism-related activities conducted by the United Nations in
Africa. Many of our efforts relating to peace and security, development, good
governance, rule of law and human rights do not have counter-terrorism as an
objective per se although they contribute to the prevention and adequate response to
terrorism.

II. Terrorism in Africa
4.
Terrorism remains a serious threat to peace and security across Africa. It is a
driving factor in an increasing number of conflict situations.
5.
My recent visit to the Sahel region reinforced my belief in the importance of
considering peace, security, development and human rights in an interconnected
manner. To be effective, counter-terrorism efforts need to address not only the
14-20321 (E) 150114

*1420321*

S/2014/9

symptoms but also the conditions that create the environment that enables terrorist
organizations to prosper. The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region
has the potential to have a decisive impact on the region by providing long-term
support for peace and security efforts, sustainable growth, human development and
resilience (see S/PRST/2013/5).
6.
In Mali, terrorists came close to destroying the basic State structure, thereby
affecting the stability of a country and of an entire region. Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa and Ansar Eddine
continue their activities in northern Mali with spillover effects in neighbouring
countries. They put the presence and activities of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) at risk.
7.
In North Africa and the Sahel-Sahara region, the impact of armed groups,
including the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, with extremist ideologies has
increased. Taking advantage of political instability in several North African
countries, they have been able to strengthen their existing network and widen the
scope of their activities. Their intent and capability to plan attacks was evidenced in
Algeria and the Niger in 2013. In Libya, Ansar al-Sharia has strengthened its
presence in the east, in particular in Derna and Benghazi, and has carried out
numerous assassinations of members of the national security forces and other State
institutions.
8.
Porous borders and weak State structures in southern Libya have provided an
enabling environment for increased presence and activities of terrorist groups in the
Sahel. Moreover, they directly transfer instability to neighbouring regions: the flow
of arms from Libya to the Central African subregion, particularly the Central
African Republic, has contributed to an escalation of violence that poses
considerable threats to the security and stability of the entire subregion.
9.
Despite robust actions taken by relevant Governments, Boko Haram and its
offshoot Ansaru carry on their deadly attacks in Nigeria. The group has exploited
the porous border between Nigeria and Cameroon and abducted foreign nationals in
Cameroon. Terrorist activities by Boko Haram have driven an estimated 45,000
Nigerian refugees and returning migrants into Cameroon, Chad, and the Niger,
among whom are suspected insurgents. Central Africa has also become the main
theatre of operation of the Lord’s Resistance Army, which is responsible for serious
and widespread human rights violations and is considered a terrorist group by the
African Union.
10. In Eastern Africa, Al-Shabaab is increasingly engaging in asymmetric warfare
as a result of the military campaign conducted by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali National Army. Al-Shabaab is demonstrating an
improved ability to launch complex terrorist attacks, including in the wider region,
as recently illustrated by the Westgate Mall attack of September 2013 in Nairobi.
Al-Shabaab has also reportedly been able to secure the support of other international
terrorist networks. The group reportedly has strong links with Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula and has provided training in Somalia to individual terrorists from
Nigeria and countries with a closer proximity to its borders. Reports of Al-Shabaab
providing training to Boko Haram and Al-Hidjra personnel cannot be substantiated.
In addition, attacks by Al-Shabaab and affiliated groups in Uganda and Kenya have
demonstrated its reach and recruitment capacity in Somali communities in those

2/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

countries. Such alliances enable them to engage in wider efforts aimed at
destabilizing the African continent.
11. Even the Southern African region is not immune to acts of terrorism. There
have been a series of isolated incidents ranging from bombings to alleged Al-Qaidalinked training in South Africa. Also, there have been warnings of Al-Qaida cells in
Zambia, and both South Africa and Zambia have extradited suspected terrorists in
the past.
12. The picture is further complicated by the increasing cooperation between
criminal networks and terrorist groups, especially in West Africa and the Sahel
where organized criminal networks pose a major threat to peace and stability. 1
Kidnappings for ransom have been conducted directly by Al-Qaida affiliates and
provide a major source of income for these groups. The increasing evidence of
opportunistic linkages between organized criminal groups and terrorists has
reinforced the need for comprehensive and multidimensional assistance to address
interrelated security challenges.

III. Activities of the United Nations to help States and subregional
and regional entities in Africa in fighting terrorism
13. Addressing the varied challenges posed by terrorist groups requires robust
responses across a broad spectrum of activities, from fostering development to good
governance and the rule of law and from promoting human rights to addressing the
conditions conducive to terrorism.
14. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy identifies capacitybuilding as a central element of global counter-terrorism efforts. The CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force and the United Nations entities operating
within its framework have responded to the needs of African Member States in line
with their mandate and areas of expertise. Increasingly, the United Nations has been
working with regional and subregional organizations to amplify the impact of its
work.
15. While the United Nations has a critical role to play in capacity-building
efforts, it is the Governments of Africa themselves that are at the forefront.
Moreover, as terrorism often transcends borders, it is critical that Governments
cooperate regionally and even interregionally to counter terrorist actions. In this
regard, strengthened cooperation, especially between Sahel and Maghreb States,
between Sahel and Central African States, between East African and Maghreb
States, and between Middle Eastern and East African States, is essential.
16. The United Nations has provided assistance across all four pillars of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which calls for action towards
addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism; preventing and
combating terrorism; building the capacity of countries to prevent and combat
terrorism and to strengthen the role of the United Nations system in that regard; and
ensuring respect for human rights and the rule of law while countering terrorism.
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have also provided relevant
__________________
1 See the report of the Secretary-General on transnational organized crime and illicit drug

trafficking in West Africa and the Sahel region of 17 June 2013 (S/2013/359).

14-20321

3/23

S/2014/9

technical and other assistance to States towards implementing various General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions related to counter-terrorism.
17. The comprehensive survey of United Nations assistance contained in the
present report reviews, in section A, the United Nations work in cooperation with
Member States and, in section B, its work in cooperation with subregional, regional
and international organizations. In both sections, activities are grouped under the
thematic areas identified by the Global Strategy.

A.

United Nations work in cooperation with Member States
Tackling the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
Promoting dialogue, understanding and countering the appeal of terrorism
18. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy calls for the promotion
of dialogue, tolerance and understanding among civilizations, cultures, peoples and
religions and for the establishment of relevant education and public awareness
programmes.
19. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) is pursuing initiatives in the fields of culture, education and media. To
strengthen the protection of culture, UNESCO is working with the international
community to prevent the destruction of, or damage to, cultural heritage and the
trafficking of cultural property, stressing that cultural heritage and the values that it
enshrines are a unifying force for reconciliation and peacebuilding. In Mali,
UNESCO helped to safeguard cultural heritage and expressions, which suffered
repeated attacks during the recent conflict. Following the adoption of Security
Council resolution 2100 (2013) establishing MINUSMA with support for cultural
preservation as part of its mandate, UNESCO has continued to work with United
Nations partners to integrate the safeguarding of cultural heritage in the
peacekeeping operation and recovery efforts.
20. Promoting dialogue and mutual understanding towards peace in the region has
been the focus of a cooperation agreement between UNESCO and Saudi Arabia in
support of the Abdullah bin Abdulaziz International Programme for a Culture of
Peace and Dialogue. Projects aimed at developing a culture of dialogue have been
implemented in Egypt, Libya and Tunisia.
21. In West Africa, UNESCO and the African Development Bank provide support
to a peace and development project of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) which is developing educational tools for the promotion of
human rights education, citizenship, a culture of peace, democracy and regional
integration in the formal education system of 15 Member States. In North Africa,
UNESCO assists countries in the revision and adaptation of curricula, textbooks and
other learning materials to counter cultural, religious and gender-based stereotypes.
22. Given the role of radicalization in the spread of terrorism and the importance
of focusing on young people in preventative actions, UNESCO continued to
provide, in collaboration with United Nations agencies and country teams, policy
advice and technical assistance to support the Governments of Burundi, Ghana,
Liberia, Mali and Sierra Leone in reviewing or developing integrated and inclusive
public policies on young people. UNESCO also developed a project in Mauritania

4/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

that focuses on teaching young people about the skills and values needed to promote
tolerance and dialogue. In collaboration with the Ministry of State for Youth and the
Ministry of Higher Education in Egypt, UNESCO developed a gender-sensitive
manual on democracy.
23. Since community radio plays a key role in many aspects of the daily life of
local communities, UNESCO trained young people in South Africa to utilize
community radio with a view to promoting social inclusion, creating platforms for
dialogue and building societies where peace is a reality for all. UNESCO also
strengthened capacities for youth-led social entrepreneurship and promoted a culture
of peace by providing “springboard” fellowships through the International
Fellowships Programme and through its work with the Guidance, Counselling and
Youth Development Centre for Africa in Malawi.
24. UNESCO also works with the media as an important vector for promoting
tolerance, implementing programmes in the field of media and information literacy.
In June 2013, it held an international conference on the theme “Promoting media
and information literacy as a means to promote cultural diversity” in Nigeria.
25. Through its conflict-related development analysis, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) is engaged in conducting and applying conflict
analysis to support evidence-based conflict prevention efforts. UNDP is supporting
security sector reform and local community security through its peace consolidation
and governance programme covering Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger.
Countering violent extremism and incitement to commit terrorist acts
26. The United Nations Alliance of Civilizations developed programmes in Africa
to prevent radicalization. One of these programmes focuses on Nigerian
communities and targets young men, women and community leaders to facilitate
dialogue and engagement among members of different groups. The Alliance
currently supports two civil society-led projects in the Horn of Africa designed to
reduce tensions in the coastal region of Kenya by assessing the trends in
radicalization and violent extremism and empowering young people who are
targeted by extremist groups. In addition, and in order to counter radical narratives,
the Alliance, with support from the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
Office, will undertake another project to develop capacity-building initiatives to
counter the use of incendiary narratives among Somali diaspora media professionals
to improve relations across clan lines and political divides.
27. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate continued to promote
the implementation of Security Council resolution 1624 (2005). In this regard, the
Directorate organized, in cooperation with the International Centre for Counterterrorism, and with the support of the Netherlands, its second workshop on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) in July 2012 in Rabat. The workshop was
held within the framework of a Directorate global initiative that brings together
government and civil society representatives to discuss, inter alia, the
criminalization of incitement to commit acts of terrorism and measures, including
social policy measures, to address violent extremism and radicalization.
28. At the third regional workshop on effective implementation of Security
Council resolution 1624 (2005) facilitated by the Directorate and held in Algiers in

14-20321

5/23

S/2014/9

June 2013, representatives from Governments, civil society and intergovernmental
organizations, including the African Union and the Organization for Islamic
Cooperation, discussed effective strategies for prohibiting and countering
incitement. In early 2014, the Directorate will facilitate a national workshop for
Kenya to discuss issues pertaining to resolution 1624 (2005) as a follow-up to the
regional workshop for East African States held in Nairobi in November 2011.
Rehabilitating and reintegrating violent extremists
29. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and the
African Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism of the African Union
organized a regional consultation on rehabilitating and reintegrating violent
extremists in February 2013. The event served as a basis to develop a regional
programme focusing on Algeria, Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and
Nigeria, aimed at building the capacity of Member States to design, plan, develop
and implement rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for violent extremists in
prisons. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute
conducted an initial consultation with the Ministry of the Interior of Nigeria in
October 2013 and will collaborate with other West African Member States to build
on existing programmes.
Preventing and combating terrorism
Combating money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism
30. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) provided capacity development advice
on anti-money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism to several
Governments in Africa, including the Comoros, Ghana, Morocco, Nigeria,
Sao Tomé and Principe, South Sudan and the Sudan.
31. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), through its
Terrorism Prevention Branch, continued to assist countries in implementing the
universal legal framework against terrorism, including with respect to countering
terrorism financing and freezing of assets. Specialized training for criminal justice
officers was also provided to relevant national institutions in the region, including
for example, a workshop on the freezing of assets and the implementation of the
sanctions regime pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011), held in June 2013 in Rabat. The UNODC Global Programme Against
Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of Terrorism also
provided continued technical assistance to countries in North Africa to enhance
national capacities to tackle money-laundering and terrorism financing. Of
particular importance is the continuation of a joint UNODC/World Customs
Organization training initiative on cash couriers.
Building the capacity of States to prevent proliferation and respond weapons of mass
destruction attacks
32. Since 2012, the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), has undertaken country visits to Madagascar, the Republic of Congo
and, most recently, to Burkina Faso (in 2013) to raise awareness and help develop
national plans for the implementation of the resolution. An invitation has also been
received to visit the Niger in January 2014.

6/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

33. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, within
the framework of the European Union Chemical, Biological, Radiological and
Nuclear Mitigation Centres of Excellence Initiative, established regional offices in
Algeria, Kenya and Morocco to mitigate chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear risks by promoting a coherent policy, improving coordination and
preparedness and offering a comprehensive approach covering legal, scientific,
enforcement and technical issues.
Building the capacity of States to prevent and combat terrorism and to
strengthen the role of the United Nations system in that regard
Facilitating integrated assistance for countering terrorism
34. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office developed the
Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism (I-ACT) Initiative to assist
requesting Member States with the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in an integrated manner, provide assistance across all
pillars of the Strategy and coordinate the activities of the United Nations system.
The partner country is closely involved in the design of the activities to improve the
effectiveness, impact and sustainability of the technical assistance. This platform,
which is based on a thorough mapping and gap analysis of capacity-building needs
in a country, currently facilitates the delivery of technical assistance to Nigeria and
Burkina Faso. Joint projects were developed and implemented with the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate, UNODC and UNESCO.
Enhancing the implementation of legal and international instruments, providing legal
assistance and enhancing the capacity of criminal justice officials
35. In 2012 and 2013, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
continued to monitor and promote the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) in Africa. The Directorate conducted assessment visits and
fact-finding missions, on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, to
23 countries, including Angola, Botswana, Djibouti, Gabon, Mauritania, Morocco,
Mozambique, the Niger and Zambia.
36. In December 2013, the Directorate organized, in cooperation with the
Government of Tunisia, a seminar on bringing terrorists to justice, as part of a series
of seminars for senior counter-terrorism prosecutors to enable practitioners to share
challenges and lessons learned and discuss good practices and the way forward on
specific thematic issues related to the requirement of Security Council resolution
1373 (2001). A previous seminar focusing on the role of the prosecutor in
preventing terrorism was held in June 2012 in Algiers.
37. UNODC continued to provide legal technical assistance and specialized
capacity-building training to criminal justice officials to prevent and combat
terrorism. Addressing gaps in the legal regime against terrorism and strengthening
capacity to effectively implement international cooperation mechanisms have also
been among UNODC priorities in Africa. In that context, UNODC provided support
and technical assistance for the development of a Regional Judicial Platform,
established in 2010, with the participation of Burkina Faso, Mali, Mauritania and
the Niger. This network of national focal points cooperates to facilitate extradition
and mutual legal assistance in criminal matters. The 4th annual meeting of the
Platform was held in Nouakchott from 28 to 30 October 2013, with the participation

14-20321

7/23

S/2014/9

of the League of Arab States as an observer. Based on this successful experience,
UNODC also developed a regional network of prosecutors and central authorities
for the member States of ECOWAS and Mauritania. For the Sahel region, UNODC
developed two practical guides to help criminal justice officials address terrorist
activities.
38. Building on the previous work of UNODC in Nigeria, UNODC and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate developed, in partnership with
the European Union, a multi-year programme with Nigeria on strengthening
criminal justice responses for multidimensional security, which was launched in
November 2013. The project is aimed at strengthening the capacity and
interoperability of security and national criminal justice institutions involved in
counter-terrorism investigations, prosecutions and adjudications. The three entities
also launched a four-year programme on effective counter-terrorism investigations
and prosecutions while respecting human rights and the rule of law in the Maghreb.
The first regional workshop is planned for early 2014 and will target investigators,
prosecutors and policymakers. A number of national capacity-building activities are
also planned.
39. Medium- to long-term action plans were developed between UNODC and
Governments in the Maghreb, forging strategic partnerships for the provision of
sustained, specialized and on-the-ground technical and capacity-building assistance
to strengthen national counter-terrorism legislation; promote the protection of
human rights and the rule of law while countering terrorism; and enhance
specialized national capacity to investigate, prosecute and adjudicate terrorism
cases.
40. UNODC continued to provide counter-terrorism technical assistance to
countries in Eastern Africa. For example, in close consultation with the national
authorities of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia, it elaborated country-specific
long-term assistance programmes to strengthen their criminal justice responses to
terrorism in accordance with the rule of law and with due respect for human rights.
Implementation of assistance activities have started in Djibouti and Ethiopia and are
expected for early 2014 in Kenya and Somalia.
41. UNODC also strives to support Member States in their efforts to strengthen
regional cooperation, especially on criminal matters. A regional workshop for
central authorities in the Middle East and North African States will be held in
January 2014 in Morocco within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate/UNODC global initiative. UNODC will organize
a national workshop on international cooperation in criminal matters related to
terrorism, transnational organized crime and corruption for Namibia in March 2014.
42. In February 2013, the United Republic of Tanzania hosted the fourth
prosecutors’ seminar on bringing terrorists to justice within the framework of
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate seminars addressing the policy
aspects of the prevention and prosecution of terrorist acts. As a follow-up to the
seminar, the Directorate and the Centre on Global Counter-terrorism Cooperation
held, with the support of the Governments of Australia and New Zealand, the first
workshop in a series of four for law enforcement officers and prosecutors from East
Africa (Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania) on
bringing terrorists to justice, in May 2013 in Kampala. The aim of the workshops is

8/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

to strengthen national criminal justice systems, inter-agency cooperation and
coordination and regional cooperation in countering terrorism.
43. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office jointly organized
with the Government of Ethiopia a regional workshop on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in East Africa, held in Addis
Ababa in July 2011. The workshop served as a forum for the exchange of
perspectives and priorities and the identification of practical ways to build State
capacity. It also served as a starting point for participating States and relevant
regional organizations to develop a regional counter-terrorism strategy
implementation plan of action, with support from the Task Force and its relevant
entities. Participants called for additional efforts to generate and promote effective
leadership in the region. In addition, States called for enhancing operational
cooperation within the region on key areas relevant to the Global Strategy.
44. On 20 September 2013, the Counter-Terrorism Committee held a special
meeting with Member States of the Sahel region as well as international and
regional organizations on enhancing cooperation and technical assistance,
emphasizing the need to deliver capacity-building in a coordinated, coherent and
integrated manner.
45. The International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) undertook
capacity-building programmes on counter-terrorism for the Sahel region and the
Horn of Africa to enhance the sharing of information among agencies, strengthen its
integrated operational response in the region and expand the use of its secure
communications network, databases and services. The programmes assisted border
control officers, immigration officials, counter-terrorism experts and officials from
the INTERPOL National Central Bureaux in Algeria, Burkina Faso, Chad, the
Comoros, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
the Niger, Nigeria, Seychelles, Somalia, Tunisia, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania.
46. The World Customs Organization works with several North and West African
and Sahel countries at the bilateral level and as part of its regional initiatives to
enhance border management. Regional Intelligence Liaison Offices in Cameroon,
Morocco and Senegal as well as regional training centres in Egypt and Morocco
provide support on intelligence analysis, including with respect to security and
counter-terrorism. The World Customs Organization supports Libya on border
control questions. In East and Southern Africa, it supports the national Customs
Enforcement Network, which allows countries to record and analyse information on
suspicious consignments and persons, including on counter-terrorism-related
aspects.
47. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) assists the
Government of Libya in reforming its security institutions to provide basic
capabilities to enforce the rule of law throughout the country and thereby indirectly
enhances capacities to fight terrorism.
48. Within the framework of the Somali New Deal Compact, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) developed, with the support of UNODC
and UNDP and in close cooperation with the Federal Government of Somalia, rule
of law activities in support of the Somali police and justice sectors. The
establishment of a capable corrections structure that provides the necessary security

14-20321

9/23

S/2014/9

to those held on remand or for sentencing is also receiving urgent attention from
UNSOM and UNDP. In October 2012, UNODC conducted in Kampala a national
workshop for Somalia entitled “Universal legal framework against terrorism:
international cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of crimes at sea”. It
was co-sponsored by the Governments of Uganda and Italy.
Enhancing transport security
49. The International Maritime Organization (IMO) continued to assist the Federal
Government of Somalia and the regional authorities of Somaliland, Puntland and
Galmudug, in partnership with other United Nations agencies, to advance the
development of the Somali Maritime Resource and Security Strategy through the
Kampala process and to help review and improve national legislation to implement
the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
Ensuring respect for human rights for all and the rule of law while
countering terrorism
Promoting human rights while countering terrorism
50. The Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism conducted an official visit to
Burkina Faso from 8 to 12 April 2013, at the invitation of the Government, to gather
information on the current situation in Burkina Faso and thereby assist the
Government in its efforts to counter terrorism while respecting human rights and
promote the implementation of international instruments. This invitation as well as
the cooperation the Special Rapporteur received during his visit reflects the
commitment of the Government of Burkina Faso to ensuring that its efforts to
counter terrorism are in line with international human rights laws and standards. 2
51. On 29 October 2013, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) participated in a conference on the new Tunisian
counter-terrorism draft law organized by the Ministry of Human Rights and
Transitional Justice of the Government of Tunisia. OHCHR had provided written
comments on the draft law aimed at improving the human rights guarantees of both
victims and suspects of terrorism. This initiative supports national efforts to ensure
that Tunisia’s counter-terrorism legislation is aligned with international human
rights laws and standards, taking into account the recommendations issued by the
former Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism (see A/HRC/16/51/Add.2 and
A/HRC/20/14/Add.1).

__________________
2 The report of the country visit to Burkina Faso will be presented at the twenty-fifth session of

the Human Rights Council in March 2014 (A/HRC/25/59/Add.1). The end of visit statement of
the Special Rapporteur is available from http://www.ohchr.org.

10/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

B.

United Nations work in cooperation with subregional, regional and
international organizations
Tackling the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism
Resolving conflicts and mitigating regional repercussions
52. Peacekeeping operations and special political missions are increasingly
mandated with disarmament, demobilization and reintegration tasks. For example,
the Rule of Law and Security Institutions Group, along with AMISOM, engaged
closely with the Federal Government of Somalia to assist in managing the
disengagement of fighters from Al-Shabaab in line with international best practice
and human rights standards. This engagement culminated in the assessment of the
legal framework that informed UNSOM support to the Federal Government of
Somalia; the engagement of a team of trained Human Rights Officers to monitor the
functioning of the Serendi Youth Rehabilitation Centre for disengaged fighters in
Mogadishu; and an assessment of the application of best practices to design a
de-radicalization programme for disengaging Al-Shabaab fighters. The United
Nations is seeking to build upon initial experiences in Somalia to counter the
terrorist threat posed by Al-Qaida’s infiltration of Touareg non-State armed groups
in the north of Mali.
53. In addition to the unintended regional humanitarian consequences of conflicts,
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons as well as movements of illegal
armed and terrorist groups exacerbate security challenges, especially where there
are shared porous borders with fragile or unstable neighbouring States. Within the
framework of its engagement with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) on terrorism issues, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate will partner in the implementation of a project related to coordinated
border management for East African States that will be launched in 2014 as a
follow-up to the regional workshop on border control held in July 2010.
Promoting dialogue, understanding and countering the appeal of terrorism
54. UNESCO organized the Pan-African Forum entitled “Sources and resources
for a culture of peace” together with the African Union and the Government of
Angola in Luanda, from 26 to 28 March 2013. It resulted in the development of an
action plan for the culture of peace in Africa; the launch of a multi-stakeholder
partnership for the implementation of the action plan through coordinated action at
the national, subregional and regional levels; and the launch of a Pan-African
movement in support of the “Make peace happen” campaign initiated by the African
Union in 2010. In 45 countries in sub-Saharan Africa, UNESCO developed a
comprehensive mapping of current policies and resources to provide a depiction of
how a culture of peace is fostered.
55. In the 10 countries of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), UNESCO implemented a project entitled “Education for citizenship and a
culture of peace” to support the integration of education for peace and sustainable
development modules in school curricula.

14-20321

11/23

S/2014/9

Countering violent extremism and incitement to commit terrorist acts
56. My Special Representative for West Africa organized a brainstorming session
with the Resident Coordinators of the region on the symptoms of religious and
ethno-political extremism and their impact on stability in West Africa, held on
17 September 2013 in Dakar. Experts from think tanks and academia, as well as the
African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and the United Nations, including
representatives from the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office and
the Department of Safety and Security, participated in this meeting. They considered
holistic approaches to addressing the factors conducive to the spread of extremism
and terrorism in the region and how best United Nations entities can assist in
dealing with the phenomenon and its impact on peace, security and stability. They
underscored the nexus between security and development and stressed the need for
inclusive governance that is responsive to basic socioeconomic needs and pays due
regard to international human rights considerations.
57. Within the framework of its efforts to thwart incitement to commit terrorist
acts, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate co-organized with the
League of Arab States a regional workshop entitled “Ways to develop national and
regional strategies to confront acts of incitement, extremism and violence leading to
terrorism, and enhancing cultural dialogue”, held in Cairo, Egypt, in November
2013. The workshop provided a forum for the League of Arab States to consider the
findings of previous workshops on the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005)
and the relevant provisions of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, discuss good national practices and challenges, and identify potential
solutions that respect human rights and the rule of law.
Preventing and combating terrorism
Developing regional counter-terrorism strategies
58. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate work jointly with the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to contribute to the development of a
regional strategy against terrorism and the proliferation of small arms for Central
Africa. Within the framework of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa, Member States adopted a Declaration on a
Road Map for Counter-Terrorism and Non-proliferation of Arms in Central Africa at
the 33rd ministerial meeting of the Advisory Committee in December 2011.
59. The main objective of the Declaration is to strengthen customs, military,
police, economic and social cooperation established in bilateral, multilateral and
institutional mechanisms for the subregion. In line with the road map, a workshop
on a counter-terrorism strategy for Central Africa, supported by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, was held in Brazzaville in the margins of the
35th ministerial meeting of the Advisory Committee.
60. The implementation of the road map will involve the international community
as a whole and especially the United Nations, through the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, as well as the African Centre for Studies and Research on
Terrorism. Future workshops will determine regional priorities. A first workshop on
police and intelligence, jointly organized by the United Nations Regional Office for

12/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

Central Africa, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre-Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force Office and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, will be held in January 2014 in Libreville, with the financial support of
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre.
61. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre-Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force Office and the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism
will also support the Southern African Development Community (SADC) to develop
a regional counter-terrorism strategy to increase regional coordination and
collaboration in preventing and combating terrorist activities in Southern Africa.
62. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office and the IGAD
Security Sector Programme signed a memorandum of understanding in July 2012
that allows the two offices to jointly launch counter-terrorism projects in Eastern
Africa; develop national and regional counter-terrorism strategies in partnership
with States; and establish dedicated liaison and focal points for closer collaboration
and engagement.
Combating money-laundering and countering the financing of terrorism
63. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate worked closely with
the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money-Laundering in West Africa to
organize the first joint regional workshop on freezing terrorist property for the West
African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU) member States and Guinea, held
in Dakar from 11 to 13 December 2012. A similar event will be held in early 2014
for the anglophone countries of ECOWAS.
64. The Directorate and the Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities were granted observer status in the Middle East
and North Africa Financial Action Task Force in April 2012. The Directorate
subsequently participated in the Task Force plenary and co-organized a regional
workshop on the effective implementation of the Security Council resolutions,
conventions and international standards on combating money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism, held in Jordan in October 2013.
65. The Directorate, together with the Centre on Global Counter-terrorism
Cooperation and with the support of the Governments of the Netherlands and
Germany, held a subregional workshop for East African Member States on effective
monitoring of alternative remittances to prevent terrorist financing abuse, in Addis
Ababa, in December 2013. The aim of the workshop was to raise awareness of the
risk for informal money remitters who could be used to fund terrorist activities;
promote a dialogue among regulatory agencies, law enforcement officials and the
money remitters; promote financial inclusion and identify best practices. A similar
workshop for the Sahel region will be held in early 2014.
66. The Directorate worked closely with the Eastern and Southern African
Anti-money-laundering Group on issues relating to money-laundering and
countering terrorist financing. In addition to participating actively in the Group’s
plenary meetings and assisting in the delivery of training, the Directorate organized
joint events such as the regional workshop for East and Southern African States on
effective freezing of terrorist assets, held in the United Republic of Tanzania in June

14-20321

13/23

S/2014/9

2013, in cooperation with the Global Counterterrorism Forum and with the support
of the United States of America.
67. The Directorate and the Australian Reporting and Analysis Centre jointly
organized a subregional workshop for the member States of the Eastern and
Southern African Anti-money-laundering Group on controlling the cross-border
movement of cash and bearer-negotiable instruments, held in Pretoria in May 2013.
Subsequently, Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia and Zambia requested additional
bilateral training sessions. The Directorate will facilitate the delivery of the
requested training to customs officials, border police and financial intelligence units
in the first quarter of 2014.
68. IMF provided assistance to the Government of Mozambique to assess its legal
and institutional regime on anti-money-laundering/counter-financing of terrorism as
well as legal drafting advice. It also trained the staff of the Central Bank on
risk-based anti-money-laundering/counter-financing of terrorism oversight.
69. The World Bank continued to provide assistance to Member States in North
and sub-Saharan Africa along three main pillars, namely diagnostics, support to the
enactment of laws and regulations in line with the relevant international standards,
and capacity-building for policymakers and practitioners in the anti-moneylaundering/counter-financing of terrorism regime. The World Bank continued to
develop strong partnerships with United Nations agencies in implementing
assistance, such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
UNODC and the 1267 Monitoring Team, especially on asset freezing.
70. Under the framework of the Working Group on Tackling the Financing of
Terrorism of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and its global
initiative on protecting non-profit organizations from terrorist abuse, the Directorate
organized a regional workshop for East African Member States, held in March 2012
in Nairobi. The workshop discussed national practices and identified shortcomings
in the oversight of the non-profit organization sector with regard to specific terrorist
financing risks. The event was supported by the Governments of Canada and
Switzerland and the Charity Commission for England and Wales.
Building capacity to prevent proliferation and respond to weapons of mass
destruction attacks
71. To promote the ratification and implementation of the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the 2005 Amendment thereto as well as
the 2005 International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
UNODC organized workshops in Senegal and Kenya in 2013, in close cooperation
with the African Union, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
72. The United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs supports the Committee in
its activities and has organized, co-organized or supported regional workshops in
Africa to facilitate the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), hosted by
Botswana, Egypt, Ghana, Kenya and South Africa, with the participation of
50 African States as well as the African Union and several subregional
organizations, including ECCAS, ECOWAS, IGAD and SADC.
73. The twentieth Ordinary Session of the African Union Assembly, held in
January 2013, requested the African Union Commission to take the necessary steps,

14/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

in collaboration with the Committee and other stakeholders, to further promote and
enhance the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) in Africa. The African Union
organized, with the support of the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs,
the workshop on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) held on 10 and
11 December 2013 in Addis Ababa. The Committee and its experts, the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, international organizations as well as
regional and subregional organizations contributed their expertise.
74. In 2007, the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons launched a programme to strengthen cooperation with Africa on
the Chemical Weapons Convention, which was later extended to December 2013.
The programme is aimed at promoting the full and effective implementation of the
Convention in Africa and increasing participation in programmes and activities
designed to promote the peaceful uses of chemistry for economic and technological
development and enhance national protective capacities by African State parties.
Building the capacity of States to prevent and combat terrorism and to
strengthen the role of the United Nations system in that regard
Enhancing the implementation of legal and international instruments, providing legal
assistance and enhancing the capacity of law enforcement officials
75. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate continued its active
engagement with the European Union, including the European Union
Counter-Terrorism Coordinator on the Maghreb who participated in its follow-up
visit to Morocco in March 2013. The European Union is also working in partnership
with the Directorate and UNODC on strengthening the capacity of the Maghreb
States to investigate and prosecute counter-terrorism cases while respecting the rule
of law and human rights. In addition, the Directorate developed a partnership with
the Arab Maghreb Union. In November 2013, the Union participated for the first
time in a Directorate country visit to the region.
76. The Directorate collaborated closely with the African Centre for Studies and
Research on Terrorism, which participates in its assessment visits and often
contributes a regional perspective in events facilitated by the Directorate. It facilitated
an initiative with the African Centre on enhancing the use of international databases
by the Sahel countries in order to strengthen coordination, information-sharing and
cooperation among police and border authorities. This initiative will culminate in a
series of four workshops that will be rolled out in 2014 in North and West Africa.
77. In its efforts to promote regional cooperation, UNODC organized, jointly with
the Global Counterterrorism Forum, a conference on regional cooperation in
criminal matters in the Maghreb and the Sahel, held in Casablanca, Morocco, from
16 to 18 April 2013. The conference focused on challenges in the region and ways to
strengthen such cooperation. A number of practical recommendations will guide
follow-up initiatives to be jointly conducted by UNODC and the Forum in 2014.
78. UNODC and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
co-organized a regional expert workshop on implementation of the universal legal
instruments against terrorism as a way to enhance counter-terrorism cooperation in
the Mediterranean basin, held in Malaga, Spain in September 2013.
79. In order to support the implementation of the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan
against drug trafficking and transnational organized crime, the West Africa Coast

14-20321

15/23

S/2014/9

Initiative was developed by the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNODC and INTERPOL and launched
in July 2009. The first programmatic component is the establishment of
transnational crime units in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and
Sierra Leone. While the Initiative was envisaged in response to the growth of drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime in West Africa, the transnational crime
units will function as law enforcement fusion centres to support national and
regional analytical and technical capacity to respond to transnational threats. The
Initiative’s extension beyond the initial pilot States will benefit from the recent
Security Council authorization to develop national police and law enforcement
information analysis capacities on illicit arms.
80. In 2012, INTERPOL launched the West African Police Information System,
supported by the European Union. The information system allows law enforcement
agencies in 16 West African countries to collect, analyse and share police
information at the national, regional and global levels.
81. The United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region, which is
implemented by the United Nations Office for West Africa in collaboration with the
entire United Nations system, includes security as one of its three pillars, and
counter-terrorism issues figure prominently among the key regional priorities. 3 I am
pleased to note that regional Member States are starting to take ownership of the
strategy as evidenced by the organization of the ministerial meeting on the Sahel by
the Government of Mali, held on 5 November 2013 in Bamako. Participants agreed
on the establishment of a regional coordination platform which would be led by
Mali for the first two years and supported by a technical secretariat, co-chaired by
the United Nations and the African Union, with the participation of all relevant
multilateral institutions. The meeting was organized on the margins of my visit to
the Sahel region from 4 to 7 November 2013 with the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, the Presidents of the World Bank and the African Development
Bank and the Commissioner for Development of the European Union.
82. The
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task
Force
Office,
the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and UNODC worked closely
with the United Nations Office for West Africa to develop the security pillar of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region to define key principles and
priority actions. UNODC has elaborated and commenced implementing an
integrated programme in response to the challenges faced by the Sahel countries
entitled “UNODC contribution to the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel region”. UNDP is leading the Regional Inter-Agency Task Force on
Governance and contributes to advance the security pillar of the strategy on the
democratic governance and security aspects.
83. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre co-organized with the Government of Morocco
an international conference focusing on border control cooperation in the Sahel and
the Maghreb, held in Rabat in March 2013. The conference gathered police, customs
and intelligence officials from 11 countries to discuss common challenges and ways
to address them to strengthen border cooperation. The Directorate, with the
__________________
3 See the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sahel region of 14 June 2013

(S/2013/354).

16/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

assistance of relevant international organizations, including IMO, the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the World Customs Organization, the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and INTERPOL, developed a
number of capacity-building projects on border control. In particular, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre will support two border control and regional
cooperation projects. The first project is aimed at enhancing the counter-terrorism
and transnational organized crime coordination and information-sharing capacities
of States by establishing and linking six national counter-terrorism and transnational
crime units; the second project will seek to strengthen interregional cooperation on
border control by creating informal networks of intelligence, police and customs
officials in neighbouring countries that are part of different regional arrangements.
84. The World Customs Organization continued to strengthen capacity with regard
to border control as well as the prevention and detection of the trafficking of all
types of illicit goods that can be directly or indirectly used by terrorists to fund their
activities. It developed projects with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force Office, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, UNODC
and INTERPOL.
85. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office organized jointly
with the Government of Nigeria a regional workshop on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in West Africa and the Sahel,
held in Abuja in October 2013. The workshop identified key capacity-building
priorities for the region, especially in the field of border control. In addition,
participants called on the United Nations, the Task Force and other relevant
counter-terrorism bodies to continue working with national and regional actors to
promote the effective implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel region and the ECOWAS
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in an integrated and mutually reinforcing manner. The
Task Force’s I-ACT Initiative was cited by participants as a valuable tool to map
ongoing activities, identify gaps and develop programmes that address niche areas
where additional technical assistance is required.
86. The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate developed, in view
of the situation in Mali, a project aimed at addressing the issue of terrorist suspects
detained by the Malian army in order to bring them to justice. The project is being
discussed with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and MINUSMA as well
as other relevant partners, and a joint Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate/Department of Peacekeeping Operations mission to Mali is expected to
take place in early 2014.
87. To support the efforts of Governments across the globe to implement the
international counter-terrorism instruments, UNODC has elaborated several
specialized technical assistance publications and tools. These include the
counter-terrorism legal training curriculum, which is aimed at maximizing the
impact of capacity-building assistance. The Office continued to provide assistance
to criminal justice officials through capacity-building workshops and national
legislative assistance seminars.
88. The United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre-Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force Office contributed to enhancing cooperation between African experts
and other international stakeholders through, especially, the International
Conference on National and Regional Counter-Terrorism Strategies held in Bogota

14-20321

17/23

S/2014/9

in January 2013 and the International Conference on Engaging Partners for
Capacity-Building: United Nations Collaboration with Counter-Terrorism Centres
held in Riyadh in February 2013.
89. The 1267 Monitoring Team continued its engagement in African countries to
assist in the implementation of the 1267 regime by participating in thematic
workshops and conducting country visits. In 2013, it visited Ethiopia, Kenya and the
Sudan and held talks with officials from the Federal Government of Somalia.
90. Although the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) does not have a counter-terrorism mandate, in the exercise of its function,
UNHCR works very closely with Governments to promote protection-sensitive
entry systems as part of broader migration management policies and practices. A
range of activities in the field, including the provision of training, technical
assistance and capacity-building to border guards, immigration and related officials
have been undertaken to help maintain the integrity of national asylum systems,
including through preserving the civilian character of asylum, thus contributing
positively to the overall security environment.
Enhancing transport and maritime security
91. IMO continued to collaborate with UNSOM, UNODC and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to support the sustainable
development of the Somali maritime sector, the creation of alternative livelihoods to
piracy, and the protection and management of Somalia’s maritime resources.
92. The Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast
of Somalia, whose Board is chaired by the Department of Political Affairs,
continues to be an efficient mechanism for supporting the international community’s
efforts to counter piracy off the coast of Somalia. The Trust Fund has supported the
initiatives of FAO, IMO, UNDP, UNODC, UNSOM and INTERPOL. Collectively,
the Trust Fund has supported a range of activities, including strengthening the
regional capacity to prosecute persons suspected of acts of piracy and sanction those
convicted; providing basic comfort and minimum treatment standards for prisoners;
enhancing the capacity of judiciaries and prosecutorial services; building up police
departments; targeting illicit financial flows derived from pirate activities; and
creating greater public awareness.
93. ICAO has substantial engagement with African States and regional and
subregional organizations, particularly with respect to global aviation security and
border integrity policy development as well as capacity-building assistance. ICAO
activities include assessment missions, technical assistance, training, workshops and
conferences to enhance the capacity and awareness of regional and subregional
organizations.
94. IMO assisted in the development and subsequent adoption of the new Code of
Conduct concerning the Prevention and Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery
Against Ships and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa, signed in
June 2013 in Cameroon. It also supported the development of maritime law
enforcement capacity and launched a new West and Central Africa Maritime
Security Trust Fund for that purpose. IMO delivered national table top exercises on
maritime contingency planning in 2012 and 2013.

18/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

95. In cooperation with ICAO and IMO, UNODC is finalizing a module on
transport-related terrorism offences as part of its counter-terrorism legal training
curriculum.
96. The Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat continued to provide advice and
assistance to Member States and international organizations on the legal framework
against terrorism, including maritime security issues. It also reports on
developments regarding maritime security to the General Assembly in the reports of
the Secretary-General on oceans and the law of the sea. In that regard, it provided
input to the African Union 2050 Africa’s Integrated Maritime Strategy adopted by
the African Ministers of Transport in 2012.
Ensuring respect for human rights for all and the rule of law while
countering terrorism
Protecting human rights and the rule of law while countering terrorism
97. It has been noted that in some instances, owing to the perceived urgency and
particularity of terrorist threats, counter-terrorism investigations and responses
carried out by national law enforcement and security forces may have been delinked
from human rights considerations in comparison to regular criminal policing
situations, leading to important gaps. In order to assist in filling these gaps and to
improve the capacity of Member States to prevent and respond to terrorist threats
and conduct investigations in the event of a terrorist attack that are compliant with
human rights and the rule of law, the Working Group on Protecting Human Rights
While Countering Terrorism of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
launched, under the leadership of OHCHR, a two-year global project in April 2013
on training and capacity-building for law enforcement officials on human rights, the
rule of law and the prevention of terrorism.
98. The Working Group conducted two workshops, in Amman in April 2013 and
Ouagadougou in October 2013 respectively, entitled “Identifying key needs and
developing training best practices” to map the training needs of States; raise
awareness of the project among experts and State representatives; and establish a
roster of experts who could assist in developing the training curricula for the
project. High-level law enforcement and security officials as well as expert
facilitators from Algeria, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Egypt, Libya, Mali, Morocco,
Nigeria, Senegal and Tunisia attended.
99. The Working Group will implement the training that forms part of this project
in 2014, with a priority on Member States in the Sahel region and North Africa.
100. As part of its counter-terrorism legal training curriculum, UNODC is
elaborating a module on human rights and criminal justice responses to terrorism.
The curriculum examines human rights questions typically arising in the various
stages of the criminal justice process in terrorism cases.

IV. Observations
101. The primary responsibility of preventing and combating terrorism remains
with African Member States and with its subregional and regional entities. The
United Nations, together with its partners, is committed to providing the necessary
assistance.

14-20321

19/23

S/2014/9

102. As the present report highlights, the range and breadth of United Nations
activities in support of African Member States is growing. It is also encouraging that
many States have shown willingness to seek United Nations assistance to fill key
gaps in their counter-terrorism activities. While these are indicators of significant
progress, much still needs to be accomplished.
103. We must expand our efforts to ensure a balanced and comprehensive approach
to counter-terrorism assistance in Africa. This means an emphasis on implementing
all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as well as a
concerted effort to implement and abide by all relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.
104. The most efficient utilization of our resources will remain a high priority. I
also encourage the donor community to generously respond to appeals in respect of
counter-terrorism efforts in Africa.
105. Developing systematic and consistent monitoring and evaluation mechanisms
to identify those United Nations counter-terrorism activities that are effective and
ready to be scaled up and those that should be phased out has become critical. It is
vital for our collective credibility and effectiveness that the United Nations deliver
concrete and measurable results.
Improving and streamlining capacity-building efforts
106. The assessment work carried out by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate has resulted in a comprehensive survey of the legal,
institutional and operational measures in place in 23 African States to combat
terrorism, as well as recommendations to address identified shortfalls and the need
for technical assistance. The Directorate will continue its assessment work of other
African countries as well as monitor progress in States already assessed.
107. The I-ACT Initiative of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force has
proved valuable in providing assistance in Burkina Faso and Nigeria. I am pleased
that preparation is under way to extend it to additional countries in West Africa and
encourage further expansion to other countries. Moreover, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre will expand its assistance to developing and
implementing regional strategies.
108. The specialized legal assistance provided by UNODC since 2003 to African
Member States to support their efforts to establish and strengthen the legal regime
against terrorism has resulted in important progress. Whereas in early 2003 very few
countries in Africa had ratified at least 4 of the then existing 12 international legal
instruments against terrorism, most of the countries have now ratified the majority.
African States have also undertaken review and revisions of their national
counter-terrorism legislative provisions to incorporate the instruments and to
comply with Security Council resolutions and international standards related to the
rule of law and human rights.
109. The need for in-depth and tailored assistance in the area of criminal justice,
especially in investigations, prosecutions and adjudication of terrorist cases, from
the perspective of both bringing terrorists to justice and preventing terrorist acts, is
another important area to address. In that regard, UNODC, in collaboration with other
United Nations entities, should continue to develop and implement country-specific

20/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

long-term assistance programmes to respond to the need to strengthen national
criminal justice systems.
110. It is important that special attention also be given to the development of
specialized training for investigators, prosecutors and judges in such areas as
countering the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes; supporting and assisting
victims of acts of terrorism; tackling chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
terrorism; countering transport-related terrorist offences; and countering the financing
of terrorism. Border control and border management also need additional efforts.
111. The United Nations and international partners must make it a key priority to
work closely with recipient countries to integrate human rights and a rule-of-lawbased approach in their national counter-terrorism policies.
Enhancing coordination and cooperation within the United Nations system, with
recipient countries and regional organizations
112. Coordination among United Nations entities in the delivery of
counter-terrorism assistance is critical to avoid duplication, enhance effectiveness in
the delivery of assistance and ensure more rational allocation of resources. I
welcome the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office to
improve coordination and coherence among Task Force entities in this regard.
113. I encourage United Nations agencies to work more closely with recipient
countries and to promote coordination among them through the assistance provided.
I have adopted measures to improve coordination in all rule of law-related activities,
which should also be reflected in the area of counter-terrorism. The work of the
United Nations on developing regional and national counter-terrorism strategies
provides a good political framework for countries to collaborate. However, Member
States would also benefit from regular interaction with each other and with regional,
subregional and international organizations. I urge United Nations entities to do
more to facilitate such interaction.
114. The enhanced cooperation with regional and subregional organizations
contributes to giving local ownership to United Nations activities in Africa: the
increasing collaboration with the African Union and its regional economic
commissions as well as with IGAD and SADC is to be highlighted. I welcome this
trend which ensures that local and regional realities are taken into account.
However, I ask that United Nations entities further increase collaboration by sharing
information, exchanging best practices and helping organizations to develop
technical expertise in key areas. A more widespread use of the relevant instruments
developed by the African Union to prevent and combat terrorism would greatly
contribute to that effort.
115. Another positive development is the new partnerships forged by the United
Nations with other international partners present in Africa, such as the European
Union, to develop joint programmes, and the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
whose working groups tackle counter-terrorism capacity gaps throughout Africa to
provide tailored assistance.

14-20321

21/23

S/2014/9

Enhancing preventative activities to help States to address conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism
116. This survey reveals that most of the counter-terrorism assistance provided by
the United Nations in Africa is geared towards strengthening State capacities to
combat terrorism. However, for a comprehensive counter-terrorism approach, it is
necessary that States also develop and implement measures that address conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism.
117. The values of good governance, respect for human rights and the rule of law,
inclusive economic growth and social progress are not merely positive goals in
themselves, but are basic and essential ingredients to address the underlying
conditions. Thus, combating terrorism requires full and scrupulous adherence to
international human rights and rule of law standards as prescribed in pillar IV of the
Global Strategy. We must ensure that States are able to handle terrorism, terrorist
attacks and support to victims of these attacks within the legal framework of human
rights law, refugee law and international humanitarian law.
118. Terrorism is a driving factor in an increasing number of conflict situations,
especially in the Sahel region and the Maghreb. While I note the Organization’s long
and positive contributions to conflict resolution and prevention in Africa, which
have helped to address, to a certain extent, some of the conditions conducive to
terrorism, we need to consider additional ways to integrate the prevention of
terrorism in the Organization’s broader conflict prevention and conflict management
efforts, especially through collaboration with our special political missions.
Relevant United Nations entities should also consider expanding their field presence
in such areas. In this regard, I welcome the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel region, which includes security as one of its three pillars and where
counter-terrorism issues figure prominently among the key regional priorities.
119. I also note the long-term support of the United Nations to Africa in the areas of
economic and social development, which has contributed to alleviating poverty and
exclusion. However, these measures need to be significantly enhanced. The
prevention of radicalization and extremism among young people, in particular,
should be a priority area for intervention. A mapping exercise of youth involvement
in addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism would be a good
starting point to develop positive interventions addressing those conditions, which
could also include solutions to lack of education and of employment. I encourage
United Nations agencies to develop and improve mechanisms that involve the youth
of Africa in the design and implementation of their own activities.
120. In view of the important contribution of women in countering radicalization
and extremism, there is a need to further integrate women’s perspectives into
national and regional counter-terrorism programming. I urge United Nations entities
to incorporate a gender component into their counter-terrorism work and to ensure
that gender considerations are addressed as part of efforts on counter-terrorism and
countering violent extremism, including through enhanced cooperation with civil
society and women’s groups.
121. Counter-terrorism activities must be supported by efforts to prevent vulnerable
individuals from being drawn into terrorism and conflict. Preventative actions
targeting the rhetoric used by terrorists and the fertile ground on which they operate
in order to radicalize a fringe of the population are crucial. The work of

22/23

14-20321

S/2014/9

organizations such as UNESCO, UNDP and the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations that focus on conflict prevention, building a culture of peace,
eradicating poverty and promoting sustainable development and social inclusion
through education, culture and communication in Africa has become critical. It will
also be vital to maintain and build upon the important synergies that have been
developed with non-governmental actors, including local communities, civil society
organizations, the private sector and the media.
122. In 2014, I will be submitting a report to the General Assembly on the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, reviewing
our efforts in countering terrorism across the world in the context of the
implementation of the Strategy. Taking into account the present report, I will be
putting forth recommendations on how the United Nations could step up its efforts,
through the framework of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, to
assist Member States and subregional and regional entities to address terrorism in a
more dynamic, creative and systematic manner.

14-20321

23/23
