A/RES/74/4

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 October 2019

Seventy-fourth session
Agenda item 19 (a)
Sustainable development: implementation of Agenda 21,
the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda
21 and the outcomes of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development and of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 15 October 2019
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/74/L.2)]

74/4. Political declaration of the high-level political forum on
sustainable development convened under the auspices
of the General Assembly
The General Assembly
Endorses the political declaration adopted by the high-level political forum on
sustainable development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly,
which is contained in the annex to the present resolution.
15th plenary meeting
15 October 2019

Annex
Gearing up for a decade of action and delivery for sustainable
development: political declaration of the Sustainable Development
Goals Summit
I
Our commitment
1.
We, the Heads of State and Government and high representatives, have met at
United Nations Headquarters in New York on 24 and 25 September 2019 at the

19-17862 (E)

241019

*1917862*

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly

A/RES/74/4

Sustainable Development Goals Summit, 1 to review progress on the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. 2
2.
We stand firm in our determination to implement the 2030 Agenda as a plan of
action for people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnership – a plan to free humanity
from the tyranny of poverty and heal and secure our planet for future generations.
3.
We emphasize that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement
for sustainable development.
4.
Today, we are launching an ambitious and accelerated response to reach our
common vision by 2030, and pledging to make the coming decade one of action and
delivery. We will maintain the integrity of the 2030 Agenda, including by ensuring
ambitious and continuous action on the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals
with a 2020 timeline.
5.
We reaffirm the commitment at the very heart of the 2030 Agenda to leave no
one behind. We will take more tangible steps to support people in vulnerable
situations and the most vulnerable countries and to reach the furthest behind first.
6.
We also reaffirm the principles recognized in the 2030 Agenda and recall that it
is universal in nature and that its Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible,
balancing the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustain able
development.
7.
We remain resolved, between now and 2030, to end poverty and hunger
everywhere; to combat inequalities within and among countries; to build peaceful,
just and inclusive societies; to respect, protect and fulfil human rights and achiev e
gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls; and to ensure the
lasting protection of the planet and its natural resources. We also remain resolved to
create conditions for sustainable, inclusive and sustained economic growth, shared
prosperity and decent work for all, taking into account different levels of national
development and capacities.
8.
We resolve to realize our vision of a world with access to inclusive and equitable
quality education, universal health coverage and quality health care, food security and
improved nutrition, safe drinking water and sanitation, affordable, reliable and
sustainable energy and quality and resilient infrastructure for all.
9.
We recognize the special challenges facing the most vulnerable countries and,
in particular, African countries, least developed countries, landlocked developing
countries, small island developing States and countries in conflict and post -conflict
situations, as well as the specific challenges facing middle -income countries, in
pursuing sustainable development.
10. We reaffirm that gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls
will make a crucial contribution to progress across all the Goals and targets. The
achievement of full human potential and sustainable developmen t is not possible if
one half of humanity continues to be denied full human rights and opportunities.
11. We also reaffirm that climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our
time. We express profound alarm that emissions of greenhouse gases cont inue to rise
globally, and remain deeply concerned that all countries, particularly developing
countries, are vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change. We emphasize in
__________________

High-level political forum on sustainable development convened under the auspices of the
General Assembly (Sustainable Development Goals Summit).
2
Resolution 70/1.
1

2/6

19-17862

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly

A/RES/74/4

this regard that mitigation of and adaptation to climate change represent an immediate
and urgent priority.
12. We commit to achieving a world in which humanity lives in harmony with
nature, to conserving and sustainably using our planet’s marine and terrestrial
resources, including through sustainable consumption and production, to reversing
the trends of environmental degradation, to promoting resilience, to reducing disaster
risk, and to halting ecosystem degradation and biodiversity loss.
13. We recognize that greater efforts are needed to direct and align the means of
implementation of the 2030 Agenda with our Goals, and commit to accelerate the
implementation of commitments across the seven action areas of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development. 3
14. In this endeavour, we must come together in durable partnerships between
governments at all levels, and with all relevant stakeholders, including civil society,
the private sector, academia and youth.
15. The 2030 Agenda is our promise to the children and youth of today so that they
may achieve their full human potential and carry the torch of sustainable development
to future generations.
II
Our world today
16. We recognize the many efforts at all levels since 2015 to realize the vision of the
2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals. We have seen a significant
response from national Governments, cities, local authorities, civil society, the private
sector, academia, youth and other actors. We acknowledge that the Sustainable
Development Goals are increasingly incorporated in national policies, plans, budgets
and development cooperation efforts, and we recognize that private sector engagement
in sustainable investing is growing. Global, regional and subregional multilateral
development and finance institutions have embraced the Sustainable Development
Goals and taken significant steps to incorporate them into their operations.
17. We welcome the Secretary-General’s ongoing efforts to reposition the United
Nations development system to better support countries in their implementation of
the 2030 Agenda and we commit to continuing to support his efforts.
18. We commend the work of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development, meeting under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council since
the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, including its reviews of all 17 Sustainable
Development Goals. The voluntary national reviews presented by 142 countries bear
witness to the efforts at the national level to prioritize integration of the Sustainable
Development Goals into national plans and policies and to bring together all parts of
society in the common endeavour of realizing the 2030 Agenda. We further welcome
the efforts at the regional level, including by the United Nations regional commissions
and the regional forums on sustainable development as well as the contributions of
major groups and all other stakeholders.
19. We take note with appreciation of the Secretary-General’s progress report on
the Sustainable Development Goals and the Global Sustainable Development Report,
including the identified entry points for transformation and transformative levers for
realizing the 2030 Agenda. We acknowledge the potential of a systemic and holistic
approach, taking into account interlinkages between Goals and targets. The reports
show that we have achieved progress in some areas, such as in reducing extreme
__________________
3

19-17862

Resolution 69/313, annex.
3/6

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly

A/RES/74/4

poverty and child and neonatal mortality; improving access to electricity and safe
drinking water; and expanding the coverage of terrestrial and marine protected are as.
20. At the same time, we are concerned that progress is slow in many areas.
Vulnerabilities are high and deprivations are becoming more entrenched. Assessments
show that we are at risk of missing the poverty eradication target. Hunger is on the
rise. Progress towards gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls
is too slow. Inequalities in wealth, incomes and opportunities are increasing in and
between countries. Biodiversity loss, environmental degradation, discharge of plastic
litter into the oceans, climate change and increasing disaster risk continue at rates that
bring potentially disastrous consequences for humanity.
21. We recognize that international migration is a multidimensional reality of major
relevance for the development of countries of origin, transit and destination.
22. Violent extremism, terrorism, organized crime, corruption, illicit financial
flows, global health threats, humanitarian crises and forced displacement of people
threaten to reverse much of the development progress made in recent decades.
23. In many parts of the world conflicts and instability have endured or intensified
and natural disasters have become more frequent and intense, causing untold human
suffering and undermining the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals. Our
ability to prevent and resolve conflicts and build resilient, peaceful, just and inclusive
societies has often been fragmented and insufficient.
III
Our call to accelerated action
24. We recognize the urgent need to accelerate action on all levels and by all
stakeholders, in order to fulfil the vision and Goals of the 2030 Agenda. We also
emphasize the need for concerted action across all relevant major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields, including the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, 4 the New Urban Agenda, 5 the
Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed Cou ntries for the Decade
2011–2020, 6 the Vienna Programme of Action for the Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–2024 7 and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway. 8 We recognize the synergies between the implementation of the
2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement. 9
25. We welcome the voluntary actions pledged by leaders at the Sustainable
Development Goals Summit and throughout this high -level week.
26. We request the Secretary-General, as a follow-up to the Sustainable
Development Goals Summit and the reports on progress on the Goals, and in the
lead-up to the summit to mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, to
engage Governments, civil society, the private sector and other stakeholders in
generating solutions and accelerating action to address systemic gaps in
implementation, as we embark on a decisive decade for the 2030 Agenda. We also
call upon the Secretary-General to organize an annual moment to highlight inspiring
action on the Goals, in the context of the general debate of the General Assembly.
__________________

Resolution 69/283, annex II.
Resolution 71/256, annex.
6
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul,
Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7), chap. II.
7
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
8
Resolution 69/15, annex.
9
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
4
5

4/6

19-17862

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly

A/RES/74/4

27. To demonstrate our determination to implement the 2030 Agenda and achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals, we need to do more and faster. To this end, we
commit to:
(a) Leaving no one behind: we will place a focus on the poorest and most
vulnerable in our policies and actions. People who are vulnerable must be empowered.
Those whose needs are reflected in the 2030 Agenda include all children, youth,
persons with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, o lder persons, indigenous
peoples, refugees and internally displaced persons and migrants. We intend to see the
Goals and targets met for all nations and peoples and for all segments of society. And
we will endeavour to reach the furthest behind first. We commit to targeted and
accelerated action to remove all legal, social and economic barriers to achieve gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls, and the realization and
enjoyment of their human rights;
(b) Mobilizing adequate and well-directed financing: in order to close the
financing gap for the Sustainable Development Goals, Governments, the private
sector and other stakeholders need to increase the level of ambition in domestic,
public and private resource mobilization, strengthen the enabling environment for
sustainable investments and deliver on commitments to international development
cooperation. We will ensure that policies and actions reach those furthest behind,
aiming at financial inclusion, and supporting the competitiveness o f micro-, small and
medium-sized enterprises, including women- and youth-owned enterprises. We will
also strive to increase our level of ambition on the non-financial means of
implementation, including promoting a universal, rules-based, open, transparent,
non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral trading system, recognizing that
international trade is an engine for development;
(c) Enhancing national implementation: we pledge to lift the level of
ambition of our national responses to the implementatio n of the 2030 Agenda, while
respecting national processes and ensuring ownership. To this end, we aim to
proactively mainstream the 2030 Agenda into our national planning instruments,
policies, strategies and financial frameworks;
(d) Strengthening institutions for more integrated solutions: we will
proactively develop effective, accountable and transparent institutions at all levels
and ensure more responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision making processes. We will strive to equip domestic institutions to better address
interlinkages, synergies and trade-offs between the Goals and targets through a wholeof-government approach that can bring about transformative change in governance
and public policy and ensure policy coherence for sustainable development;
(e) Bolstering local action to accelerate implementation: we commit to
empower and support cities, local authorities and communities in pursuing the 2030
Agenda. We recognize their critical role in implementing and realizing the
Sustainable Development Goals;
(f) Reducing disaster risk and building resilience: we undertake to pursue
policy, investment and innovation to reduce disaster risk and build the resilience of
countries, economies, communities and individuals to economic, social and
environmental shocks and disasters;
(g) Solving challenges through international cooperation and enhancing
the global partnership: we recognize that the integrated nature of the Sustainable
Development Goals requires a global response. We renew our commitment to
multilateralism, to find new ways of working together and to ensure that multilateral
institutions keep pace with the rapid changes taking place. We further commit to
finding peaceful and just solutions to disputes and to respecting in ternational law and
19-17862

5/6

A/RES/74/4

Political declaration of the high-level political forum on sustainable
development convened under the auspices of the General Assembly

the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including the right
to self-determination of peoples and the need to respect the territorial integrity and
political independence of States;
(h) Harnessing science, technology and innovation with a greater focus on
digital transformation for sustainable development: we will promote research,
capacity-building initiatives, innovation and technologies towards advancing the
Sustainable Development Goals and promote the use of scientific evidence from all
fields to enable the transformation to sustainable development. We will promote and
support quality education and lifelong learning to ensure that all children, youth and
adults are empowered with the relevant knowledge and skills to shape more resilient,
inclusive and sustainable societies that are able to adapt to rapid technological
change. We will foster international cooperation to support developing countries in
addressing their constraints in access to technologies and education;
(i) Investing in data and statistics for the Sustainable Development Goals:
we commit to strengthen our national statistical capacities to address the gaps in data
on the Sustainable Development Goals in order to allow countries to provide high quality, timely, reliable, disaggregated data and statistics and to fully integrate t he
Sustainable Development Goals in our monitoring and reporting systems. We
encourage international cooperation supporting statistical capacity-building in
developing countries, in particular the most vulnerable countries, which face the
greatest challenges in collecting, analysing and using reliable data and statistics;
(j) Strengthening the high-level political forum: we pledge to carry out an
ambitious and effective review of the format and organizational aspects of the high level political forum and follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level during the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly with a view to better addressing gaps in implementation and linking
identified challenges with appropriate responses, including on financing, to further
strengthen the effective and participatory character of this intergovernmental forum
and encourage the peer-learning character of the voluntary national reviews. We also
pledge to advance our efforts in communicating the 2030 Agenda to the global public
to raise awareness and inspire accelerated action.
28. We know the world we want. We pledge to accelerate our common efforts, now
and in the coming decade to reach this vision by 2030. Rapid change is possible and t he
Goals remain within reach if we embrace transformation and accelerate implementation.

6/6

19-17862
