ll6

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

4. Refers to the conference the draft articles contained in chapter II of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its fifth session, together with the oommenta,ry
thereon and the analytical compilation of comments
and proposals to be prepared by the Secretary-General
pursuant to the decision of the Commission, 9 as the
basis for consideration by the conference.

2091st plenary meeting
28 November 1972

2966 (XXVII). lntf'rnational conference of plenipotentiaric:,; on the representation of States
in their relations with international organizations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Representation
of States in their relations with international organizations",
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General1°
containing the comments and observations received
from Member States, Switzerland, the Secretary-General, specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, submitted in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2780 (XXVI) of 3 December
1971,
Recalling that in its resolution 2780 (XXVI) the
General Assembly noted with satisfaction that at its
twenty-third session, in 1971, the International Law
Commission, in the light of the observations and comments of Member States, Switzerland and the secretariats of various international organizations and taking
into account the relevant resolutions and debates of
the Assembly, revised the provisional draft articles on
the representation of States in their relations with international organizations, prepared at its twentieth, twentyfirst and twenty-second sessions, and adopted a final
set of draft articles as the basis of a convention,
Recalling further that in its resolution 2780 (XXVI)
the General Assembly expressed its appreciation to
the International Law Commission for its valuable
work on the question of representation of States in
their relations with international organizations and to
the Special Rapporteur on the topic for his contribution to this work,
1. Decides that an international conference of
plenipotentiaries shall be convened as soon as practicable to consider the draft articles on the representation of States in their ,relations with international
organizations and to embody the results of its work
in an international convention and such other instruments as it may deem appropriate;
2. Further decides to include in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-eighth session an item entitled
''lnternat,ional conference of plenipotentiaries on the
representation of States in their relations with international organizations" in order that the General
Assembly may consider the questior, of participation
in the conference. the date :rnd place of the conference
and other rcbtecl matter•;
1o A/8753 ,•ricl J\,ld l 1.

3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session a memorandum on the methcxls of work of the conference
so that the Assembly may consider the matter with
a view to reducing the costs of the conference.

2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2967 (XXVII). Report of the Special Committee
on the Question of Defining Aggression

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression on the
work of its fifth session, held in New York from
31 January to 3 March 1972,11
Noting the progress so far achieved by the Special
Committee in its consideration of the question of
defining aggression and on the draft definition, as
reflected in its report,
Considering that it was not possible for the Special
Committee to complete its task at its fifth session,
Considering that in its resolutions 2330 (XXIl) of
18 December 1967, 2420 (XXIII) of 18 December
1968, 2549 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969, 2644
(XXV) of 25 November 1970 and 2781 (XXVI) of
3 December 1971 the General Assembly recognized
the widespread conviction of the need to expedite the
definition of aggression,
Considering the uraency of bringing the work of the
Special Committee to a successful conclusion and the
desirability of achieving the definition of aggression as
soon as possible,
Noting also the common desire of the members of
the Special Committee to continue their work on the
basis of the results achieved and to arrive with due
speed at a draft definition in a spirit of mutual understanding and accommodation,
1. Decides that the Special Committee on the Question of Defining Aggression shall resume its work at
Geneva, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2330 (XXII), as early as possible after 1 April
1973;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of
the Special Committee on the Question of Defining
Aggression".
2 109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2968 (XXVII). Need to consider su~~estions regarding the review of the Charter of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2552 (XXIV) of 12 December 1969 and 2697 (XXV) of 11 December 1970
entitled "Need to consider suggestions regarding the
Teview of the Charter of the United Nations",
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sel·cnth
Session. Supplement No. 19 (A/8719).
