A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/122
27 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 89 (e)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/49/729/Add.5)]
49/122.

Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing
States

The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, in particular chapter 17, section G, of Agenda 21, 1/ relating
to the sustainable development of small island developing States,
Recalling also its resolution 47/186 of 22 December 1992 on specific
measures in favour of island developing countries,
Recalling in particular its resolutions 47/189 of 22 December 1992 and
48/193 of 21 December 1993,
Reaffirming that, because the development options of small island
developing States are limited, there are special challenges to devising and
implementing sustainable development plans, and that those States will be
constrained in meeting such challenges without the cooperation of the
international community,

1/
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and
Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1)) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by
the Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

95-76939

/...

A/RES/49/122
Page 2

Having considered the report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, 2/ which was held at
Bridgetown from 25 April to 6 May 1994 and included a high-level segment on 5
and 6 May 1994,
Expressing its satisfaction that the Conference and its Preparatory
Committee provided for the participation of all States Members of the United
Nations and members of its specialized agencies at a high level, and also
provided for the participation of observers, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations from all regions of the world,
Expressing its profound gratitude to the Government and people of
Barbados for the hospitality extended to the participants of the Conference
and for the excellent facilities, staff and services placed at their disposal,
1.
Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Global
Conference on the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States;
2/
2.
Endorses the Declaration of Barbados, 3/ and the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States, 4/
as adopted at the Conference on 6 May 1994;
3.
Notes with satisfaction the summary of the high-level
segment, 5/ which focused on the theme "Forging partnerships for sustainable
development";
4.
Calls upon Governments, as well as the organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system and other intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to implement all commitments reached and
recommendations made at the Conference and to take the action necessary for
effective follow-up to the Programme of Action, including ensuring the
provision of the means of implementation under chapter XV thereof;
5.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on action taken by the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to implement the Programme of Action; 6/

2/
Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, 25 April-6 May 1994 (A/CONF.167/9
and Corr.1 and 2) (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda).
3/

Ibid., chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.

4/

Ibid., annex II.

Report of the Global Conference on the Sustainable Development of
5/
Small Island Developing States, Bridgetown, 25 April-6 May 1994 (A/CONF.167/9
and Corr.1 and 2) (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.94.I.18 and
corrigenda), Annexes, annex III.
6/

A/49/425 and Add.1.
/...

A/RES/49/122
Page 3

6.
Welcomes, in particular, the progress made by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Meteorological Organization in identifying focal
points and other similar mechanisms to coordinate the action they are taking
to implement the Programme of Action;
7.
Welcomes the preparation by the United Nations Development
Programme of studies on the feasibility of developing a technical assistance
programme 7/ and on an information network 8/ for the small island
developing States;
8.
Invites the United Nations Development Programme to continue to
carry out its mandate as the lead agency in organizing the efforts of the
United Nations system towards capacity-building at the local, national and
regional levels, as set forth in Agenda 21, and in fostering the United
Nations collective thrust in support of the implementation of the Programme of
Action, particularly through its network of country offices;
9.

Also invites the United Nations Development Programme:

(a)
To initiate the implementation of the technical assistance
programme for small island developing States by preparing a directory, as
specified in paragraph 106 of the Programme of Action, and undertake further
consultation with small island developing States and other interested parties
to determine the most effective means of implementation of the technical
assistance programme;
(b)
To coordinate further interregional and intraregional
consultations between relevant technical experts of small island developing
States and other interested States, agencies and relevant organizations to
elaborate further the information network for small island developing States
and determine the most effective means of implementing it, taking into account
the requirements of the technical assistance programme and the Programme of
Action;
10.
Calls upon the international community to participate in the
consideration of the feasibility studies through a process of consultation,
with a view to supporting fully efforts to put the technical assistance
programme and the information network into operation;
11.

Requests the Commission on Sustainable Development:

(a)
To make arrangements for monitoring and reviewing, in a distinct
and identifiable manner, and in the context of its multi-year thematic
programme and its annual consideration of cross-sectoral issues, the
implementation of the provisions agreed upon in the Programme of Action;
(b)
To carry out, in 1996, an initial review of the progress achieved
and steps taken to implement the Programme of Action;

7/

A/49/459, annex.

8/

A/49/414, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/122
Page 4

(c)
To recommend, in the context of the overall review of Agenda 21 in
1997, specific modalities for a full review of the Programme of Action in
1999, including the question of convening a second global conference, in
accordance with chapter 17, section G, of Agenda 21;
12.
Requests the Secretary-General to enable the relevant regional
commissions to support activities to coordinate the implementation of the
outcome of the Conference at the regional and subregional levels by, inter
alia, providing the necessary autonomy and adequate resources to their
subregional offices and operational centres, in accordance with paragraph 134
of the Programme of Action, taking into account the decentralization process;
13.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development has a strengthened capacity to
carry out, in accordance with its mandate, the research and analysis necessary
to complement the work of the Department for Policy Coordination and
Sustainable Development of the Secretariat with respect to the implementation
of the Programme of Action;
14.
Commends the Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable
Development for the efficient manner in which it serviced the preparations for
and reporting on the Conference;
15.
Further requests the Secretary-General to establish within the
Department for Policy Coordination and Sustainable Development a clearly
identifiable entity with the resources and number of qualified and competent
professional and support staff that are necessary to undertake its broad range
of functions in support of the system-wide implementation of the Programme of
Action, relying on the most efficient and cost-effective use of resources, in
accordance with the provisions of paragraph 123 of the Programme of Action;
16.
Requests the Secretary-General, through the Department of Public
Information of the Secretariat, to arrange for the wide and effective
dissemination of the Programme of Action;
17.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fiftieth
session, under the item entitled "Environment and sustainable development", a
sub-item entitled "Implementation of the outcome of the Global Conference on
the Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States";
18.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fiftieth session on action taken to implement the present resolution
and on action taken by the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to implement the Programme of Action for the Sustainable
Development of Small Island Developing States, and in that regard also
requests the Secretary-General to invite those organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system which have not already done so to consider
the establishment of focal points and other similar mechanisms to enable them
to respond effectively in the implementation of the Programme of Action.
92nd plenary meeting
19 December 1994
