I

UNITED

I
I

SECURITY COUNCIL

I

.:;
i

NATIONS

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

,/
:I
l.’

2

j.?

.”

.L

2300th

MEETING:

31 AUGUST

1981

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2300). , , , , . . , . , , , . , . , , , , , , . , , , . . . , . . , . . . . , .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.........................,~,.,.,,...~.,,.,,....,.

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981from the Charge d’affaires a-i. of the Permanent
Mission of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/14647) ,..“,,.‘,..“.,.‘..*.,,..,.....*,*...............

1

StPV.2300

P
Prc

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rpplz~~r~.s of the O@Grl R~wI& c#the Scwrriry Cor~~~cil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, arc ouhlished in yearly volumes of Rcsnhtions
cd
1kisimr.s
q1’ //a, Scwtri/.v Cored.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

Chin
Japa!
Tuni!
Unite
Irelal

I. I
2. (

Th

TI;
Corn
Lf

I.
In a
2299

to te
tativ

of c
hiri)
Zim
side

2300th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 31 August 1981, at 5.45 p.m.
President:

Mr. Jorge E. ILLUECA (Panama).

Presenr: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda(S/Agenda/23001
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Angola to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/14647)
The meeting

was called

to order

at 7.30 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

was adopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires a,t. of the Permanent Mlssion of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary
General (S/14647)
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with decisions taken at the 2296th to
2299th meetings, 1 invite the representative of Angola
to take a place at the Council table and the representatives of Brazil, Canada, Cuba, the Federal Republic
of Germany, India, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, South Africa, viet Nam, Yugoslavia and
Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation

of the President,

Mr.

de Figueiredo

(AngolaJ,
took a place
at the Corrttcil
table;
Mr. Baeno
(Braz.ilJ,
Mr.
Morden
(Canuda),
Mr.
Roa Kourl
(Cuba),
Mr. vatI We// (Federal
Republic
of Gernta~ly),
Mr. Krishrmrl
(Iudia),
Mr. Mabut
(Kenya),
Mr. Burwirt
(Libya
Arub famahirisa),
Mr. Eksteerr
(South
Africa),
Mr. Ha Vati Lau (C’iet
N(m),
Mr. Lazarevic’
(Yagosluvia)
and Mr.
Mushirlgaidze
(Zimbab,c*eJ
took
the
places
reserved
for them
at the side of the Council
chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
I shouldlike to informthe members
of the Security
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative
of Mozambiquein whichheasksto be
invitedto participatein the discussion
of the itemon
the agenda.In accordancewith the usualpractice,
I propose,with the consentof the Council,to invite
that representative
to participatein the discussion,
withoutthe rightto vote, in accordance
with rule37of
theprovisionalrulesof procedure.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Lobo (MOrambique)
took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
Membersof the SecurityCouncilhavereceivedthe
text of the reviseddraft resolutionsponsored
by the
delegations
of Mexico, Niger, Panama,the Philippines,Tunisiaand Uganda,distributedin document
S114664lRev.2.
4. 1shouldalsoliketo drawtheattentionof members
of the Councilto a newdocumentrelatedto thisitem:
a letter dated28August1981from the representative
of Chinaaddressed
to the Presidentof the Council,
distributedin documentS/14665.
5. The first speakeris the representative
of Mozambique.I invitehimto takea placeat the Counciltable
andto makehisstatement.
6. Mr, LOB0 (Mozambique):
It is an honouranda
privilegefor my delegationto participatein these
deliberations
whichare presidedover by a manwho
hasa thoroughknowledge
of the issuein questionand
whohashimselfbeenfor manyyearsa participantin
the complex strugglefor liberation. Mozambique
respectsand admiresthe objective zeal of YOUI
leadership,
Mr. President,andyour understanding
of
the dilemmainvolved in trying to coexist with an
aggressive
andunscrupulous
neighbour.
7. The racistrdgimeof South Africa is today the
focal issuewheneverwar and peaceare considered
anywhereon the African continent,and mostparticularly in southernAfrica. Its racial policies,its
colonialcharacterandits repressiveand aggressive
methodsarethe causesof that concernandare the
issuethe Councilis discussing
today, namely, the
military invasionof Angolaby SouthAfrica.

8, In southern Africa, the emergenceof the People’s
Republic of Angola, the People’s Republic of Mozambique and, lately, the Republic of Zimbabwe has
sharpenedthe changein the balanceof forces in favour
of the oppressed peoples of Namibia and of South
Africa itself. That tip in the balance of forces is so
dramatic. so drastic. that the racist regime of Pretoria
has resorted to open military aggresdon against the
neighbouringcountries. Racist South Africa wants to
destroy Angola. It wants to destroy its independence.
It wants to destroy its economy. Furthermore, South
Africa wants to provoke a full-scale war from which its
friends can profit.
9. It was within that context that we witnessed
the South African invasion of Angola on 24 and
25 August 1981.It was within the same context that
South Africa carried out its cowardly attack on the
homes of South African refugees in the southern
Mozambican town of Matola in the early morning
hours of 30 January [S/143581.
IO. The invasion of Angola and the attack on Matola
were both meant to destabilize the situation in our
countries and sabotage our national reconstruction
efforts. Those attacks were meant to make it more
difficult for us to express our political and material
solidarity with the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAP01 and the African National Congress
of South Africa (AN0
I I. Mozambique is extremely concerned by the
South African military invasion of Angolaas well as by
the violation of Angola’s territorial integrity, not only
because of the barbaric manner of the invasion but
also because of the increasing self-confidence South
Africa has exhibited lately in conducting these operations in the region.
12. Of course, we are well aware that the aggressiveness and self-confidence of South Africa are a result of
the connivance of certain Western Powers and permanent members of the Security Council. Because of
the obvious benefits it derives from the intensive
plunder of the natural and human resources of
Namibia and South Africa, the United States of
America has repeatedly failed to condemn apartheid
in South Africa and in Namibia and the aggression against Angola. The Pretoria rdgime has found
encouragement to proceed with its illegal occupation
of Namibia and its military aggression and menace
against the other neighbouring countries.
13. The refusal of the representative of the United
States on 28 August [2296d meetirlg] to condemn the
South African invasion of Angola clearly indicates the
extent to which the United States is committed to
protecting Pretoria’s policy of dcstabilization of the
front-line States.
14. Sometimes we wonder whether the supporters
of South Africa know exactly what it is they are

upholding, Reading from excerpts of the policy
statement on southern Africa delivered in Honolulu by
Mr. Chester Cracker, we noticed indications of
misinformation, naivety and some tone of identification with everything that the South African racist
rt5ghnestands for. In case it is a matter of misinformation about the nature of the South African regime, any
one of the neighbouring countries is in a position <o
provide correct and accurate information on the nature
of that rkgime.
1% During the statement he made on 6 OCtOhCr 1980
to the General Assembly, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of my country, Mr. Joaquim Albert0 Chissano,
stated:
“In the so-called free world, few know about the
nature of apartheid and of those who practice it.“’
He also said:
“Apartheid
and nazism are based on the same
political and ideological principle-the superiority
of one race over the other races. They use the same
instruments to suppress and massacre the peoples.

“The direct victims of nazism in Europe were
whites while those of apartheid are blacks.“’
16. As a matter of fact, two months after Mr. Chissane’s statement, in the very early morning hours of
30 January 1981,the commandos of the South African
minority regime carried out a cowardly attack on the
homes of South African refugees, just because they
were located in Mozambiqueand not somewhere else,
in Europe or America.
17. On the afternoon of the same day, members of
the diplomatic corps in Mozambique visited the site of
the attack, where they found the body of a South
African commando still wearing a helmet with a
variety of Nazi symbols, such as swastikas and the
words “Sieg Heif”. Furthermore, evidence of the
racist acts of savagery, such as cutting off the ears of
the dead refugees, could be seen everywhere. This,
therefore, confirms what Mr. Chissano had warned the
international community about two month earlier.
18. Sometimeswe wonder if it is possible that a nation
which fought nazism in Europe can consciously find
peace of mind supporting it in Africa. Does it mean
that if Hitler were alive in 1981he would have fewer
nations to opposehim? Does it meanthat some nations
are beginning to have second thoughts about the
swastika and to forget what it stands for? It is
impossible not to entertain these questions, especially
when the representative of the S&h African Government can find the courage to inform the Council that
“Pigs and goats ran through the streets ahead of US”
[229&h meeting,
para. 381 to show that peace and
tranquillity exist in southern Angola-as though a pig
running has anything to do with the massacre of 240to

trat
me
19.
of
stn
unl
am
MC
so
arr
An
20,
21
I !
rel

22
tb
da
Fc
pr
ne
cc
C1

ar
A
2:
Cl

si
A

P
a1
tr

270 members of the population they have admitted primaryresponsibilitygiven it by the Charterof the
United Nationsto maintaininternationalpeaceand
having killed, as if goats running are an indication that
everything is normal. Yes. for a racist mentality, a pig security,
running his more meaningthan a kid playing in a
schoolplaynound.In like manner,a Nazi will treat a 26. The systemof securityconceivedat SanFranJewin ihe-sarne
wayhe will treata guineapig, ashe ciscoby the foundersof the Organizationis based,
did duringnazism’s
nefariousexperiments
in concen- firstly, as noted in Article 4, paragraphI of the
andfulfilmentby Member
tration camps.Are thesethe peoplesomepermanent Charter,on the acceptance
Statesof the obligationsenshrinedin the Charter,
members
of thisaugustbody refuseto condemn?
secondly,asstatedin Article 25,on the bindingforce
19. Weleavethissimplemoralquestionin thehands of the resolutions
of the SecurityCounciland,thirdly,
of the Council.For our part, we shallcontinueto asstipulatedin Article 103,on theprimacy,in caseof
struggleshoulder
to shoulderwith the African people conflicts,of the obligationsimposedby the Charter
until justiceis respectedin the continentin general over obligationscontractedby MemberStatesby
andin Angolain particular.The People’sRepublicof virtue of anyother internationalagreement,
Mozambiquestronglycondemns
the racistr6gimeof
South Africa for its premeditatedand unprovoked 27. It is clear that the conceptof neutralityasfar as
armedaggression
againstthe People’sRepublicof theapplication
of resolutions
of theSecurityCouncilis
Angola.
concerned,particularlyasregardsconflictsin southern Africa, cannotbe upheldin light of the above20. A luta continua.
mentioned
provisions.
21. ThePRESIDENT(interpretation from Spanish):
I shall now make a statementin my capacity as 28. Even thoseStatesthat aretraditionallyneutral,
Statesthat arenotMembersof the UnitedNationsbut
representative
of PANAMA.
arepartiesto the Statuteof the InternationalCourtof
22. The complaintput forward by the Presidentof JusticeandStatesthat, althoughnot partiesto that
the People’sRepublicof Angola,Mr. JoseEduardo Statute,haveaccessto the Court are subjectto the
dos Santos,the communique
from the Minister for obligationsderivingfrom Articles 25 Lnd 103of the
ForeignAffairs of that country, Mr. Venanciode Charterwhich apply to all StatesMembersof the
Moura[seeS/14646],andthedramaticstatement
made UnitedNations.
by Mr. Elisiode Figueiredo[2296th meeting] have
presented
to theCounciltheterribledimensions
of the 29. Therefore,therecanbe nojustificationof South
with Councilresolution475
new seriesof acts of aggression
which have been Africa’s non-compliance
committedby the Pretoriaracistregimewith manifest (1980),which was adoptedon a previousoccasion
cruelty, in openviolationof the sovereignty,airspace whenthis topic wasconsidered,nor roomfor any
and territorial integrity of the People’sRepublicof otherpretextfromSouthAfricanor non-southAfrican
sourcesthat mightbe invokedthat wouldallow the
Angola.
illegalactsof the Pretoriarkgimeto be passedovel
23. The Governmentand the peopleof Panama withoutany internationalsanction.
condemn
thisinfamous
act of anaression
whileexpresof thePretoriaregimeis
singsolidaritywith theGovernzentandthe peopleof 30. Universalcondemnation
AnaoIaat thisaainfulcrossroads
in their history.The eloquentlyexpressedin the mediain Africa, Latin
Panamanian
d&legation
deeplyregretsthelossdf lives America, Asia, WesternEurope, Eastern.Europe,
andthe untoldcrueltiesandmerciless
crimescommit- North AmericaandOceania.It couldnot be otherted by the apartheid regime againstthe civilian wise.The town of Xangongo,ashasbeenconfirmed
copulationof Angola.Wesharethejust indignationof by Europeandiplomats,hasbeentotally destroyed.
ihe international
fommunity over tfiesereprehensible Morethan600humanliveshavebeentaken.In spite
about withdrawalmadein Cape
actsandconveyour mostsincerecondolences
to the of the statements
familiesof thevictimsandto theGovernmentandthe Town by the Commanderof the invadingforce,
GeneralConstandViljoen, severalhundredSouth
peopleof Angola.
African soldiersstill remainin the areaof hostilities.
24. In theview of the Panamanian
Government,the accordingto reportscirculatedby internationalpress
recent military operationsconductedby the South agencies.
African army have reachedunprecedented
intensity.
of SouthAfrica in Latin America
Wearefacingaggression
againstthe People’sRepub- 31. Condemnation
Its representatives
in theCouncil
lic of Angolawhichalsoinvolvesa seriousthreat to hasbeenunanimous.
their viewsunequivocally.The posi.,
thefront-lineStates,aswellasthe othernationsin the haveexpressed
area,withtheresultingdangerto peaceandsecurityin tions put forwardin this chamberby Brazil, Cuba,
MexicoandPanama
area cleargaugeof the intensity
the regionandthe worldat large.
of the feelingsof repudiationof the South African
prevailingin the regionamongthoseof
25. In the face of the SouthAfrican aggression,
we aggression
persuasions.
canrightlyaskwhattheCouncilshoulddoto fulfil the diffe-rentpoliticalandideological
3

-

32. South Africa is an isolated country within the
United Nations because of its violation of the Charter
and its delinquent conduct. From the point of view of
the health of the Organization, South Africa represents
a body that is socially. noliticallv and morallv sick. It
is a gtate that suffeis. irom s&h a highly infectious
diseaJe that it must be isolated. Therefore we could
not accept any suggest;,a that this debate might be
aimed at isolating any country other than South
Africa. It is clear-that those wfio try to absolve the
Pretoria regime of sin and cleanse its body of
infectious girms without submitting it to the-sole
treatment that can produce a cure, namely, the
fulfilment of the resolutions of the United Nations, will
have to face the consequences of contamination and
contagion.

35. Concerning the subject under discussion, my
delegationis in favour of the adoptionof the draft
resolution.iointlv orooosedbv Mexico, the Niger.
Panama,
the Philipiine’s,
Tunis&andUganda[S/l4&4i
Rnp.21.which stronaly condemnsSouth Africa.
dema&lsthe immedia&
andunconditional
withdrawal
of all itstroopsfrom Angolanterritory, recognizes
the
right of the People’sRepublicof Angolato full and
sufficient compensation,calls upon all States to
implementfully the armsembargoimposedagainst
SouthAfrica ICourwil wsohrtior~ 418 c/977)1,provides
for the immediate
establishment
of a comm&sion
of
investigationof the Councilto undertakean on-thespot evaluationand urgesall MemberStates,as a
matterof urgency,to extendmaterialassistance
to the
People’sRepublicof Angola.

33. African problems must be subject to African
solutions. The eradication of colonialiom in all its
forms and manifestations and ttt: exercise of the right
of self-determination by the African peoples iannot be
made subordinate to ihe economic: po’iiticai or strategic interests of the super-Powers. To claim that
those interests can prevail over the rights of peoples to
freedom and independenceis to go against the course
of history.

36. It is our duty asStatesMembersof the United
Nationsseriouslyto insistthat the Councilshould
fulfil its obligationsunder the Charterand that it
shouldadoptthenecessary
coercivemeasures
sothat
the Governmentof SouthAfrica will put anendto its
persistent
actsof anaression.
The Pretoriaregimemust
withdrawfrom ttig illegally occupiedTeTritory of
Namibiawhosepeople.with SWAP0 as their sole
legitimaterepresentitive,havethe right to seetheir
nationalunity andterritorialintegrityrespected
andto
begrantedindependence
prom&, ihrougha process
whichshouldbebroughtto fruition underthe control
andsupervision
of theUnitedNations.It istruly ironic
that theSouthAfricanGovernment,in a gesturewhich
I shallnot ventureto describe,shouldbe claimingto
invite theSecurityCouncilto Namibiawhenit refuses
to acceptthe presence
in that Territory of the United
NationsCouncil for Namibia, which is the sole
legitimate
authoritythat shouldfunctionthereuntil the
Territory attainsindependence.

34. We also uphold the fact that Latin American
problems must have Latin American solutions. Asian
problems m!:rt have Asian solutions. European problems must hs.e European solutions. The very fact that
today we talk about the crisis of the capitalist and the
socialist systems, as well as growing tension among
the super-Powers, creates a dislocation in world
relations that is reflected in pathological human
behaviour. There is a growing recourse to violence, an
increase in delinquency, a tendency towards a breakdown of the family and a relaxation of the ethical
values of modern societies, all of which is directly
related to the climate of international tension. We
might say that to the extent that the United Nations
loses its institutional effectiveness. the feelines of
despair predominant in most of the social strata of
mankind will also be heightened.The United Nations
is a forum for the preve&on of confrontation and the
promotion of communication and constructive dialogue.The dangers of nuclear conflagration are always
present in our times. Today more than ever, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries must insist, as it
did in the New Delhi appeal adopted on 11 February
1981at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned Countries held at New Delhi from 9 to
13February 198l’and as we ourselves insist now, that
the United States of America and the Soviet Union call
a halt to their evident rivalry in Africa, the Midle East, Central America and the Caribbean. That
would be the first step by which the statesmen of the
two super-Powers, in-honouring their responsibilities,
could promote a meeting of the minds among the
leaders of their and other regions so as to create
conditions of security, harmony and peace in the
world.

37. The StatesMembersof the United Nations
cannotremainneutralandindifferentin thefaceof the
constantinstitutionalerosionthat the stubbornand
delinquentattitudeof SouthAfrica producesin the
Organization.How canwe remainneutralin the face
of an attitude of this type which is an absolute
violation of the Charter?Neutrality in this case
wouldmeanour complicitywith the maintenance
of
the ~fafusquo, in otherwords,our acceptance
of the
presentstateof affairsin SouthAfrica andNamibia.It
wouldmeanthemaintenance,
with ourconsent,of the
odioussystemof apartheid,
the recognitionof the
validity of racismand racialdiscrimination
and out
acquiescence
in the continuation,for the sake of
allegedeconomic,strategicandsecurityinterests,of a
systemof colonialexploitationwhichis a disgraceto
mankind.
38. Theseriousness
of theunjustandunprovokedact
of aggression
committedby the racistregimeof South
Africa againstAngolarequiresthe Counciland,above
all, thoseStateson whichtheCharterjas conferreda
specialresponsibility
for themaintenance
of peace,to

adoptforcefulcot
rdgimesothat it
actsof aggressio
peace,

39. I nowresum
my understandin
now preparedto 1
they havebeforet
now put the draft
Sl14664lRev.2to
representative
of t
to speakbeforeth

40. Sir Anthony
Governmentin Lc
alreadymadeabu
African attack o
wholly deplores
transgressed
the n
wasunacceptabl
hopedthat the (
without delay a c
demandfor the in
canforcesfrom tb

41. Thereis muc
we are about to
SUPPOSE. 1 amthin
ope+ativcparagra
unconditional
witt
from theterritory

42. Weare also1
resolutionfor the
meetthe objectio
putto themover tt
still containselel
difficult to suppo

43. In a stateme
anothersubjectin
that offensivechz
rhetoric directed
Organizationdo n
peacefulsolutionc
someoneby argu
may I say on the
attacks againsth
militaryacl10non
equipmentof dr
languageboth in
partsof the draft
cannot subscribe
resolutionisadop
specificinstructio
BritishGovernme
will not constitute
Chapter VII of
thereforeabstainH
vote.

adopt forceful coercive measures against the Pretoria
regime so that it will put an end to its reprehensible
acts of aggression ;nd cease to be a threat to world

44. I have one last point to make.My delegation
firmly believesthat theonly hopeof progress
towards
a peacefulsolutionof theproblemof Namibia-thatis
peace.
to say,the achievement
for Namibiaof internationally
acceptedindependence-lies
in the continuedefforts
39. 1nowresume
myfunctionsasPRESIDENT.It is of the contact group of five to bring about the
my understanding
thatthe members
of the Councilare implementation
5f Security CouncilreSolution435
now preparedto vote on the reviseddraft resolution (I 978).In ourjudgement,
thereisnoalternativecourse
they havebeforethem.If thereisnoobjection,I shall whichisin keeping
with theprinciples
andpurposes
of
now put the draft resolutioncontainedin document the Charterof the UnitedNations.Thecontactgroup
S/l4664/Rev.2to the vote. I now call upon the of five hasnot beeninactivein recentmonthsand, ai
representative
of the UnitedKingdomwhohasasked the Councilis probablyaware,the five Ministersfor
to speakbeforethevote,
ForeignAffairs will be meetingin New York very
shortly, My delegationis resolvedto take no step
whichcouldhinderthisprocess.
40. Sir AnthonyPARSONS(UnitedKingdom):My
Governmentin Londonandmy delegation
herehave 45. ThePRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
alreadymadeabundantlyclearour view of the South I shall now put to the vote the draft resolution
African attack on Angola. The United Kingdom sponsored
by Mexico,Niger,Panama,
the Philippines,
wholly deploresthe South Afric7.n action which TunisiaandUganda,distributedin documentS/14664/
transgressed
the normsof international
behaviourand Rev.2.
wasunacceptable
to theinternational
community.We
hopedthat the Councilwould addressto Pretoria
A vote was tuken by show of hands.
without delaya clear, unanimous
and unambiguous
demandfor the immediate
withdrawalof SouthAfriIn favour:
China, France. GermanDemocratic
can forcesfrom the sovereign
territory of Angola.
Republic,Ireland, Japan,Mexico, Niger, Prl;lama,
Philippines,
Spain,Tunisia,Uganda,Ur‘ionof Soviet
41. Thereis muchin the draft resolutionon which SocialistRepublics
we are about to vote which my delegationcan
support.1amthinkingoarticularlvof the lanauarre
of
Against:
UnitedStatesof America
optiafivc paragraph
4: ihe demanhfor imme&ateand
unconditionalwithdrawalof all SouthAfrican trooos
Abstaining:
UnitedKingdomof Great Britain and
from the territory of the People’s
Republicof Angoia. NorthernIreland
42. Wearealsogratefulto the sponsors
of the draft
resolutionfor the seriousefforts they have madeto
meet the objectionsto the originaldraft which were
put to themover theweek-end.
Nevertheless,
thedraft
still containselementswhich my delegationfinds
difficult to support.

The result of the vote was i3 in favour,
with one abstention.

one against,

The drafr resolution
was not adopted because of the
negutive
vote of one pertnunent
member
of the
Council.

43. In a statement
that I madesomeweeksagoon 46. ThePRESIDENT(interpretation
frow Spanish):
anothersubjectin theCouncil,1madeclearmy-view 1 shallnow call on thoserepresentatives
who have
that offensivecharacterizations
and highly coloured askedto beallowedto speakfollowingthe vote.
rhetoric directed againstStates Membersof the
Organizationdo not contributeto the possibilityof a 47. Mr. LICHENSTEIN(UnitedStatesof America):
peacefulsolutionof problems.
If you wishto colivince My Government
haslong
violentsolutior,s
to
- opposed
..
someoneby argument,you do not abusehim; nor, thk problemsof the southernAfrican region. Such
may I sayon the other side,do you launchmilitary violenceonly createsanatmosphere
that undermines
attacks againsthim. Oral abuse1 1 one side and seriousnegotiations.We deplorethe recent South
military achonon theotherarethevocabularyandthe African actioninto Angola,just as we deploreanv
cquipmcntof dr Air. Furthermore.there is still other escalationof violence-fromany quarter, a&l
languageboth in the preambularand the operative indeedhavebeenpreparedfromthebeginning
of these
parts of the drnft reso!ution10 whichmy delegation proceedings
to vote for a draft resolutionsobased.
cannot subscribe.1 shouldadd that if this draft
resolutionisadopted.I stateunequivocallyandonthe 48. Thereis little doubt that SouthAfrica’s resisspecificinstructionsof my Governmentthat it is the tanceto grantingthe peopleof Namibiathe right to
UritishGovernment’s
view that operativeparagraph
3 self-determination-as
the Councilhascalledon it to
will not constitutea determination
underArticle 39of do-is a basisfor the -nsicn and instabilitywhich
Chapter VII of the Charter. My delegationwill exist in the region:r.‘- At thesumetime, it is clear
thereforeabstainwhenthedraft resolution
isputto the that the presence
of ! ..:&i combatforcesin Angola
vote.
-particularly the largeCubanforce-the provisionof

..,.?:-.

Soviet.originatedarms to SWAP0 and the presence of
Soviet military advisers fuel the explosive atmosphere
of confrontation and violence which daily plaguesthe
people of Angola, Namibia and, indeed, the entire
region. As a result, the United States had to vote
againstthe draft resolution under consideration today,
a draft resolution wherein the blameis placedsolely on
South Africa for the escalation of violence.

54, The consequences
of that new strategymay be
truly ominous,The “new 8trategY.“, in fact, is a
demandto disregardthe will of the international
community,to invalidatethe basicresolutions
of the
UnitedNationsSecuiityCouncilandGeneralAssembly in respectof SouthAfrica. It is the call of one
Power,the United States,which, havingjoined the
South African racistsas a self-declared“regional
partner”, istrying to reversethehistoryof decolonizationin thatregionby forcingonindependent
Africa its
regimeon the African continent,

49, How, then, can we bring about a solution to the
conflict in the region? My Government’s approach is
not one which providesor promisesquick or easy
answers
to thiscomplexsituation,It is one,however, 55. It has beenofficially statedthat “the Reagan
whichis sharedby thosewho standfor co-operation Administrationdoesnot intendto destabilizeSouth
over confrontationand by thosewho will seriously Africa to pleaseothers”. That warningis frankly
considerthe settlingof differencesthroughnegotia- addressedto independentAfrican countries.The
tions, difficult as that processmight be. Those United Statesdoes not want to pleasethem but
negotiationsmust, of course,be on the basisof Pretoria.Similarrecently-declared
sympathies
for the
Council resolution435 (1978).With our contact racistsof SouthAfrica slippedin evenbeforethat, in
grouppartners,we aim to bring thesenegotiations the corridors,particularlyin Februaryof this year,
to fruition. The result mustcommandinternational when members
of the Councilpreparedan appeal
accentance.take into accountthe interestsof all [226&h meeting, para. 21to savethe lives of three
part& involved snd impart to them confidenceto fightersagainstapartheid who hadbeencondemned
oroceedwith implementation.Such a result will by Pretoria.As a pricefor that appeal,the delegation
glleviatetensionin the areato the advantageof ail of the UnitedStatestried to force other members
of
southernAfricans.
the Councilto grant recognitionto the horrendous
legalsystemof apartheid. For the last two weeks,
50. Withoutaddressing
in a balanced
waytheunder- members
of the Councilhave donetheir utmostto
lyingsources
of conflictin thearea,ontheotherhand, preparea newappealof that kind, for the apartheid
it is unlikelythat anywell-intentioned
effort canbring regimehassentenced
to deaththreeothermembers
of
aboutan endto the resortto violence.
theANC. If wehavenot madesuchanappealtodayit
isbecause
theUnitedStateshasagainblockedit in the
51, The UnitedStateswill continueto workwith the corridors.
That is the new strategy of, in fact,
contactgroupto advanceproposals
whichareconsis- pandering
to the apartheid regime.
tent with the resolutionsof the Counciland which
promotethe settlementin Namibiathat we all seek. 56. Now, for the othersideof the coin.The United
We will continueto act asanhonestbroker.Wewill Statesis statingthat it doesnot intendto destabilize
deny ourselvesthe indulgence
of taking sidesin the South Africa. But it doesintend to destabilizethe
public war of wordswhich accompanies
this most internalsystemof Angola.That istheonly waywecan
crucialissue.Our focuswill remainat the bargaining interpretwhat is saidin the statementof the new
table where we can most effectively pursuethe strategyof the UnitedStatesvi&vis SouthAfrica,
strugglefor a peacefulsettlementthrough nego- namely,tb.atAngolantraitorsandthe mercenaries
of
tiations.
SouthAfrica from UNITA [UnicioNational para a
Total de Angola] are seenasa lawful
52. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Independdncia
Republics)
(interpretation $0, Russian): The Soviet elementin Angola.
delegation
votedin favourof thedraft resolution
of the 57. Andwhatis the followingfact worth, for exam
Africanandothernon-aligned
countriesagainsttheact ale?In the samestatementin which somuchunderof aggression
committedby racistSouthAfrica be- itandingand somuchsympathywereexpressed
for
causethat draft resolutionreflectsthe demand
of the the aunitiveactionsbv SouthAfrica againstSWAP0
victim, Angola,andbecause
it reflectsthepositionand and’ the armedincursionsby the iacists against
interestsof independent
Africa.
neighbouring
African States,there wasnot even a
semblanceof criticism of the aggressiveactions
53. What hastakenplacetoday-a blockingof the committedby SouthAfrica againstAfrican countries.
draft by onedelegation
alone-isno mererepetitionof
eventsthat havetakenplacein the past.The vote of 58. Further,asregardsNamibia,againtherewasnot
about the South African
the UnitedStateswascastagainstthe draft resolution a word of dissatisfaction
in a particularlydefiantcontext. Wearetalkinghere racistshavingwreckedthe politicalsettlementof the
about the “new regionalstrategy” of the United Namibianproblem.Onthecontrary,theUnitedStates
the needto take accountof a condition
States,whichwasofficiallystatedonly afewdaysago, underscored
on 29August-the so-callednewregionalstrategyon whichPretoriais trying to imposein thisrespect.But
southernAfrica. It is againstthat background
that the that conditionis Geli known: it is agreementthat
Namibiarecognizethe SouthAfrican puppets.
UnitedStatesdelegation
cast its vote.

S9. When
StatesinSC
that the UI
wouldnot
actualfact
bv thenew
apartheid

favour of
choiceaga
in favoura
other wor(
and indeu
favouroic
SouthAfril
delegation
other non.
that.

60. One I
resentativ
mustbese
Wearenot
isdispara
did notexi
oneof the
all around
colour is I
causethe I
madness

61. Mr. C
of the draw
delegation
vote. Our
greatersin
member01
thisdraft.

62. Neve
features01
eringbeur
fbll contex

63. Thef
beena ma
Angolaby
falls saua
Charte; of
constitute
security,b
the peace

64. Thes
that werni
first time
with a corn
act of uggr
is the fifth
65. Thet
fact that t\

59, When that notorious new strategy of the United
States in southern Africa was proclaimed, it was stated
that the United States wanted to be objective, that it
would not choose between blacks and whites. But, in
actual fact, a decisive choice has already been made
by the new strategy and that choice is against the antiapartheid fightersin SouthAfrica; it is a choicein
favour of maintenance
of the apartheld system,a
choiceagainsta truly independent
Namibia,a choice
in favourof Namibiaasa puppetof SouthAfrica-in
other words,a choiceagainstthe security, stability
and independence
of African countries,a choicein
favourof continued
armedaggression
againstthemby
SouthAfrica. The negativevote of the UnitedStates
delegationon the draft resolutionof the African and
;rtt; non-aligned
countriesis eloquentproof of all
’

CharteragainstSouthAfrica, In resolution439(1978)
andanainin resolution475(19801,
the Councildecided
that, h theeventof anotherattackagainstAngola,the
Councilwouldinvoketheprovisionsof ChapterVII of
the Charter.In spiteof the movingpleamadeby the
representative
of Angolalast Friday, 28 August, in
whichhe said:“Let menot takebackto my people
anotherpaperresolution”[2296th meetiag, paw. 24,
the Counciltodayis deliveringto the representative
of
Angola what is not even a paperresolution;it is
nothingat all. The representative
of Angolais going
backto his peopleempty-handed.

66. It will alsohavebeennoticedthat thedraftwhich
hasjust beenvotedon isa very mildtext. Thisis not
the text with whichthe sponsors
beganthis exercise.
Thetext just votedon doesnot containany reference
to ChapterVII of theCharter.In spiteof the existence
60. One last thing. In today’s statement,the rep of an act of aggression,
the massiveness
of that
andtherepeatednatureof that aggression,
reeentativeof the UnitedStatessaidthat everything aggression
mustbe seenwithinthe context of a globalstruggle. there is no referenceto ChapterVII. Furthermore,
Wearenotevenmentioning
thefact thatthatapproach there is no referenceevento the fact of aggression,
is disparaging
for Africa in that it treatsit asthoughit even thoughwe are meetingto consideran act of
Whyhasthisbeenthe case?Clearly,we,
did notexist. Whatisworseis thefact that it reminds aggression.
havebeenanxiousfromthebeginningto
oneof thebehaviourof a bullwhoin hisrageseesred the sponsors,
all aroundhimandnothingbut red-not because
that retaintheunity andsolidarityof theCouncil.Wehave
colour is really presenteverywherebut simplybe. beenanxiousfrom the verv beninninnto retainthe
of the Council.
causethe bullyhimselfhaseyesthat arereddenedby collectivenatureof the responsibility
madness.
We have beenown-minded.We have invited ail
members
of the Councilto engage
in discussions
with
61. Mr. OTUNNU(Uganda):As oneof thesponsors usin a glveeand-take
mannerandto takeinto account
of thedraft resolutionthat hasjust beenvotedon, my all positive contributions.In spite of theseefforts
delegation
is mostdisappointed
at the outcomeof the on our part, the draft resolution-weak, mild and
vote. Our disappointment
in this respectis all the watered-down
asit is-is a fallenpieceof paper.
greatersinceit wasthe singlevote of a permanent
of the vetowehavejust
memberof the Councilthat blockedthe adoptionof 67. Whatthenisthemeaning
thisdraft.
seen?MY delegation
hadoccasion
to warntheCouncil
on 30April thit the trlple veto that wasthencastby
62. Nevertheless,
we deemit importantthat certain threeof its permanentmembers
wouldnot servethe
featuresof the complaintwe havejust beenconsid. purposeof peaceand securityin the world; that, on
eringbeunderlined,
in the spiritof appreciation
of the the contrary, it couldonly strengthenthe forcesof
apartheid andoppression.
Well, the aggression
which
full contextof the questionbeforethe Council.
we havejust beendiscussing
is clearly a result of
63. Thefirst featureis the fact that therehasindeed the signalthat wassentby the Council-especially
beena massiveact of aaaression
committedaaalns! by three permanentmembers-on 30 April [see
Angolaby SouthAfrica &l that thatact of aggr&sion 2277th meeflng).Thosewho castthe triple veto then
falls sauarelvwithin the context of Article 39 of the mustthereforetoday beara big shareof the responagainst
Charterof the United Nations.Indeed,it not only sibility for yet another act of aggression
constituteda gravethreat to internationalpeaceand Angola.Today’svetowill havethesameimpactasthe
security,but alsoresultedin an unnaturalbreachof triple veto of 30 April 1981.It will strengthenand
the peace.That isthe first feature.
protectthe aggressor
andexposethe victim, making
the httter ever morevulnerable.It will give comfort
64. Thesecond
featureof thecasebeforetheCouncil and encouragement
to the Pretoriarenime.It conthat we mustappreciateis thefact that thisis not the stitutesyet anothermightyblowagainst-the
peopleof
first time that-Angolahascomebeforethe Council Namibiain theirsearchfor genuineself-determination,
with a complaintagainstSouthAfrica arisingout of an It is a rebuff to thosewho seek to abide by the
act of aggression.
In thespaceof only threeyears,this Charterand, when inktred, seekremedyunderthe
is the fifth time.
Charterthroughthe instrumentalityof the Security
Council.
65. The third featurethat we mustappreciateis the
fact that twicebeforetoday the Councilhasformally 68. The essence
of the veto power is a notion of
postponedthe invocation of ChapterVII of the powerwith responsibility.But what wewitnessedon

30April and againtoday is the manifestation of power
without the corresponding exercise of responsibility,
power that has been used to frustrate the forces of
freedom and dignity and to provide cover to the forces
of oppression and tyranny,
69. Still, I say that all is not lost. We believe in the
principle of progress. On 30 April, we witnessed a
triple veto; today we have witnessed a single veto.
There has been some progress. It remains our hope
that even the permanent member who decided on this
occasion to abstain will soon join in a positive vote
and. indeed, we refuse to give up even on that one
single mountain, the one permanent member who cast
a negativevote today, becausewe believe that history
is a dynamic process and, because it is a dynamic
process, it is never too late to join in the global
consensus in favour of the forces of freedom and
dignity,
70. So once again, I extend an invitation to that one
permanent member, the one with the heaviest hand of
all, to come and join in the global consensus in favour
of freedom and dignity, It is never too late.
71, The PRESIDENT (interprelutionfiotn
Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Angola.
72. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO (Angola): Mr. President,
I have always admired your natural brilliance and
I hope that in that context you will accept the
appreciation of my Government and my delegationfor
the able manner in which you have presided over the
meetingsof the Security Council in connection with the
South African acts of aggression against the People’s
Republic of Angola and for the assistance we have
received from you personally and from the mission of
Panama.
73. Although the Council is shortly to end the
present series of meetings, I should like to point
out once again that the invasion by the South African racist forces continues and that areas in the
southern part of Angola are still under military
occupation. Contrary to South Africa’s announcements, the racist troops are still deep inside Angolan
territory. According to the latest reports, they have
now occupied Ondjiva, the capital of the province of
Cuncne, and the town of Xangongo has been mostly
dcstroycd. Over 600 people have been massacred
during this invasion alone and we have not yet even
beguu IO assess the damagecaused. It was to see for
itself the death and destruction of this particular
invasion that the Council was requested to send an
investigative team to Angola.
74. The nation of Angola, which daily suffers acts of
racist aggression of one kind or another. takes strong
exception to those views expressed here by the
representative of the United States of America that
sought to give an erroneous impression of the military
invasion and occupation of southern Angola by the

racist armed forces of South Africa. There is an
intimate connection among oppression, racism and
colonialism. But there is only one response: resistance, a war of liberation by any and all means, and
support for such a war, In this, Angola is doing no
more and no less than what is enioined on us by
resolutions of the United Nations,- of our own rkgional organization. I$‘ the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and of tne Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
75. The simple facts are these: the People’s Republic
of Angola is a sovereign independentState in southern
Africa, a Member of the United Nations, a member of
the OAU and a member of the Movement of NonAligned Countries. Angola has no borders with South
Africa. The racist regime is illegally occupying the
Territory of Namibia. Since 1975, its military forces
have repeatedly invaded Angola from Namibia. That
has been the issue before the Security Council: the
attacks perpetrated by South Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola. As for those who may wish
to discuss other issues, my delegation’s view is, yes,
let us do so, let us discuss them, but in the proper
context and in accordance with the proper procedure.
If they wish to discuss the independenceof Namibia,
let us by all means do so. In fact, that is why the
General Assembly is holding an emergency special
session in a very few days. If they wish to discuss the
question of foreign troops all over the world, let us
have a Council meeting on that subject. But any
attempt to bring up a matter which is the sole concern
of a sovereign, independent State, an issue limited to
the nationals of a sovereign State, is strictly outside
the jurisdiction of any entity, organization br orqan
and is the prerogative of the legitimate Government
and the people of that sovereign State. Revolutions
never go backwards and attempts to link unconnected
issues are morally wrong, politically unacceptableand
historically unjustifiable.
76. For every man who lives without freedom, the
rest of us must bear the guilt. The veto that was cast
here today was a veto cast against the principles set
out in the Charter of the United Nations, against the
principles of international law, against the human
rights of the peopleof southern Africa and against the
most basic human right of all, the right to live in
freedom and security. With that veto, the racism and
brutality of the Pretoria rcgimc have indeed been
strengthened and allowed another temporary victim.
The veto was an insult to the cherished concepts and
practices of independence, territorial integrity and
sovereignty. It was a callous requiem for those who
have been martyred by the racist troops.
77. The racist regime’s optrrthc4l syskm
and military exuansionism, as well as its regional terrorism.
have been made possible by rhe massive assistance
aiven to Pretoria by the United States. That pnlitical.
&onomic and military support has enabled the racists
to perpetuate and extend their system far beyond thch

borders
southern
threatens

78. Tha
world as
racism, il
its disreg
the Cour
has again
79. At
communi
by my G
face of c
tion of th
the Peop
but to in
Charter t
made re
addressef
80. In z
the Secu
Article 5
itself am
internatic
81. The
sought t
was nor
200 “spe
para.

,

381

their ten
and chilc
belittled
in May 1
W’dS also

racist Prc
in the las
children
against 1

borders into Namibia, Angola and other parts of
southern Africa. South Africa’s nuclear capability now
threatens much of Africa.
78. That veto can be seen by Africa and by the third
world as nothing short of support for South Africa’s
racism, its flouting of United Nations resolutions and
its disregard for humandignity and life. With that veto,
the Council’s potential for action in southern Africa
has again received a blow,
79. At this point, 1 must warn the international
community that 1 am empowered by my President and
by my Government to state categorically that, in the
face of continued inaction and increasing destabilization of the situation in our region, the Government of
the People’s &public of Angola may have no option
but to invoke, however unwillingly, Article 51 of the
Charter to which President Jose Eduardo dos Santos
made reference in his letter of 25 August 1981
addressed to the Secretary-General [S/14643].
80. In everv instance. we have broueht our case to
the Security~Council. Any efforts undertaken undetArticle 51 will fall within the bounds of the Charter
itself and we shall surely have the support of the
international community.
81, The representative of the terrorist racist regime
sought to give the impression that the situation
was normal in southern Angola, that there were
200 “spectators” at a football game [229&A tncetittg,
pat-a. 381.The Angolan peopleare being slaughtered,
their territory is under military occupation, women
and children are beine brutalized and raoed-that is
belittled and ignored. Perhaps the Cassinga massacre
in May 1978,in which over I .OOOoersons wsre killed.
was aisoa football match? By its-own admission, the
racist Pretoria regimehas killed more than 450persons
in the last few days and it continues to kill women and
children and other civilians. A war is being waged
against Angola today. Will the United Nations be

unable to do anything about it? Peace in southern
Africa can bc lasting only if it is peacebetween equals;
if it cannot be maintainedwith honour, it is no longet
Peace. Inaction will lead to all-out war in that part of
the world where, with South Africa’s racism,.o/>urlheid and military adventurism, conditions arejust ripe.
If 1 may quote:
“The wrongs which we seek to condemn and punish
have been so calculated, so malignant and so
devastating that civilization cannot tolerate theh
being ignored because it cannot survive their being
repeated.”
82. In conclusion, I should like to thank all those
who spoke in our defence and in support of those
principles by which many of us have chosen to live and
which are enshrined in the Charter: freedom, justice,
sovereignty, independenceand peace. For those who
drive nails into the coffin of liberty, there are others
who smash the coffin. To those -who defended tyranny, racism, imperialism and colonialism, I have
nothing to say except that those who deny freedom to
others will some day perish.
83,

A luta corrtitrua.

84. The PRESIDENT (ittterpretation
frotn Spanish):
The Council has thus concluded the present stageof its
consideration of this agenda item.
The tnre;ittg

rose at 8.45 pm.
