S/2011/58

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 February 2011
Original: English

Letter dated 6 February 2011 from the Permanent Representative
of Cambodia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I have the honour to forward to you herewith a letter dated 6 February 2011,
from Samdech Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister of the
Kingdom of Cambodia, addressed to you (see annex) regarding Thailand’s
aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Kingdom of
Cambodia.
I also have the honour to request you to convene an urgent meeting of the
Security Council with the participation of His Excellency Hor Namhong, Deputy
Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Kingdom of Cambodia, in order to address this flagrant act of aggression of
Thailand, which is a grave threat to peace and security in the region.
(Signed) Kosal Sea
Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of the Kingdom of Cambodia to the United Nations

11-22747 (E) 070211

*1122747*

S/2011/58

Annex to the letter dated 6 February 2011 from the Permanent
Representative of Cambodia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
With reference to my Foreign Minister’s letter dated 5 February 2011 to you I
wish to draw your attention to the worsening of the situation at the border between
the Kingdom of Cambodia and the Kingdom of Thailand as follows:
Once again, despite negotiation by the field commanders of both sides for a
ceasefire, on 6 February 2011, at 18.20 hours, Thai armed forces launched a fullscale armed aggression against Cambodia, using heavy sophisticated weapons
including many 105, 120, 130 155 mm artillery shells, which were fired into the
Temple of Preah Vihear, a World Heritage site, the region of Tasem, Veal Intry and
Phnom Trap hill, and others. All these areas are well inside Cambodian territory.
Thai artillery shells have landed as far as approximately 20 km inside Cambodian
territory.
While I write this letter to you, Thai armed forces still continue firing heavy
weapons into Cambodian territory.
This fresh onslaught by Thai armed forces has resulted in more human
casualties and damages to the Temple of Preah Vihear as well as other properties.
The repeated acts of aggression against Cambodia by Thailand violate the
following legal instruments:
1.

Articles 2.3, 2.4 and 94.1 of the Charter of the United Nations

2.

The Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, article 2, to
which Cambodia and Thailand are parties, provides for:
• Mutual respect for the independence, sovereignty, equality, territorial
integrity and national identity of all nations
• Settlement of differences and disputes by peaceful means
• Renunciation of the threat or use of force

3.

The Agreement concerning the Sovereignty, Independence, Territorial
Integrity and Inviolability, Neutrality and National Unity of Cambodia,
articles 2.2.c, 2.2.d, of the Paris Peace Accord in 1991.

Considering the recent extremely grave aggressions by Thailand, which has
gravely threatened peace and stability in the region, I earnestly request you to
convene an urgent meeting of the Security Council so as to stop Thailand’s
aggression. I would also highly appreciate it if you would circulate the present letter
to the members of the Security Council as a document of the Council.
Hun Sen

2

11-22747
