45

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

any income tax exemption in respect of the child of a staff
member accrues to the benefit of the United Nations under
arrangements for reimbursement of income tax, the staff
member shall receive the full amount of the dependency
allowance for such child.
"(ii) The Secretary-General may determine the amount of
the dependency benefits referred to in (c) (i) above on the
basis of categories established by him in the interest of administrative convenience and simplicity provided that the
benefit actually received plus the dependency aUowance shall
be no less than $300 in respect of a child."
As a result, the present paragraphs (c) and (d) become paragraphs (d) and (e).
Annex I, paragraph 5
Add the following new text :
"The Secretary~General may provide two further increments at $10,540 and $10,920, at two-yearly intervals, to staff
in the Second Officer level who have remained in that level
for at least five years and are, in his opinion, qualified for
promotion."

1226 (XII). Question of the geographical distribution of the staff of the Secretariat of
the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General regarding changes in the geographical distribution
of the staff of the Secretariat of the United Nations
during the year ended 31 August 1957, submitted to
the General Assembly at its twelfth session,32
Recalling its recommendation in paragraph 1 of resolution 1097 (XI) of 27 February 1957 that, in future
appointments to the staff of the Secretariat of the
United Nations, at all levels, appropriate preference
be given to nationalities which form a disproportionately
small part of the Secretariat, subject to the provisions
of Article 101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations,
Noting that the appointments listed in the report of
the Secretary-General mark a step towards the objectives of that recommendation,
Expressing appreciation of the action already taken
by the Secretary-General pursuant to that recommendation,
Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) In making future appointments to the staff of
the Secretariat of the United Nations, at all levels, to
continue his efforts to ensure the fullest possible conformity with the recommendation in paragraph 1 of
resolution 1097 (XI) of 27 February 1957;
( b) To report to the General Assembly at its thirteenth session the results of his efforts in that direction.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1227 (XII). Review of the Staff Regulations and
of the principles and standards progressively
applied thereto
The General Assembly

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
t~e review of the Staff Regulations and of the principles and standards progressively applied thereto. 33
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
.. Ibid., document A/C.5/718/Rev.1.
88
Ibid., document A/C.5/726.

1228 (XII). United Nations International School
and delegation office facilities
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations International School, 34
Noting that the School is in urgent need of permanent
premises, and that it is under notice to vacate its present
temporary premises in June 1959,
Noting that, in order to meet the needs of the greatest
possible number of children of United Nations staff
members, delegates and others associated with the
United Nations, such permanent premises should be
located in Manhattan,
Noting further that, in the view of the SecretaryGeneral, the provision of truly adequate accommodation
for the School is in the best interest of the Organization,
Recalling its resolution 1102 (XI) of 27 February
1957 on this subject and, in particular, the recognition
contained therein of the continued functioning of the
School as one of the important non-financial factors
contributing to the recruitment and retention of international staff,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the appropriate authorities on the possibility of constructing permanent premises for the United Nations
International School on the Headquarters site;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to use his good
offices to assist the Board of Trustees of the School in
finding a site for the School in Manhattan, including
the "Headquarters District", in developing plans for
the building, and in pursuing their efforts to raise funds
from private sources for the construction of the School
and, if necessary, for the acquisition of a site therefor;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to use his good
offices to assist the School in finding suitable accommodation pending completion of the permanent premises;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
General Assembly at its thirteenth session a progress
report, together with the comments, if necessary, of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.

B
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the discussions at previous sessions
concerning a delegation building to be constructed in the
area close to the United Nations Headquarters, and
the increasing interest expressed by many delegations
in having such facilities,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to use his good
offices to investigate practical possibilities for the provision of delegation office facilities in the area close to
United Nations Headquarters;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to make a progress report to the General Assembly at its thirteenth
session.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
"'Ibid., agenda item 52, document A/3688.
