United Nations

22nd

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING
Saturday, 25 June 1988,
at 11.50 p.m.

FIFTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

President: Mr. Peter FLORIN

specified in Article 19 of the Charter. May I take it
that the General Assembly duly takes note of this
information?

(German Democratic Republic).

It was so decided.

Programme of Work

AGENDA ITEM 3

I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I call on Mr. Richard William Butler of Australia,
Vice-Chairman of the Committee of the Whole of the
Fifteenth Special Session.

Credentials of representatives to the fifteenth
special session of the General Assembly:*
(IJ) Report of the Credentials Committee

2. Mr. BUTLER (Australia), Vice-Chairman of the
Committee of the Whole: On behalf of Mr. Ahmed,
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, I have the
privilege to report to this plenary meeting of the
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament on the progress of our work to date.

6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I invite members to turn their attention to the draft
resolution recommended by the Credentials Committee in paragraph 17 of its second report [A/S15/36/Add.l]. I shall now call upon those delegations
that wish to speak in explanation of vote on the
recommendation of the Credentials Committee.

3. The Committee of the Whole has been involved
in intensive consultations in the search for a consensus concluding document of the special session. A
short while ago the Committee agreed to suspend its
work and to allow private consultations to take place
in the search for consensus. At the present moment
those consultations are continuing, and I think I can
say there is hope that they will reach a successful
conclusion. The fact is that a little more time is
required for the completion of those consultations on
this day, 25 June, and it is my submission to the
Assembly, on behalf of the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, that note be taken of these
developments and that time be allowed for those
consultations to continue on 25 June.

7. Mr. SERVAlS (Belgium) (interpretation from
French): The fact that my delegation has not objected
to the credentials of the delegation of Afghanistan
cannot in any way be interpreted as implying recognition of the present regime in that country.
8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
We shall now take a decision on the recommendation
of the Credentials Committee contained in paragraph
17 of its report. In the Credentials Committee, the
draft resolution was adopted without a vote. May I
take it that the General Assrmbly wishes to proceed
in the same manner?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S-15/1

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
In view of the situation the Vic~-Chairman of the
Committee of the Whole has just described, we shall
suspend this meeting until that body concludes its
consultations.

B).

9. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I shall now call upon those representatives who wish
to explain their positions.

The meeting was suspended at 11.55 p.m., Saturday, 25 June, and resumed at 5.25 a.m., Sunday, 26
June.

10. Mr. FISCHER (Federal Republic of Germany):
I want to place on record our position on the
credentials of the delegation of Afghanistan. It is
important to note that the task of the Credentials
Committee is not a political one. The Committee is
not called upon to make political judgements about
the Governments that issue credentials. The fact that
we participated in the consensus on the report of the
Credentials Committee does not imply any such
judgement from our side.

Scale of Assessments For The Apportionment of The
Expenses of The United Nations*
5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):
I should like to draw the attention of members to
document A/S-15/l8/Add.3, which contains a letter
dated 24 June 1988 addressed to me by the Secretary-General informing me that, since the issuance of
his communications dated 31 May and 2 and 14 June
respectively, Equatorial Guinea has made the necessary payment to reduce its arrears below the amount

11. Miss SOLESBY (United Kingdom): The fact
that my delegation has raised no formal challenge to
the credentials of the delegation of Afghanistan
should in n~ way be taken to imply that the
Government of the United Kingdom will deal with

*Resumed from the 20th meeting.

425

-

A/S-15/PV.22

I
426
t;

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary

the present r{;glme m Kabul on a Government-toGovernment basis.
12. Mr. KAMAL (Pakistan): In regard to the second
report of the Credentials Committee, my delegation
wishes to place on record its formal reservation to the
credentials of the delegation representing Afghanistan at the third special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament. In view of the
decision taken by the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the realities of the situation in
Afghanistan, Pakistan continues to adhere to its
policy of withholding recognition of the regime in
Kabul.
13. Mr. YU Mengjia (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): Agreement has been reached with regard to
the question of Afghanistan, but the relevant document has not been fully implemented. Therefore my
delegation maintains its reservations as regards representation of Afghanistan.
AGENDA ITEMS 10 TO 16
Assessment of the implementation of the decisions and
recommendations adopted by the General Assembly
at its tenth pnd twelfth special sessions:
(a)

Report of the Conference on Disarmament;

(b)

Report of the Disarmament Commission;

(c)

Resolutions of the General Assembly in the
field of arms limitation ami disarmament;

(d)

Status of neg':ions on arms limitations
and disarmamt-aJiI in bilateral and various
multilateral forums

Consideration and adoption of the Comprehensive
Programme of Disarmament
Assessment of developments and trends;, including
qualitative and quantitative aspects, relevant to the
disarmament process, with a view ~o the elaboradon
of appropriate concrete and practical measures und,
if necessary, additional principles, taking duly into
account the principles and priorities established in
the final document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly, the first sUJecial session
de~'oted to disarmament
Consideration of the role of the United Nations in the
r.~ld of disarmament and of the effectiveness of the
uisarmament machinery
United Nations information and educatiomd actbities
in the field of disarmament, including measures to
mobilize world public opinion in favour of d~sarm­
ament:
(a)

World Disarmament Campaign;

(b)

Other public information activities

----~----------

Relatiorlship between disarmament and development,
in the light of the action programme adopted at the
International Conference
Adoption, in an appropriate format, of the document(s)
of the fifteenth special session of the General
Assembly
14. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Assembly will now turn to the report of the
Committee of the Whole of the Fifteenth Special
Session [A/S-15/50] on agenda items 10 to 16. I
request the Rapporteur of the Committee of the
Whole, Mr. Pedra Nunez Mosquera of Cuba, to
introduce the report.
15. Mr. NUNEZ MOSQUERA (Cuba), Rapporteur
of the Committee of the Whole (interpretation from
Spanish): It is my honour to place before the General
Assembly for consideration the report of the Committee of the Whole of the Fifteenth Special Session,
contained in document A/S-15/50. It has two main
chapters, entitled "Introduction" and "Work of the
Committee of the Whole". Annex I contains a list of
proposals submitted by Member States, and annex n
contains a list of non-governmental organizations
and peace and disarmament research institutes that
addressed the Committee.
16. The report objectively reflects the work done by
the Committee of the Whole over the past few weeks.
It is an expression of the persevering hard work of all
delegations.
17. The introduction contains 14 paragraphs. It
gives a brief description of the work of the Committee of the Whole from its establis::ment by tne
General Assembly on 31 May 1988 until its meeting
of 20 June. This first chapter also covers, inter alia.
the election of the Committee's Chairman, the 18
Vice-Chairmen and the Rapporteur. Reference is
made to the decision to set up three working groups:
Working Group I, under the chairmanship of Mr.
Davidson Hepburn of the Bahamas, to deal with
agenda item 10; Working Group 11, under the
chairmanship of Mr. Paul-Joachim von Stuelpnagel
of the Federal Republic of Germany, to deal with
agenda items 12 and 15; and Working Group Hi,
under the chairmanship of Mr. Paul Bamela Engo of
Cameroon, to deal with agenda items 13 and 14.
Reference is also made to the Committee's decision
to authorize it- Chairman to ask Mr. Alfonso Garcia
Robles o. ~,1p.x """ to conduct consultations on agenda
item 11 and to report subsequently to the lQmmittee.
18. Another matter of some importance is the
status of the documents that the Con, n: (tee of the
Whole had before it on agenda items 1 ~hrough 15,
some of which were introduced in the General
Assembly and others directly in the Committee of the
Whole. All are listed in paragraph 14 of the Committee's report.
19. Chapter 11 of the report concerns the work of
the Committee of the Whole on agenda items 10 to
15. There is a brief report on the substantive work of
the working groups and on the consultations conducted by Mr. Garcia Robles.

20. Working Grou
and 17 June, and th
8th meeting, on 20
the Working GrouJ
21. 'Working Grou
and 17 June, and th
8th meeting, took n
Group [A/S-15/AC
22. Working Grou
and 17 June, and at
the Whole took no
Group [A/S-15/AC
meeting a report 0
Group [A/S-15/AC
23. In addition, at
tee of the Whole, M
results of his consul1
verbatim record of t
24. The final par
foHows:
"At its 10th I
Committee of th
contained in doc
and Corr.l and ,
25. i should like to
tion with which all I
and informal meetil
tations, and the de<
Secretariat staff, in I
ment for Disarma
grateful for the ass
26. I have confin
introducing the reI
aspects; it would no
cur to evaluate the.
speaking on behalf 0
opportunity to do tI
be the peoples of thl
They deserve our 1
actions.
27.

The PRESIDJ

sian): If there is ne

rules of procedure, I
discussion of the r
Whole.

Pursuant to rule 6
decided not to discu.
the Whole.
28.

The PRESIDJ

sian): In that conne

Assembly proceed i
report of the Con
understanding that
will be free to mak
subject afterwards. r
the General Asseml

It was so decidea

I
22nd meeting-25 June 1988

20. Working Group I held 13 meetings between 6
and 17 June, and the Committee of the Whole, at its
8th meeting, on 20 June, took note of the report of
the Working Group [A/S-15/AC1I18].
21. Working Group 11 held II meetings between 6
and 17 June, and the Committee of the Whole, at its
8th meeting, took note of the report of the Working
Group [A/S-15/AC1I19 and Add. 1-3].
22. Working Group III held 12 meetings between 7
and 17 June, and at its 8th meeting the Committee of
the Whole took note of the report of the Working
Group [A/S-15/AC1I20 and Corr.1]. At the same
meeting a report of the Chairman of the Working
Group [A/S-15/AC1I2l] was also presented.
23. In addition, at the 8th meeting of the Committee of the Whole, Mr. Garcia Robles reported on the
results of his consultations, which are reflected in the
verbatim record of that meeting [A/S-15/AC1IPV.8].
24. The final paragraph of the report
foHows:

read~

as

"At its 10th meeting, held on 25 June, the
Committee of the Whole adopted its report, as
contained in document A/S-15/AC. l/L. I (Part I)
and Corr.1 and A/S-15/AC.l/L.I (Part Ill)."
25. i should like to make mention of the determination with which all delegations worked in the formal
and informal meetings and during unofficial consultations, and the dedication demonstrated by all the
Secretariat staff, in particular the staff of the Department for Disarmament Affairs. I am especially
grateful for the assistance given me.
26. I have confined myself in this statement to
introducing the report and outlining its technical
aspects; it would not be appropriate for the Rapporteur to evaluate the results achieved. Represt:ntatives
speaking on behalf of their Governments will have an
opportunity to do that, but first and foremost it will
be the peoples of the world that will assess our work.
They deserve our best efforts; they will judge our
actions.
27. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the
rules of procedure, I shall take it that there will be no
discussion of the report 'Jf the Committee of the
Whole.

Pursuant to rule 66 of the rules of, ·~edure, it was
decided not to discuss the report of thl! Committee of
the Whole.
28. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): In that connection, I suggest that the General
Assembly proceed immediately to take note of the
report of the Committee of the Who~e, on the
understanding that any delegation wishing to do so
wiil be free to make statements of position on the
subject afterwards. May I take it Lhat it is the wish of
the General Assembly to follow that procedure?

It was so decided.

42',

29. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Assembly will now proceed to take a
decision on the report of the Committee of the Whole
of the fifteenth special session, containeli in document A/S-15/50. May I take it that the General
Assembly takes note of the report of the Committee
of the Whole as the concluding document of the
special session?

It was so decided (decision S-15/24).
30. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I shall now call on representatives wishing to
make statements in explanation of their positions. I
remind speakers that interventions by delegations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
31. Mr. von STUELPNAGEL (Federal Republic of
Germany): Speaking on behalf of the 12 member
States of the European Community, I seize this
opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, for the
dedication and efficiency with which you have
presided over our meetings.
32. The Twelve express their regret that this special
session could not find consensus in the main part of
its work and that no consensus could be reached
despite the fact that in all caucuses-in the Working
Groups, in the Committee of the Whole, and in small
and large consultations-the atmosphere was remarkably good and the willingness of all delegations
to contribute to success was visible. We had a wise,
able and efficient Chairman of the Committee of the
Whole, and the Working Groups had done some
good preparation.
33. We regret that the concrete achievements during the last years and months in nuclear and conventional disarmament could not be translated to the
global multilateral field and that we did not find
consensus.
34. We should not now ask whose fault this was.
What we must do is answer the questiol1 "How can
we all maintain the role of the United Nations in the
field of multilateral disarmament?", and we must
live up to our answer.
35. It is our hope that the findings of this special
session, which are quite remarkable, may contribute
to the development of a new spirit that will promote
the ideals of what has been called "constructive
parallelism of bilateral and multilateral disarmament" in a mutually improving manner. No delegation is allowed to neglect its responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security and for its share
in the field of multilateral disarmament. What we
will have to do now is to assess how next we can
come to a consensus on those subjects on which
finally we could not agree.
36. The Twelve would like to thank Mr. Ahmed for
his untiring efforts, his patience and his fairness. He
is not to blame if the outcome of this special session
is unsatisfying. He tried his best, and we owe him
much gratitude and recognition. The Twelve also
want to thank the translators and all the other
members of the Secretariat who assisted us at this
special session.

I'

i
[:'

I
428

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary

37. Mr. CASTRIOTO de AZAMBUJA (Brazil):
The third special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament is drawing to a close. It has
been held in the wake of a long series of efforts by the
international community in the field of disarmament, most notably the special sessions Qf 1'978 and
1982. The presence in this Hall over the last few
weeks of an impressive number of heads of State and
Government and foreign ministers clearly shows the
common will for a world more secure and less armed.
Likewise it reflects the renewed vitality of the
multilateral process and the global recognition of the
unique role of this Organization in dealing with
matters of universal concern.

I

f,

38. In this spirit, President Jose Sarney addressed
the special session [10th meeting] to voice the faith of
the Brazilian people and Government in the salutary
process of building international peace and security
through disarmament. Moreover, he expressed the
support of the Brazilian Government for the United
Nations and its central role in the field of disarmament.
39. The Brazilian delegation participated in a constructive spirit both during the preparatory work and
in the work of the Committee of the Whole and its
three Working Groups. We co-operated actively with
all delegations in the search for balanced solutions. In
the course of this exercise we have time and again
displayed our willingness to be flexible and constructive in approaching the many important issues before
us. We have, I believe, contributed to the efforts
undertaken here by presenting a document containing principles pertaining to disarmament and international peace and security. Those principles, formulated originally in the address of President Sarney,
translate some of our deep beliefs in some crucial
areas.
40. The Brazilian delegation has always been supportive of the untiring efforts of Mr. Mansur Ahmed,
the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, in
trying to find compromise solutions for issues where
a wide spectrum of views existed. We have consistently accepted his formulations as a middle ground
with which we could all go along. We have also
supported the efforts of the Chairmen of the three
Working Groups and of the rest of the officers of the
Assembly.

43. We were perhaps a bit too ambitious at this
juncture. The good results of bilateral negotiations
between the super-Powers encouraged many to believe that such gains could be translated into a new
impulse for multilateral negotiations. Our recent
experience has shown that that was not necessarily,
nor immediately, the case.
44. Brazil continues to be fully engaged in our
common endeavour of strengthening the role and
primary responsibility of the United Nations in
matters of disarmament and international peace and
security.
45. My thanks must finally go to you, Mr. President, for your guidance and leadership throughout.
46. Mr. KATEKA (United Republic of Tanzania):
We are coming to the end of the third special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament.
This session opened on a high note, with the
participation of many heads of State or Government
in the general debate, and we were led to believe that
it would realize considerable achievement. Unfortunately, we were mistaken. The euphoria created by
the improved relations between the two major nuclear Powers did not permeate this session. While we
welcome the emerging dialogue between the two
super-Powers and the improved climate in their
relations, we have to be cautious. We have had such
spells before, ranging from peaceful coexistence to
detente. But such moments have come and gone,
only to be replaced by periods of hostility and
uneasiness. Such is the reality of international life.
47. Regrettably, those fluctuations in super-Power
relations have had an impact on the United Nations
and the three special sessions of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament. For example, in 1978,
which marked the tail end of detente, we managed to
have a successful first special session on disarmament. Four years later, in 1982, relations between
the super-Powers were at a low ebb, and thus the
second such session did not achieve much. Now, in
1988, when relations between the United States and
the Soviet Union are at their best, we are faced with
the irony of the third special session being a failure.

41. Despite the strenuous work done by all delegations over the past weeks, however, it has not been
possible to arrive at a full substantive text. My
delegation, as many others, had hoped for a document that, building on the consensus of the Final
Document of ! 978 [resolution S-10/2J ''''uld reflect
the new developments in the field of ,_I;q~ mament.

48. The events of the last few hours and the frantic
efforts to salvage the session are testimony to the lack
of political will to have a fruitful conclusion to this
special session. It has been a typical case of too little,
too late. What we have witnessed shows that it does
not follow that improved relations between the two
super-Powers will always be to the advantage of
multilateralism. What we have witnessed here during
the past four weeks is ample evidence of obstructionism on the part of some and a conspiracy of silence
on the part of others.

42. This is not the last special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarlilament. Others
will follow, and the endeavour to build a world of
peace and security based on the Charter will continue. We still have an enormous task ahead of us in
the years to come-namely, implementation of the
Programme of Action of 1978. This dynamic process
will continue in the Conference on Disarmament and
the Disarmament Commission and at future regular
and special sessions of the General Assembly.

49. We have been reminded from time to time that
our multilateral negotiations are inconvenient and
uncalled for in view of the success in the bilateral
dialogue between the two super-Powers. We are thus
expected to behave like disinterested onlookers while
the fate of mankind is determined by the mighty
Powers. We think the United Nations should not be
held hostage to bilateral negotiations; we cannot
accept that. We reject the attempt by some Powers to
hijack this session by dictating the direction of the

agenda to issues th
majority of manki
example, that arn
symptom of inten
to remind the spe
very cause of all
50. W have be
revise and water I
first special sessio
some Powers to re
us that we should I
the past. But Wt
Document in the
unfortunately, we )
out any adverse co
we said that
"No real progre
crucial field of
For more than
negotiations lea
complete disarn
para. 17.]
Who can fault t
ment?
51. Aside from
States of America
Republics on the F
Range and Shorte
ty-which redLces
missiles, what havl
1978? Even the COl
to this day eluded
52. What, then, a
tional ~om~unity
spent 111 111tenSlV<
Nothing. The nec<
lacking from the di
and from the first
priorities that were
ignored. In our nt
down play the pri<
weapons, which po
and to the survival
that nuclear weapc
for the past 40 ye2
was not given to j
But, unfortunately,
be achieved by ge
mately to eliminat
achieved by nucle2
as "limited nucle2
terror".
53. My delegation
areas of its concerr
hour we shall refri
should like to cor
realize that the thi
Assembly devoted
the disarmament p
chanted by the lac
without a clear me
ness of our effort.
proval at how W(
achievement. It is j

....

22nd meeting-25 June 1988

429

agenda to issues that are of greater significance to the
majority of mankind. We have heard arguments, for
example, that arms are not a cause but, rather, a
symptom of international tensions. But do we need
to remind the special ses.sion that the arms are the
very cause of all our troubles?

disarmament negotiations on the multilateral level.
Objective observers will not fail to notice that at the
eleventh hour we made an attempt to find some facesaving mechanism, but that we did not succeed. No
amount of patchwork could overcome the differences. We cannot feel proud of this.

50. W have been disappointed by attempts to
revise and water down the Final Document of the
first special session, as e'ddenced by the refusal of
some Powers to reaffirm its validity. They have told
us that we should be fnrward-Iooking and not look to
the past. But we CV..1ld rewrite the 1978 Final
Document in the document of this session-which,
unfortunately, we have not managed to adopt-without any adverse consequences. In 1978, for example,
we said that

54. Mr. YAMADA (Japan): As we conclude the
third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament I wish to express the sincere
appreciation of the Japanese delegation to you, Mr.
President, for the excellent leadership you have
exerted. I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude
to my dear friend, Mr. Mansur Ahmed, Chairman of
the Committee of the Whole, for his untiring and
devoted efforts to bring the special session to a
success conclusion. My delegation's appreciation also
goes to Mr. Hepburn, Mr. von Stuelpnagel, Mr. Engo
and Mr. Garcia Robles, and to Mr. Nunez Mosquera,
who have rendered valuable assistance to the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole.

"No real progress has been made . . . in the
crucial field of reduction of armaments . . . .
For more than a decade there have been no
negotiations leading to a treaty on general and
complete disarmament." [See resolution S-10/2,
para. 17.]
Who can fault that passage from the 1978 document?
51. Aside from the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Elimination of Their IntermediateRange and Shorter-Range Missiles-the INF Treaty-which redLces only a tiny fraction of nuclear
missiles, what have we achieved in the decade since
1978? Even the convention on chemical weapons has
to this day eluded the Conference on Disarmament.
52. What, then, are we going to give to the international community to justify the four weeks we have
spent in intensIve negotiations? The answer is:
Nothing. The necessary good will for success was
lacking from the days of the Preparatory Committee
and from the first day of this special session. The
priorities that were set out in 1978 have largely been
ignored. In our negotiations, efforts were made to
down play the priority to be accorded to nuclear
weapons, which pose the greatest danger to mankind
and to the survival of civilization. Those who believe
that nuclear weapons have maintained world peace
for the past 40 years have ensured that prominence
was not given to the question of nuciear weapons.
But, unfortunately, undiminished security can only
be achieved by genuine efforts to reduce and ultimately to eliminate nuclear weapons. It cannot be
achieved by nuclear deterrence or by such language
as "limited nuclear war" and "mutual balance of
terror".
53. My delegation had intended to underscore a few
areas of its concern, but owing to the lateness of the
hour we shall refrain from doing so. However, we
should like to conclude by saying that, while we
realize that the third special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament is not the end of
the disarmament process, we leave New York disenchanted by the lack of any achievement. We leave
without a clear message to the world of the seriousness of our effort. Observers will look with disapproval at how we failed to build on the 1978
achievement. It is a sad commentary on the state of

I

~

['
E

I

I

55. My delegation deeply regrets that the many
hours of very hard work we all put in have not been
able to produce a concluding document based on
consensus. However, my delegation feels that the
intensive search for consensus has been a very
valuable process. We were able to identify areas of
convergence on many of the major disarmament
issues which we should be tackling in the years to
come. We were indeed very close to agreement. We
should not take this as failure.
56. I note in particular that on the tvvo issues to
which the Government of Japan attaches high priority-the nuclear-test ban and nuclear non-proliferatIOn-we found a large body of the international
community sharing our belief on the direction in
which we should be proceeding.

I"

"

{1

:1
""j'

,

57. It is also encouraging that we reached an
extensive measure of consensus on the issues related
to the machinery that would be of particular relevance as we continue our multilateral disarmament
efforts. We should not let those significant agreements drift away. We should continue to exert
utmost efforts in these and other areas. In doing so,
we should make the best possible use of consensus, or
the seeds of consensus identified through our efforts
during the past four weeks. The Government of
Japan pledges its full commitment to the task ahead
of us.
58. Mr. OTT (German Democratic Republic): I
have the honour to deliver a joint statement on
behalf of the delegations of the People's Republic of
Bulgaria, the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic, the German
Democratic Republic, the Hungarian People's Republic, the Mon~olian People's Republic, the Polish
People's RepublIc, the Socialist Republic of Romania, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
59. The third special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament has been an important
event in the ongoing international dialogue on security and disarmament. With this session, the United
Nations had to respond to the challenges of our time.
It provided a universal forum for a broad dialogue

..
¥

."

430

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary

for paving the way towards the solution of the most
crucial problems humanity confronts at present and
will confront in the future. At this session ways and
means have been outlined on how we can-and,
indeed, must-take the chance given by recent
improvements in the international climate to foster
and broaden the process of disarmament, confidence
and co-operation. These main elements should become the prevailing features of international relations.
60. This special session has had a real chance to
contribute to harmonizing the efforts undertaken in
other forums dealing with issues of disarmament and
security in the bilateral, regional and multilateral
work. It is therefore to be regretted that it was not
possible, despite the great efforts made by many
delegations, to reach consensus on a substantive
concluding document. The conditions for that were
more favourable than ever before in the last few
years.
61. At the beginning of this session the Treaty
between the United States of America and the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Elimination of
Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles entered into force, and at their Moscow summit
meeting the leaders of both countries made new
headway with regard to further agreements on arms
limitation and disarmament. These achievements
were promoted by the actions of many States, antiwar movements and peace-loving forces on all continents. Disarmament, being a universal human aspiration, has become a universal goal of mankind
which can indeed be attained.
62. Guided by the conviction that disarmament is
the main road to security, socialist countries have not
only submitted concrete disarmament proposals but
also by deeds have promoted the achievement of
respective measures. They have taken an active and a
constructive part in the deliberations of this special
session. In the memorandum entitled "Security
through Disarmament" [A /8-15/26, annex] and in
other working papers, as well as in the statements
made by their representatives during the general
debate, the socialist States have outlined ways and
means to solve the broad spectrum of disarmament
issues, to strengthen international security and to
ensure greater confidence and create an atmosphere
of trust.
63. The delegations of the socialist States regard it
as positive that, all in all, a businesslike atmosphere
prevailed at the special session. Unfortunately, the
existing differences of opinion turned out to be
stronger than the will for co-operation and for a
balanced consensus. We should like to highlight the
important contributions made by representatives of
non-governmental organizations and scientific institutions regarding key issues of war and peace.
64. It should not be overlooked that at this session
many new constructive ideas have been advanced.
Such ideas relate to, among other things, an integrated approach towards international peace and security. They cover a wide range of measures concerning
arms limitation and disarmament, verification, confidence-building and the disarmament machinery.
We consider these initiatives and the discussion on

them to be an indication that, step by step, a new
thinking on international security and disarmament
and a comprehensive approach to these questions is
taking shape. On the other hand, outdated stereotyped thinking is persistent and still influences the
policy of some States in the field of disarmament.
65. There is growing recognition, however, that in
our interdependent world lasting peace and international security require multilateral co-operation in
the field of disarmament.
66. The delegations of the socialist States reaffirm
the various proposals they have submitted at this
session. We will spare no efforts in order to achieve
further progress in elaborating and adopting the
various internationally agreed measures. We attach
special importance and give priority to further steps
to reduce nuclear weapons, leading to their final
elimination.
67. An issue of special importance will be the
intensification of the work at the Conference on
Disarmament on measures leading to a comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty in harmony with the
Soviet-American full-scale, stage-by-stage negotiations.
68. The intensification of efforts to solve the few
outstanding problems of a convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons will prove the potential of
the single disarmament negotiating body to achieve
agreement on a measure of genuine disarmament.
We appeal to all States to promote this objective.
69. In our endeavours for nuclear disarmament we
will continue to promote the strengthening of the
regime of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons as
well as the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones.
Our session has proved again the growing support for
such important measures as steps towards achieving
a nuclear-weapon-free world.
70. The prevention of an arms race in outer space
through the conclusion of an international agreement
or agreements is an urgent task and is the subject of
important proposals which should be pursued with
all resolve and international co-operation, for the
peaceful uses of outer space should be promoted. We

---J-_.. . . of nrohihitinQ
,. . .
.

...:11
..""p thp
\'VIII ,.,1"' ...... l'.... th", .. n"
lJU£l3W,,",
... a.., nhipl'tivp
al~V

lU~"I.J."'''

Q

radiological weapons.

particular, full
the Security Cl
and 47 of the

73. To conso
cent years in 1
ament and con
a decisive bre
international c
The socialist S
nesslike man m
mise to reach
substantive COl
the future to cc
disarmament a
versible proces
74. Let me t
personally, Sir,
able staff for th
should like to I
Chairman of tl
tireless efforts
successful conc
other officers oJ
Chairmen of tl
75. Mr. YU r
Chinese): The
ament has aUrc
ments and peoI
ment and mini
countries have 1
express their de
to state their n
76. In order J
achieve success
spirit of active
forward many s
Many non-gove
continents and I
contributed to !
to advocating c
77. In a perio(
out intense wod
originally hopec
would achieve ~
disarmament. H
ment on a concl
express our regl

71. At this special session it became even more
apparent that besides nuclear disarmament, constructive efforts are also needed in the conventional
field. The socialist States share this view. In Europe
we work for the commencement in 1988 of negotiations on substantial reductions of armed forces and
conventional armaments from the Atlantic to the
U rals. These disarmament measures should be accompanied by a reduction of military expenditures in
order to improve the conditions for the social and
economic development of the peoples and to enhance
international co-operation on a mutually advantageous basis.

78. As everyb
responsibility fo
own position an
reach a consenSl
try their best t(
differences rem~
ous efforts in th
point out that a
ament responsib
that others cann
on its position. "
why we did not

72. The socialist States believe the authority and
role of the United Nations in the field of disarmament need to be increased and that its political,
legal and moral status needs to be enhanced. In

79. As some re
session has not b
goal has only b..:
ament is too im

22nd meeting-25 June 1988

431

particular, full use should be made of the potential of
the Security Council, in accordance with Articles 26
and 47 of the Charter.

security and for the welfare of all peoples and
countries for us to have any alternative to continuing
our efforts to achieve success.

73. To consolidate the progress achieved over recent years in the field of arms limitation, disarmament and confidence-building, as well as to achieve
a decisive breakthrou~h, collective efforts by the
international communIty of States are imperative.
The socialist States have always worked in a businesslike manner and with a readiness for compromise to reach concrete results and bring about a
substantive concluding document. We are ready in
the future to co-operate with all countries in making
disarmament a continuous, comprehensive and irreversible process.

80. In recent years there has been some progress in
disarmament work and some detente in international
situations. The peoples have welcomed this development. However, the arms race, in particular the
qualitative arms race, has continued and posed a
challenge to mankind. The disarmament task is still
very arduous and difficult. Needless to say, all
countries still need to make efforts to achieve
international peace and security. This session has to a
certain degree demonstrated the arduous nature of
our work.

74. Let me take this opportunity to thank you
personally, Sir, and the Secretary-General and his
able staff for the excellent work done. In particular, I
should like to express our gratitude to Mr. Ahmed,
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, for his
tireless efforts in trying to bring this session to a
successful conclusion. Our thanks also go to all the
other officers of the Committee, and especially to the
Chairmen of the Working Groups.
Mr. YU Mengjia (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): The current special session on disarm-

75.

ament has attracted the attention of many Governments and peoples. Many heads of State or Government and ministers for foreign affairs from many
countries have travelled far to the United Nations to
express their desire for peace and disarmament and
to state their respective positions on disarmament.
76. In order for the AS::lembly at this session to
achieve success many delegations, on the basis of a
spirit of active participation and reality, have put
forward many suggestions to promote disarmament.
Many non-governmental organizations from the five
continents and persons devoted to disarmament have
contributed to giving publicity to disarmament and
to advocating disarmament.
77. In a period of almost a month we have carried
out intense work and frequent consultations. We had
originally hoped that as a result of those efforts we
would achieve good results to promote the work of
disarmament. However; we have not reached agreement on a concluding document, and we cannot but
express our regret about that.
78. As everybody knows, all countries have a
responsibility for world peace. Every country has its
own position and views on disarmament. In order to
reach a consensus document, the various sides must
try their best to find common ground, while their
differences remain. Many countries have made serious efforts in this regard. However, we must frankly
point out that a certain country with special disarmament responsibilities over-emphasized certain logic
that others cannot understand and insisted strongly
on its position. That is one of the important reasons
why we did not achieve consensus.
79. As some representatives have pointed out, our
session has not been in vain. The achievement of our
goal has only b.;en postponed. The work of disarmament is too important for international peace and

81. Finally, I express our sincere gratitude to you,
Mr. President, to Mr. Ahmed, Chairman of the
Committee of the Whole, and to the Chairmen of the
various Working Groups for their ~reat efforts. I also
express our thanks and appreciatIon to the UnderSecretary-General of the Department for Disarmament Affairs and to that Department for its efficient
service and to all the Secretariat staff.
82. Mr. GHAHVEHCHI-MASHHADI (Islamic Republic of Iran): A former United Nations UnderSecretary-General once said that only a complete
change of heart or a devastating crisis can bring the
big Powers to shoulder their responsibilities. This
session, with all the efforts for its preparation and the
favourable international atmosphere, as well as the
relentless attempts by the majority of the delegations
present, was blighted some minutes ago. It is regrettable to see that the session did not live up to
international expectations.
83. Disarmament constitutes an important and
pressing need of our time which can contribute to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Unfortunately, during the past decade we have
witnessed the great resort by nations to armaments,
and the arms race has gamed momentum on an
unprecedented scale. This was due in large measure
to a lack of justice in international relations and to
the pursuit of the policy of might makes right. In the
past decade the territorial integrity of nations was
trampled, sovereign States became victims of aggression, and many international laws and regulations; as
well as customary laws, recognized norms of conduct,
conventions and international protocols, were violated.
84. We had hoped at this session to work out
arrangements to restore the faith of peoples in
international instruments, to give them confidence
that their rights are safeguarded by the international
community, and in that way to contribute to international peace and security at lower levels of armaments. Unfortunately, our hopes were dashed. We
have gone a long way, and now all of us are exhausted
and unsatisfied with the results of the session.
85. Now that the first rays of the morning sun are
putting an end to our dark night here, let us commit
ourselves to making joint and common efforts for the
good of all mankind. We cannot do that unilaterally.
Let us draw lessons from this session before a
devastating crisis occurs, since it would then be too

-

432

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary

late. Nothing must countervail our march to victory,
which is the achievement of lofty human values.
86. Finally, I express my delegation's sincere thanks
to you, Mr. President, to Mr. Mansur Ahmed,
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, to the
Chairmen of the Working Groups and' to all those
who so generously rendered their services to this
session.
87. Mr. FRIEDERSDORF (United States of America): The United States delegation regrets very much
that it was not possible to reach consensus on a
substantive concluding document that would have
embodied the very widely shared view that real
progress in disarmament has been achieved and that
prospects for further progress are good. The draft
document that was being developed under the patient and skilful guidance of Mr. Ahmed of Pakistan
was acceptable in large measure to most delegations.
It is unfortunate that the remaining differences of
view could not be bridged.
88. I want to highlight the recognition that has been
accorded to the importance of the INF Treaty
between the United States and the Soviet Union, to
the ongoing bilateral negotiations to achieve a 50 per
cent reduction in strategic arms, to a global ban on
chemical weapons, to strengthening the non-proliferation regime and to the importance of addressing the
problem of conventional weapons. The importance
of verification of and compliance with arms limitation and disarmament agreements has also been
widely acknowledged.
89. In spite of the absence of a concluding document for our approval now, the United States
delegation considers the third special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament to have
been a very useful session. We have listened to the
important views of heads of State or Government
and other high-level representatives on crucial issues
of our time relating to international security. We
have a new understanding. This new understanding
is one that I believe is very widely shared; it is an
understanding of how to build upon the successes
achieved in the past several years and how to
maintain and strengthen existing agreements. Most
importantly, it is an understanding of how to take
significant steps in nuclear and conventional disarmament over the next several years-steps that should
take us towards a world of increased stability and
security, towards a more peaceful world which we all
most earnestly seek.
90. Mr. RODRIGO (Sri Lanka): Allow me at the
outset to express our appreciation to you, Mr.
President, for all your endeavours during this session
which is now ending.
91. Assessments are not very easy; they had at any
rate best be brief. To have laboured so long and not
to have succeeded in reaching a consensus is a great
pity. The promise and expectations of the time were
great. The result has, unfortunately, not matched
them. All of us are losers in a sense. Nevertheless, the
effort has not been entirely wasted: we are all better
informed about each other's positions and the
firmness, obduracy and even intractability with
which some of them are held, and to that extent even

more conscious of the complexities of the issues
involved. More importantly, the long hours of debate
and controversy have indicated the deep concern of
the ent'ire membership of the Organization about the
state of disarmament negotiations.
92. We have all welcomed the improved relations
between the United States and the Soviet Union, the
INF agreement and the potential and promise all that
affords for the future.
93. As a non-aligned State, we are glad that our
long-held view has been vindicated-that peace and
security cannot be guaranteed by armaments and the
accumulation of armaments. As the leader of Sri
Lanka's delegation, Foreign Minister Hameed, indicated in the general debate [18th meeting], security is
best promoted by shedding rather than adding arms.

94. This is certainly no time to detail Sri Lanka's
position on the various issues that were before this
special session on disarmament. We see this session,
despite the lack of agreement, as an affirmation of
the international community's deep concern about
disarmament. This is not the first special session on
disarmament, nor do we believe it will be the last;
this is a continuous process, each session 'building
upon the past sessions and making its influence felt
on future sessions. It is an occasion for the international community, through the United Nations,
regularly to review progress in disarmament negotiations, to assess the present and to plan and project for
the future.
95. We have no consensus document, but the extent
and the level of the participation leave no doubt that,
as an exercise in participation in disarmament issues,
it has indeed succeeded. The United Nations remains
the parliament for disarmament. All of us must make
use of it with responsibility. That is the least we owe
to the peoples we represent here.
96. Finally, my delegation's thanks are due to you,
Mr. President, and to the three Chairmen of the
Working Groups. I should like to address a very
special word of thanks and deep appreciation to Mr.
Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan for his wise, dedicated
and patient efforts.
97. Mrs. THEORIN (Sweden): Let me first express
my delegation's appreciation of the efforts of all the
elected officers, not least the Chairman of the
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Ahmed.
98. The United Nations is no stronger than its
Members allow it to be, nor is the special session. We
came here to form a consensus document on disarmament for the years to come. We came from East,
West, North and South. We represent rich and poor
countries with different cultures, backgrounds and
political systems. We have one thing in common-a
longing for peace, security and a better life for our
peoples. We also have a common responsibility to
make every effort to fulfil those aspirations.
99. It is without doubt the joint responsibility of the
major nuclear Powers to eliminate the nuclear threat
and create the foundation for peace. But peace and
security can be built only by the common efforts of
the whole international society. All nations have a

stake in
and all •
cannot
internat
disarma
because
nuclear
In a po

100. T
that in t
special
owin 6 tl
enough
failure (
outstanc
and nig:
reach a

101. A
we react
not lea~
issues. 1\
the past
each an<
we were
attached
been vel
not suce
102. In
express I
not prov
design al
notice n
Let it n
wisdom
curse the
very hon
really do
commun
103. M
sion has
hoped; it
delegatio
104.

M

wholehe,
speciai s
consolid,
trol over
In some
aim, in ~
meetings
Secretary
made St8
le:; M'
efforts fo
tions, W(
proposah
is sad tl
consensu
represent
positive!
resolve a
106. W(
positive s

22nd meeting-25 June 1988

stake in and responsibility for our common future,
and all should have an opportunity to participate. It
cannot be in any country's interest to have the
international community set aside in the field of
disarmament. This applies especially to the present,
because for the first time in history we have seen a
nuclear disarmament treaty signed and we are clearly
in a positive climate for future disarmament.
100. Therefore, my delegation strongly deplores
that in the end it has not proved possible to bring this
special session to a successful conclusion, mainly
owin6 to the fact that we did not allow ourselves
enough time. It would have been easier to accept
failure owing to a real impossibility of solving the
outstanding issues. But, not least, this past evening
and night convinced me of the real willingness to
reach a consensus agreement among us.
101. As other delegations have already mentioned,
we reached agreements on issues of great importance,
not least among them several important nuclear
issues. My delegation has made great efforts during
the past few weeks to find language acceptable to
each and every one, and in the spirit of compromise
we were willing to give up positions to which we
attached great importance. Our own demands have
been very sensible; nevertheless, in the end we were
not successful.
102. In these circumstances, I am impelled to
express my Government's disappointment that it has
not proved possible to reach consensus. As though by
design and not by accident, we hear the thunder and
notice the heavy clouds darkening the skies outside.
Let it not be a sign for the future work. As old
wisdom has it: "Better to light one candle than to
curse the darkness." I fully agree with that. But to be
very honest, even though I am by nature optimistic, I
really do not see that "candle" for the international
community just now.
103. Miss SOLESBY (United Kingdom): Our session has not ended in the way we would all have
hoped; it is a moment of great disappointment to my
delegation, as to all of us.
104. My Government has been committed to work
wholeheartedly for a successful outcome to our
special session. We saw it as an opportunity to
consolidate the positive achievements in arms control over recent years and to point the way forward.
In some im~ 1rtant respects we have fulfilled that
aim, in particular through the debate in the plenary
meetings of the Assembly where my own Foreign
Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, was among those who
made statements [lOth meeting].

10:', My delegation has played its full part in the
efforts for a concluding document. Like other delegations, we have put forward a number of specific
proposals for action as well as drafting suggestions. It
is sad that our joint efforts did not result in a
consensus on a concludin~ document. I believe all
representatives were workmg in a constructive and
positive spirit, but it just did not prove possible to
resolve all the differences between us.
106. We must now do our best to build on the
positive side of our session. My own delegation will

433

be particularly concerned to pursue the proposals put
forward by my Foreign Secretary for improving the
effectiveness of the ban on the use of chemical
weapons under the 1925 Geneva Protocol. We have a
full practical agenda, not only in nuclear-arms-control measures, but also steps to reduce the worrying
levels of conventional arms and forces in many areas
of the world, as well as the negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament for a comprehensive,
~lobal and effectively verifiable convention on chemIcal weapons. This agenda calls for complementary
measures on a bilateral, regional and global basis. For
our part, we intend to press ahead with the work
before us.
107. I should like to join others in paying warm
tribute to Mr. Ahmed for his dedicated and wise
leadership, as well as to the Chairmen of the three
Working Groups, and to the Under-Secretary-General and the staff of the Department for Disarmament
Affairs. And my thanks to you, Mr. President, for the
able way you have presided over our session.
108. Mr. ENGO (Cameroon): I have been looking
for quotations. I think our emotions are touched; the
moment seems sad; sometimes when a single unhappy event occurs a man seems to forget about the
happier things. I believe it was Shakespeare who
wrote
"When beggars die, there are no comets seen;
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of
princes. "
Reference has been made to the sound of thunder we
hear from outside. If it demonstrates sadness in any
way, I think it is sadness that all our labours, all the
tremendous advances we have made in different
directions are not in fact reflected for the international community to see.
109. I asked to speak in order to express deep regret
that a document that formed the basis for our
negotiations is no longer with us. If only that
document had been published and given its rightful
place, with sufficient explanation about areas in
which we could not find agreement, and if only it had
been shown that we were abie to formuiate 62
paragraphs, meeting with difficulty in only five or
six. As the representative of Sweden would put it, if
we had had a little more time we might have reduced
that number.

Mr. van Schaik (Netherlands), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
110. We must not end on a note of despair and
remorse. If we turn back the clock to our preparatory
work, we will recall that at that time our labours were
plagued by renditions of various traditional national
positions, most of which were variations on old
themes of confrontation, most of them taking their
cue from conditions of conflict that seem to plague
our generation at this time. If we turned the record
over and replayed what has happened during these
past four weeks, we would find a definite decision on
the part of most if not all delegations to attempt to
seek solutions to the problems.

•
434

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary

111. It must be understood that sometimes we are
working under very difficult circumstances, because
those who give us instructions about what we should
do, what positions we should take and what form the
negotiations must take are not always present at the
scene of negotiations to understand the climate in
which we representatives must try to negotiate very
important issues. That is part of the difficulty we
face. In some instances one has considerable negotiating to do even within one's own nation, and the
bigger it is, the more complex the situation.

t

.

c
r

l

.\

112. I do not want to provide reasons for those who
were unable to make the type of contribution they
would have liked to make to our work, but one thing
that runs through our minds, no matter how remorseful we feel, is that the important role ..J the United
Nations has once again been demonstrated to its
highest degree. We have here ambassadors and
specialists and representatives from around the
globe. Outside a regular session of the General
Assembly, we have had a full Hall here; at every
forum in which we negotiated the rooms were full.
That demonstrates at least that the United Nations is
still considered a very important place where nations
must try to negotiate the future of mankind. I think
that is a happy thing, especially at a time when we are
all praying and working hard to ensure that the
multilateral process succeeds.
113. My delegation, as the delegation of an African
nation, is particularly pleased that, consistent with
the wish we expressed in our opening statement, it
has been possible at this session for all sectors of
humanity to understand that Africans, who are
sometimes considered not developed enough to embark on sophisticated negotiations in various forums,
demonstrated, we hope to everyone, that our concern
for the peace of the world and for security is no less
than that of any other country or any other part of
the world. In recent years, at the level of heads of
State or Government and at the level of foreign
ministers, the African scene has seen much discussion about security, about confidence-building, about
verification and so forth. We are there, and that is the
message we have brought to this forum.
114. Looking to the future, we must understand
that the United Nations is not an institution that was
set up to register only successes in terms of attending
conventions. The United Nations begins to register
its success with the mere fact of its being able to
organize meetings, with the fact that it is able to
organize mankind in such a way that we can address
problems of common and mutual interest. That is the
foundation. The Vice-President now in the Chair
comes from a country that participated in the
European Cup Final yest~rday; it had the great joy
and privilege of winning the Cup, beating a country
considered a super-Power of this age. Yet, watching
that match one recognizes that in terms of sport there
were two victors yesterday: both the Soviet Union
and the Netherlands won because they maintained
the great traditions of sport. They both played well,
and they both promoted international understanding
by the high standard they maintained.
115. I think we here can take a lesson from that: we
met here, we recognized one another's right to speak,
to propose and also to disagree. Consequently, I

think we should depart feeling satisfied that we have
in fact reached a certain stage. We might not have
attained a document called a final document as a
result of our effm ts, yet we have brought home to the
cynics the conviction and the truth that this is a
viable institution and that the United Nations must
continue increasingly to play a vital, in fact a central,
role in the process of seeking peace and security for
mankind. I think one of the greatest of our attainments was to recognize some of those elements. We
also had a large degree of consensus on the machinery for realizing those truths. Even if we did not adopt
a document by consensus we have all come to a
meeting of the minds as to how we should strengthen
the machinery by which we are trying to address the
disarmament question.

Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic) resumed
the Chair.
116. Those few thoughts should give us courage;
they should inspire us to greater effort in the future.
That is the message we should carry to our respective
Governments to reassure them that here there is a
forum in which we can solve problems, that the
meeting between the Soviet Union and the United
States can be viable and long-lasting if it is part of
this system.
117. I wish to end by thanking the Chairman of the
Committee of the Whole, Mr. Mansur Ahmed, and
the Rapporteur, Mr. Pedro N6nez Mosquera of
Cuba, who gave us such an adequate report. We also
thank you, Mr. President, for your patience in staying
up until this hour. We want to thank all delegations
here for making this effort so worthwhile.
118. Mr. PETROVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Today we
are witnessing the closing of the third special session
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament;
tomorrow the session will belong to history. I think I
am fully justified in saying that this session will
occupy a very prominent place in the annals of the
United Nations. It was convened at a very important
time, when a period of true nuclear disarmament was
beginning. It was precisely at this time that our
session, accompanied by a genuinely popular assembly of representatives of various social and nongovernmental organizations, initiated fresh ideas and
proposals, the implementation of which will make it
possible to put into motion the entire disarmament
machinery and lend real content and meaning to it.
119. The session showed that the new political
thinking presupposing the rejection of confrontation
and power struggles, and the parallel constructivism
of multilateral and bilateral efforts by States have
begun to take root widely in world politics. In fact,
the dialogue on security in the military field during
the session has been given new meaning. The culture
of dialogue has become different as well. It has
ceased to be verbal fencing in a quest for victory over
an adversary and is becoming a source of truth in the
search for ideas. Of course, the resumption of United
Nations activities has, as for anything new, been
restrained by conservative reactionary forces; this
was reflected in the work of the session. We share the
regret expressed by other delegations that because of
those forces it was impossible to reach agreement on

125.
sian)

Assel
exclu
an in
worle
vital
126.
tive ~
highe
devol
head~
head~

22nd meeting-25 June 1988

·I
,

f
)

,
I
1
t

s
r

a document, especially since consensus was nearly
within our grasp. The Soviet delegation was prepared
to do what it could to reach consensus on all points of
the document.

participated in that debate, which in my view was
characterized by a qualitatively new level of multilateral discussion of problems of arms limitation and
disarmament.

120. Yet we should not be totally discouraged. As a
unique laboratory of new ideas, the session has
created a considerable possibility for its rich potential to be utilized in practical action, albeit in other
forums, thus serving to further movement in all areas
of disarmament.

127. It has become clear from the substantive and
generally business-like deliberations how the positions of States and groups of States on the main
issues of disarmament and international security are
moving closer to each other. What has proved useful
has been the open and substantive dialogue about
those items where different positions continue to
persist.

121. The Soviet Union has been given powerful
impetus for action in all areas of the quest for
disarmament. We note with satisfaction that our
priorities are shared by the international community.
Those priorities include: the conclusion of a treaty
between the Soviet Union and the United States on a
50 per cent reduction of strategic offensive arms and
compliance with the Treaty on the Limitation of
Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems, signed in 1972; the
prohibition of testing nuclear weapons; the prevention of an arms race in outer space; the prompt
conclusion of a convention prohibiting chemical
weapons and the elimination of industrial facilities
for their production; the reduction of conventional
weapons and armed forces and the beginning of
negotiations on that subject with respect to Europe
from the Atlantic to the Urals; and, finally, the
introduction into the disarmament process of machinery for verification, openness and trust.
122. Our road to disarmament has many lanes,
where there is room for bilateral as well as multilateral efforts. We think it extremely important, in
present conditions, that the bilateral processes be
supplemented by multilateral processes and that they
enrich each other in all these areas. And, certainly,
we shall continue to rely on the wisdom and experience of the international community and the knowledge we have acquired during this special session.
123. In conclusion, we convey our sincere thanks to
you, Sir, to Mr. Ahmed, Chairman of the Committee
of the Whole, to the Chairmen of the Working
Groups, to the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs and to all the Secretariat staff who
assisted us in the work of our session.
1')4
-_..

:l
t
t

II
(1

n

e
t,
g

e

,s
:r

e
d
n
ls
,e

)f
n

435

Thp
.&

.... _

Ptn::;~Tnpl\o.TT {j",t,wr"""t"t;"",
......

.....,uAL<oI'".L.Il'";.

,£,..t.~,p,c'Ur..'V',

r~,,~ D.,n
J'V'"
.l"UJ-

sian): We have thus concluded our consideration of
agenda items 10 to 16 and of all the other items on
our agenda.

Statement by the President
125. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The fifteenth special session of the General
Assembly has been the third such session devoted
exclusively to questions of disarmament. It has been
an important highlight in the eventful history of our
world Organization's dealing with this question so
vital for mankind.
126. At this special session there has been a productive and very important general debate, held at the
highest level ever in the history of special sessions
devoted to disarmament. Our thanks go to the many
heads of State or Government. foreign ministers and
heads of delegation who with great commitment

128. As has been underlined many times, the
coincidence in timing between the beginning of the
special session and the Moscow summit meeting
between the Soviet Union and the United States was
of particular significance. The ratification of the
Treaty on the Eiimination of Intermediate-Range
and Shorter-Range Missiles by both States has been
welcomed.
129. The special session reflects the realities of the
present international situation. Along with the efforts
to find a new approach and a new language in dealing
with the complicated problems of arms limitation
and disarmament, the old problems and attitudes
persist. I share the view, which has often been
expressed here, that regards the special sessions of
the General Assembly as part of the overall disarmament process, as part of the efforts to find solutions
to this question vitClI to mankind. At the same time,
as has been stated here on several occasions. the
special sessions serve to reaffirm the interrelationship between bilateral and multilateral negotiations
in that field.
130. Thus, during the past weeks, as in the extended process of preparing for this session, we have
witnessed not only a discussion of new ideas and
proposals but also intense negotiations on all aspects
of our agenda.
131. The question has been asked: What is new
about this special session? In this respect, a number
of replies have been expressed. several of which I
want to mention. An improved international atmosphere opens up new possibilities for the disarmament process. The momentum of that development
should be put to use, and for that, bilateral, regional
and global efforts should go hand in hand. What is
remarkable is how broad-ranged and concrete the
proposals submitted by States of all groups are. The
range of areas of consensus has been widened. Points
of disagreement have been reduced and have assumed sharper, narrower contours. There has been a
growing awareness of the relationship between such
factors as disarmament, security, development and
the environment. The role and dangers of the military use of new technologies have been studied in
greater depth. Aspects of the importance of multilateral verification efforts and the role of the Organization in that context have been raised explicitly. Thus,
the value of a special session focused exclusively on
questions of disarmament lies also in the fact that it
concentrates the intellectual potential of the international community on that question vital to mankind.

436

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary

132. Our work has been concentrated on concrete
tasks in the field of disarmament. I should like to
underline the intensive discussion on problems of
nuclear disarmament, on the cessation of all nuclearweapons tests and on the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons. Great importance was attached to the
speedy elaboration of a convention on the prohibition of chemical weapons. In that respect the Conference on Disarmament has a great deal of work to do.
133. Of no less significance was the exchange of
views on the urgent tasks of conventional disarmament and the prevention of an arms race in outer
space. It is encouraging to see how the growing
understanding in the field of verification and confidence-building can advance the process of arms
limitation and disarmament. Existing nuclear-weapon-free zones were supported and the possibility of
the creation of new zones was discussed.
134. Last, but not least, I attach great importance to
the profound discussion on the strengthening of
international security in a world with ever fewer
weapons. The time has come to break the cycle of
mistrust, accumulation of arms, military rivalry and
mutual fear and to proceed to the search for security
for all. Our words must be followed by deeds. In view
of the realities of our world, a few critical remarks
appear appropriate. The international community is
aware of the problems that exist. The nuclear and
conventional arms race has not been halted. Nuclearweapon tests continue. The struggle to settle regional
armed conflicts is no easy task. The gap between
developed and developing countries, which poses a
very serious problem, has not been narrowed. In
short, military and non-military global challenges
await their solution.
135. It is to be regretted that delegations could not
reach agreement on a joint concluding document.
Divergent positions made consensus impossible.
What now matters is to intensify the dialogue in
order to reach convergent positions. Greater readiness for compromise appears to be advisable. What is
decisive is the common interest of all nations in
safeguarding international peace and security, the
universal commitment to a shared human destiny.
C
rI

r

(
I

~

136. History has shown that the United Nations has
a central role and primary responsibility in the field
of disarmament. Recognition of that fact was the
basis for the historic Final Document of the first
special session devoted to disarmament which, inter
alia, spelt out methods of work for and directions to
be taken by the disarmament machinery of the
United Nations. The valuable discussions at this
special session are a substantive contribution to u5ing
this now-proven machinery and enhancing its effectiveness. I believe that with the proposals made, the
role of the United Nations and its organs in dealing
with disarmament problems will grow.
137. It gives me particular pleasure to point to the
activities of non-governmental organizations, both

before and during the ~pecial session. They have
followed our work and our discussions with great
attention all over the world, and they have contributed to mobilizing world public opinion for the cause
of peace and disarmament. Millions of signatures
were collected and handed over to the spedal session.
They symbolize the people's confidence in and
expectations of the United Nations. Those expectations must not be disappointed. The World Disarmament Campaign will be continued.
138. In conclusion, I have the pleasant task of
saying thank you. The positive aspects of our session
are due to the merits of all delegations, which have
worked with endurance and initiative during this
eventful session. We are particularly grateful to the
experienced and skilled diplomat who presided over
the Committee of the Whole, Mr. Ahmed of Pakistan, as well as to all the officers of the Committee of
the Whole, the Chairmen of the Working Groups,
Mr. Hepburn of the Bahamas, Mr. von Stuelpnagel of
the Federal Republic of Germany and Mr. Engo of
Cameroon. They have made invaluable contributions.
139. I should like to extend my thanks to all the
Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly who shar.ed
with me the responsibilities involved in piloting this
eventful session. We all appreciate the intensive
activity of the Secretary-General during this session,
at a time so difficult for the Organization. My thanks
also go to the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and General Assembly Affairs and the Under-Secretary-General for Disarmament Affairs and their staff,
as well as to all oth\ - "'11bers of the Secretariat who
with their dedicate\..' / ..k have also facilitated the
smooth running of the session. At this time of leavetaking, I should like, finally, to underline that it was
an honour for me to work together with you at th~s
special session devoted to disarmament. I thank you
for your attention and wish you the very best.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
140. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): We have now com~ to the end of the fifteenth
special session of the Generai Assembly, the third
special session devoted to disarmament. I invite
representatives to stand and observe a minute of
silent prayer or meditation.

The representatives observed a minute of silence.
Closure of the fifteenth special session
141. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I declare closed the fifteenth special session of
the General Assembly.

The meeting rose on Sunday, 26 June, at 7.25
a.m.

'<
