66

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Welcoming the progress achieved so far on the establishment of the International Fund for Agricultural
Development,
Noting that, relative to their combined gross national
products, the contributions pledged by the developing
countries are substantially large,
1. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments
that have made pledges of contributions to the International Fund for Agricultural Development, especially
to the Governments of the developing countries;
2. Expresses also its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and to the Executive Director of the World
Food Council for their efforts towards the establishment
of the Fund.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/156.

Action programme in favour of developing island countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3338 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974 in which it invited the executive heads of
the organizations concerned within the United Nations
system to intensify their efforts with respect to developing island countries, within their fields of competence,
Recalling further its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation in which it, inter alia, called for
special measures to be undertaken by developed countries and developing countries in a position to do so
to assist in the structural transformation of the economy
of the least developed, land-locked and island developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development54 in which a series of special measures and
specific action, respectively, in favour of the least developed countries and in favour of the land-locked and
island developing countries were recommended as supplementary action to the general measures applicable
to all developing countries in the spirit of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 55
Recognizing the particular impediments hampering
the economic development of many developing island
countries, especially their difficulties in respect of transport and communications, the smallness of their economies and markets, their low resource endowment and
their heavy dependence on a few commodities for foreign exchange earnings,
1. Invites the executive heads of the organizations
concerned within the United Nations system, in particular the United Nations Development Programme, in
the continuation of their efforts with respect to developing island countries to incorporate in their regional and
interregional programmes the relevant recommendations
contained in resolution 98 (IV) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development;
54 See

Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10),
part one, sect. A.
55Resolutions3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vr).

2. Urges all Governments, in particular those of the
developed countries, to lend their support, in the cont~xt
of their assistance programmes, for the implementat!on
of the specific action envisaged in favour of ?eveloptng
island countries within the framework of their development plans and priorities;
3. Calls upon the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through
the Economic and Social Council, a progress report
on the implementation of specific action in favour of
developing island countries.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/157.

Specific action in favour of land-locked
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2971 (XXVII) of 14 December 1972 and resolution 63 (Ill) of 19 May 1972
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,~6
Recalling also its resolutions 3169 (XXVIII) of
17 December 1973 and 3311 (XXIX) of 14 December 197 4 on special measures related to the particular needs of the land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly and its related organs and
by specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of land-locked developing countries,
A ware of the need to implement immediately the resolutions adopted by the United Nations, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, particularly its resolution 98 (IV) of 31 May 1976,57 and
other related organs of the United Nations calling for
specific action in favour of land-locked developing
countries,
Noting with concern that the problems of the landlocked developing countries have not found adequate
solutions and that concrete and effective operational
measures have not yet been taken in their favour,
Noting further that the difficulties faced by the landlocked developing countries, especially their remoteness
from the sea, impede their active and full participation
in the world economic life and hamper their development,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the land-locked
countries and the specialized agencies, to find ways and
means of improving the economic situation of the landlocked developing countries through the urgent implementation of resolutions 63 (Ill) and 98 (IV) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
2. Calls upon Member States and the entire international community to give special attention to the trade
requirements of the land-locked developing countries,
including the possible provision of preferential treatment of their goods;
r,6 See Proceedings vf the United Nations Confere11ce mi
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report a11d
Annexes (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.73.II.D.4),
annex I.A.
57 Ibid., Fourth Session, vol. J, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10), part one, sect. A.

67

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

3. Invites the appropriate organs of the United
Nations system, as well as the regional development
banks, to pay special attention to the particular problems of the land-locked developing countries in their
assistance to national, subregional and regional infrastructural projects related to transit;
4. Urges the developed countries and all others in
a position to do so to provide technical and/ or financial
assistance in the form of grants or in the form of concessional loans on appropriate terms to the land-locked
developing countries for the construction, improvement
and maintenance of their transit roads;
5. Calls upon the Governments of developed and
developing countries to invite and urge shipowners,
members of liner conferences and insurance companies,
as far as is feasible, to establish freight rates and premiums for the land-locked developing countries, which
will encourage and assist the expansion of trade of these
countries, and to develop promotional rates for nontraditional exports of these countries, which will facilitate the opening up of new markets and the development
of new trade flows;
6. Invites all Member States and the competent
international organizations to assist the land-locked developing countries in facilitating the exercise of their
right of free access to and from the sea.
I 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/158.

Debt problems of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Further recalling resolution 94 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 158
Noting with grave concern that heavy debt-service
payments, current account deficits stemming from maladjustments in the world economy, inadequate balanceof-payments support and long-term development assistance, coupled with tight conditions and the high cost
of loans in international capital markets and difficulties
of access to markets in developed countries for exports
of developing countries, as well as declining real prices
of primary commodities exported by developing countries, have, among other things, combined to impose a
serious and critical strain on the import capacity and
reserves of developing countries, thus jeopardizing their
development process,
A ware that the deterioration in the terms of trade of
developing countries and the high-cost short-term borrowing to which they have had to resort recently have
seriously aggravated their debt burden,
Convinced that the situation facing the developing
countries can be mitigated by decisive and urgent relief
measures in respect of both their official and commercial
debts and that these measures are essential to restore
the momentum of growth lost during the economic crisis
and to achieve the targets of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 159
158 Ibid.
59 Resolution 2626

(XXV).

Acknowledging that, in the present circumstances,
there are sufficient common elements in the debt-servicing difficulties faced by various developing countries to
warrant the adoption of general measures relating to
their existing debt,
Recognizing the especially difficult circumstances and
debt burden of the most seriously affected, least developed, land-locked and island developing countries,
1. Considers that it is integral to the establishment
of the new international economic order to give a new
orientation to procedures of reorganization of debt
owed to developed countries away from the past experience of a primarily commercial framework towards a
developmental approach;
2. Affirms the urgency of reaching a general and
effective solution to the debt problems of developing
countries;
3. Agrees that future debt negotiations should be
considered within the context of internationally agreed
development targets, national development objectives
and international financial co-operation, and debt reorganization of interested developing countries carried
out in accordance with the objectives, procedures and
institutions evolved for that purpose;
4. Stresses that all these measures should be considered and implemented in a manner not prejudicial to
the credit-worthiness of any developing country;
5. Urges the International Conference on Economic
Co-operation to reach an early agreement on the question of immediate and generalized debt relief of the
official debts of the developing countries, in particular
of the most seriously affected, least developed, landlocked and island developing countries, and on the reorganization of the entire system of debt renegotiations
to give it a developmental rather than a commercial
orientation;
6. Requests the Trade and Development Board of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, at its ministerial session to be held in 1977,
to review the results of negotiations on this question
in other forums and to reach agreement on concrete
measures to provide an immediate solution to the debt
problems of developing countries, and requests the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development to report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/159.

Report of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development on its fourth
session 60

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964, as amended, 61 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May
1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Mindful that in its resolution 3362 (S-VII) it stated
that an important aim of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development at its fourth session was to
110 See also sect. X.B.3 below.
61 Resolutions 2904 ( XXVII)

decision 31/419.
.ind 31 /2 A and B.
