-

TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 17 JUNE 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. . . . . . . . . . . . . s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

I

Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the Security Council by
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen,
Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add. 1-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) (S/8954 and S/9252) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1477)

S/PV. 1477

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of ;the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council,. numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SEVENTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 17 June 1969, at 3 p.m.
Presiclent: Mr. M. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1477)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2.

Question concerning the situation in Southern
Rhodesia:
Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo (Democratic Republic of), Cyprus,
Dahomey, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, Nepal,
Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia,
Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland, Syria, Thailand,
Toga, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Republic,
United Republic of Tanzania, Upper Volta, Yemen,
Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and Add.l-2)
Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/%954 and
S/9252).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Question concerning the situation in Southern Rhodesia

Letter dated 6 June 1969 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by the representatives of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African
Aepublic, Ceylon, Chad, Congo (Brazzaville), Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Cyprus, Dahomey, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory
Coast, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Laos, Liberia, Libya,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mmgolia, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, Southern Yemen, Sudan, Swaziland,
Syria, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United
Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, Upper
Volta, Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia (S/9237 and
Add.1 -2)

Reports of the Committee established in pursuance of
i;&h$

Council resolution 253 (1968) (S/8

1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): Since the
last Council meeting on this subject, which was held last
Friday, I have received requests from the representatives of
Mauritania, Tanzania and Guinea to be invited to take part
in this debate.
2. In conformity with the usual practice of the Council,
and if there are no objections, I shall invite those three
representatives to be seated at the Council table so as to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. A. Ould Daddah
(Mauritania), Mr. A. B. C. Danieli (United Republic of
Tanzania) and Mr. A. Tout+ (Guinea) took places at the
Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Security Council will now resume its consideration, suspended
on Friday evening for consultations, of the item on the
situation in Southern Rhodesia.
4. Before calling on the first speaker, I wish to make a
short statement. In the discussions that have taken place so
far on this subject, all the members of the Security Council
have expressed their views. They have unanimously indicated in their statements that they consider illegal the
referendum that the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia
plans to hold on 20 June. They have described the so-called
constitutional proposals as invalid, and have stated that no
constitution promulgated by the racist minority regime
would have any legal effect.
5. In view of the constant danger to international peace
and security posed by the situation in Southern Rhodesia,
the Council will now continue its consideration of this
question.
6. The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Mauritania, on whom I call.
7. Mr. OULD DADDAH (Mauritania) (translated frOT7'2
French): I thank you, Mr. President, and the members of
the Council for allowing me, on behalf of the Islamic
Republic
of Mauritania, to take part in this debate on the
grave events that are happening in Zimbabwe.
8. Because of its geographical position as a meeting-place
where all the currents of African thought mingle and give
new life to one another, and because of the composition of

Assembly,1 the Mauritanian delegation had earlier made the
following statement:

its population, a synthesis of all the races of Africa, my
country has looked with horror upon what has been
happening in Zimbabwe for now more than three years.

“If we examine the attitude of the United Kingdom
Government closely, we are forced to the conclusion that
it is only a manoeuvre to gain time and to boIster the
Smith. regime. Long before the unilateral declaration of
independence on 11 November 1965, the IJnited King
dom Government was talking of establishing a majority
government and ending discrimination but at the same
time was careful not to do anything to trouble the
mercenaries installed in Rhodesia, The Wil;son Govern
ment has since stated on numerous occasions that it
would not use force to arrive at a settlement in Rhodesia.
Yet, in the remote and recent past, the United Kingdom
has never hesitated to use force whenever its interests
were endangered, whether in Africa, in Asia, in Europe or
even here in America.”

9. From the very beginning, the Mauritanian people and
their leaders, like all peace-loving peoples, have regarded the
criminal activities of Ian Smith and of the racist minority of
European origin that he leads as an affront which the
peoples of Africa, opposed to all forms of discrimination
and racism, cannot tolerate.
10. Africans have seen the most varied forms of colonialism come and go on their vast continent. They have seen or
learnt how certain colonial Powers have reacted to the
slightest interference with what they regarded as their
interests, ignoring the motives behind it no matter how
valid these might be.
11. Accordingly, Africa can only regard with bitterness,
suspicion and anger the behaviour of the administering
Power responsible for Southern Rhodesia, when confronted
with the rash actions of the illegal racist regime which a
white minority, with the benefit of outside complicity, has
brutally imposed on more than four million Africans.

16. During the 1476th meeting of the Council the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Ambassador Malik, pinpointed the question that quite
naturally follows when the United Kingdom delegation
talks of cavalry and sappers in connexion with Rhodesia.
Ambassador Malik said in his statement:

12. The African members of the Security Council have
already unfolded here a whole range of aspects of the
Rhodesian problem. The Mauritanian delegation has greatly
admired the conviction, composure and earnestness with
which they have spoken of the tragic conditions in which
Smith and his accomplices are attempting, by the most
inhuman means, to keep the people of Zimbabwe. We have
also admired the clarity with which the speeches have
brought out the inadmissibility and injustice of the fate
that the criminal leaders of the racist minority of English
origin hold in store for a whole peopIe.

“ . . . who are these sappers and where is their sap
leading to? In what direction are they trenching?
Everyone knows that sappers’ work includes undermining
and camouflage . . . Developments in Southern Rhodesia . . . create a distinct impression that as regards
Southern Rhodesia, British sappers are enga.ged, not in
undermining the Smith regime so as to blow it up, but
rather in camouflaging its crimes against the people of
Zimbabwe.” [147&h meeting, para. 30./
17. The United Kingdom Government’s dithering and
what Mr, Mudenda called its “timidity”,
“tepidity”
and
“duplicity” /1475th meeting, para. 441 are making all
Africans share more and more the Soviet Union delegation’s
impression. In fact, what other impression can one have, if
we consider the ineffectiveness and predictable dearth of
results of everything the United Kingdom Government has
agreed to do in order to give the impression that it OppOSCS
the rebellion by the racist minority, which i’s of British
origin, installed in Rhodesia? What other impression could
one have, if we consider the complete Iack of effective
action by the United Kingdom to fulfil its obligations
towards the people of Zimbabwe?

13. My delegation would not wish to repeat the truths
that have already been eloquently expounded before this
Council, It would, however, desire to indicate briefly to the
Council the way in which the Mauritanian people and its
leaders view the problem of Rhodesia, and what they think
of the attitude of the administering Power responsible for
Southern Rhodesia towards this drama.
14. On that subject we share the opinion expressed by the
representative of Pakistan on this aspect of the problem at
the 1475th meeting of the Council:
“The administering Power, . . chose to adopt the
entirely novel tactic of confronting armed rebellion by
argument and persuasion.

18. The referendum that Smith and the racist minority
behind him plan to conduct in a few days, in the eyes of
the Mauritanian delegation, covers a grave violation of the
fundamental rights of the Zimbabwe people. It is also an
affront to the dignity of every African, an affront which all
who value justice cannot help but condemn.

“That is how the United Kingdom reacted to the
unilateral decIaration of independence. That was its
position at the Tiger talks. It adopted the same attitude at
the Fearless meeting.

19. At the 1475th meeting of the Council Mr. Abdellatif
Rahal, Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria, spoke

“At each of these critical moments, the United Kingdom was compelled to retreat . . .” [I475th meeting,
paras. 104-l O6J.
15. Speaking in the Fourth Committee debate on Rhodesia during the twenty-third
session of the General

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, Fourth Committee, 1768th meeting,
para.29.
2

of the decision by the so-called government of Rhodesia to
put its draft constitution to a referendum and said:

settlementsbasedon impartiality and sincereco-operation,
thus maintainingfriendliness,understandingand harmony
in the relationsamongpeoples.

“But the text that Ian Smith proposes to have adopted
is of interest because it reveals, if that is still needed, the
intentions of the racist minority and the future that they
have in store for the Africans in Rhodesia.

26. But it is not the fault of Africans if others allow a
racist minority to continue to trample the resolutionsof
the Security Councilunderfoot andto scoff with impunity
at the lawful rightsof more than four million Africans.

“The text has at Ieast the merit of being clear,
announcing in forthright terms the most despicable
racism in its most brutal form , ( .” (1475th meeting,
paras. 11-121.

27. In thosecircumstances,
what meaningcan there bein
the idea of unanimity referred to more than once by the
distinguishedrepresentativeof the United Kingdom?

20, Such a referendum is worthy of condemnation both
for its form and for its intent. The character of the illegal
racist authorities proposing it, the conditions under which
it is to be held and the content of its text are sucir that the
international community is duty bound to declare in
advance that the result of such a consultation must be null
and void.

28. The authority of the UnitedNationsand the Security
Council is beinggreatly weakenedby the criminal schemes
that the illegal regimeand the racist minority of British
origin are imposingon Zimbabwe,with the encouragement
that is to be found in the resignationandabdicationof the
administeringPower.
29. It is our opinion that the Security Council, while
reaffirming its condemnationof the regimeimposedby the
racist minority in Salisbury,mustensurethat the sanctions
already introducedare strictly appliedand extend them to
include South Africa and Portugal.The Councilmust also
stressthe great responsibilitythat naturally falls to the
administeringPowerin the Rhodesianquestion.

21. Yet this referendum is only one aspect of the
Rhodesian problem. This is an obvious fact that should be
stressed. We must not allow some to make this referendum
and its condemnation by the international community the
trees which distract attention from the forest. It is essential
to ensure that the necessary condemnation of the planned
referendum in Rhodesia does not take the place of the basic
decision that the Council ought to take in response to the
illegal and inhuman activities of, the white minority in
power in Rhodesia, so as to avoid while there is still time,
the development of explosive situations full of consequences for the future of peace and security in Africa and
in the world as a whole.

30. We believethat the survivalof the United Nationsas
an effective instrument, andhenceone of usein maintaining peaceand securityin the world,hangson this.
3 1. Before closing,I think it important to recallthe words
of an eminentrepresentativeof the Organizationof African
Unity, speakingabout Rhodesiaduring the celebrationof
that organization’ssixth anniversary.I quote:

22. The administering Power should therefore be induced
to gauge more clearly its weighty responsibility in this
Rhodesian matter. The United Kingdom must recognize its
heavy share of responsibility for the campaign of systematic
terror, genocide and political killings, and for the barbarous
executions which the illegal racist regime in Salisbury is
carrying out.

“In Rhodesiathe flamesthat the African fighting men
have beenobligedto light will not die down, for beyond
the fire lies freedom.The tradingand military partnersof
the racistminoritiesin Rhodesiaand South Africa, those
who support Portuguesecolonialism,should learn the
lessonsof the pastand reassess
their positionwhile there
is still time. They are backingthe wronghorse.The future
of that part of Africa belongsto the African peoples.”

23. By looking back over its long colonial experience the
United Kingdom will, we feel sure, realize that the only
way to end the rebellion of the white racist minority in
Rhodesia-a country in which the United Kingdom Government represents the only legal authority-is to use force. We
hope that the Council will exert every ounce of its strength
to convince the United Kingdom of this.

32. In Africa, as in South-EastAsia and elsewherein the
world, the fundamental truth will ultimately prevailperhapstoo late-that force cannothalt a people resolved
to fight for the recovery of their independence
and dignity.

24. In a short statement to the Council at its 1475th
meeting the distinguished representative of the United
Kingdom spoke of the necessity for the Council to act
unanimously. The word “unanimity” in fact recurred more
than five times in the same statement by’ the distinguished
representative of the United Kingdom. We are, of course,
aware that unanimity girds the Council’sdecisionswith a
significanceand an authority that might well be neededto
convince the opponentsof majority rule in Zimbabwe.

33. Mr. DANIEL1 (United Republic of ’ Tanzania):
Mr. President,may I first of all take this opportunity to
thank you and this augustCouncilfor givingmy delegation
the opportunity to participate in the present debate on
Zimbabwe. The purpose of my delegation’srequest to
participatein the current debateisto join thosecolleagues,
particularly from Africa, Asia, Latin America and Eastern
Europe, who have once againvoiced their graveconcernat
the dangerouscourse of eventsin the British colony of
Zimbabwe.

25. The peoplesof Africa want to be ableto retain their
belief in the United Nations. Africans arenot bloodthirsty.
In place of violencethey unquestionablyprefer negotiated

34. The responsibility of the United Kingdom in this
tragic affair is inescapable.The lamentablestagesthrough
3

which this situation has evolved were clearly seen and
marked by the Government of the United Kingdom and all
those who had eyes to see, The illegal declaration of
independence by Smith in November 1965 was not the
beginning of the Rhodesian tragedy; the situation had been
deteriorating long before 1965. The African States complained about that situation in the General Assembly long
before 1965.

39. Has the Government of the United Kingdom ever
called upon Portugal and South Africa to apply sanctions?
South Africa is the biggest culprit in this nefarious e.rtercise;
yet Britain has never once publicly condemned South
Africa for its breach of the trade boycott.
40. The Government of the United Kingdom knew from
the very outset that force was the only answer to rebellion,
and especially the rebellion in Southern Rhodesia. This was
well known to the British Government, because it has
unparalleled experience and expertise in the art of putting
rebellion down by force. We saw it at work best: in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. But we have also seen
it at work in the twentieth century. Nay, we saw Britain
displaying its prowess in putting down rebellions by force
of arms only a few weeks ago, and years after the white
Britishers in Rhodesia had rebelled. YOU will recall that
only a few weeks ago the British Government dispatched a
conquering arqada to the small Caribbean island of
Anguilla, of only 60,000 inhabitants, mostly black., which
was in a state of rebellion against its constitutional
authority. Paratroopers came in from the air; military
police were put ashore; and British men-of-war stood ready
to invade. The men in rebellion on Anguilla were black; the
men in rebellion in Southern Rhodesia are white. The black
men in Anguilla were not enslaving anybody. Thlay were
not firmly establishing the policies and practice of
apartheid. They had not seized vast economic interests held
by Britons, and the only armaments they possessed were
the smiles on their friendly faces. But in Rhodesia, the
white racists in rebellion have done all these things, and
more: they have enslaved the African population; they have
embarked upon murder, torture, and all the vices of a
detention camp and a police state. They have defied the
authority of the British Crown, and they have defiled the
British flag, and spurned every entreaty brought them by
the Queen’s messenger.

35. How did the British Government, the Administering
Authority, answer? It said it was the United Kingdom’s
internal affair; it sent Edgar Whitehead, the then Prime
Minister, to answer the charges of discrimination and
violation of human rights before the General Assembly. It
sent teams of Members of the British Parliament to appease
a General Assembly indignant at the callous and off-hand
manner in which the British Government was handling the
situation. Vicious racist legislation, such as the Land
Apportionment Act, the Industrial Conciliation Act, and
the Emergency Powers Act, was passed in Rhodesia, with
the consent of the British Government, many, m’any years
before the Unilateral Declaration of Independence by
Smith and his clique in 1965. Venal racial discrimination
against the Africans was allowed to be practised by the legal
Governments of Rhodesia, under the eyes of the British
Government and with its knowledge and consent. The
legislation and practice which established a state of
apartheid employed by the legal Governments of Roy
Welensky and Edgar Whitehead ever since the 1940s and
195Os, and the gross violations of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the Africans of Southern Rhodesia were perpetrated with the knowledge of the succeeding British Governments over the years, and long before
UDI in 1965.
36. The Government of the United Kingdom declares
itself outraged today about the provisions of the illegal
constitution soon to be promulgated by the traitor Ian
Smith. But what about the provisions of the 1961
Constitution, the last legal Constitution of Southern Rhodesia? Did it protect the Africans? Was it democratic?
That Constitution equally entrenched the rights of the
220,000 white British citizens in Southern Rhodesia and
left the 4.5 million Africans of Zimbabwe devoid,of their
constitutional rights as a clear majority of the inhibitants
of that land.

41. Yet the leader of the United Kingdom Government,
who has branded Ian Smith a traitorous and notorious rebel
repeatedly insulting the majesty of the British Crown, sits
from time to time in splendour and formal consultation
with. the fraitorous Ian Smith on British warships-somctimes the Tiger and sometimes the Fearless. No attempt is
ever made to arrest this traitorous rebel as is the British
custom. Why not? Under the pretext of taking him to talks
away from the troubled island, the British-led Government
kidnapped Archbishop Makarios and detained him in the
Seychelles until it had put down the rebellion on Cyprus.
Throughout what was once known as the British Empire-in
India, Singapore, Malaya, Guyana, Kenya, Ghana, the
Central African Federation, ‘Ireland, Tanganyika-aucceedw
ing British Governments have imprisoned leaders who were
not even in rebellion but who sought freedom and
independence for their people. Can it be said that .Britain is
incapable of seizing Smith and his band of traitors or of
putting down their rebellion by force? Is Britain afraid of
defeat even if it takes only limited police action against the
white Rhodesians? If Britain nourishes any such fear, it
should be frank and say so. It should let this Council and
the Assembly know that it sincerely wants to put an end to
this rebellion, that it realizes now that force is the only
answer and that it invites all States imbued with the spirit
of justice and fair play to assist it in this expedition.

37. The Government of the United Kingdom has consistently failed to protect the rights of the African people of
Southern Rhodesia over the years. It seems bent on
abdicating its legal and political responsibilities in Rhodesia.
Immediately after the illegal declaration of independence in
1965, the present Government of the United Kingdom, by
a number of subtle devices, tried to weave a net of
protection around the 220,000 white British subjects who
illegally seized power in Rhodesia.
38. The British Government knew from the very beginning
that sanctions would not work. The British Government
knew that neither South Africa nor Portugal would apply
sanctions; and that it could never contemplate using
sanctions against South Africa, its close friend and substantial trading partner.
4

42. We ~IIOW that Britain could then count on the active
help of the majority of Member States and certainly the
African States. Britain must say exactly what it wants to
do, for the rebellion must not continue any longer. Britain
has a duty to be honest and straightforward
on the
Rhodesian qUeStiOn particularly to this Council. We should
be prepared for our part to assist Britain in discharging its
responsibilities as the administering Power in Rhodesia, The
prime responsibility is unmistakably that of the United
Kingdom. The United Kingdom has created this situation,
which has been festering, with its knowledge, for many,
many years. The unilateral declaration of independence in
1965 was the climax. Britain has clearly failed in its
responsibility as the administering Power. Yet all is not lost.
The United Kingdom must act now, by using force, to
dislodge Smith and return constitutional government and
British authority to the colony. When all is at peace again
and law and order re-established, then independence based
on majority rule should be given to the colony in
consonance with General Assembly resolution 15 14 (XV)
of 1960. The Council would be failing in its duty if it did
not call upon the United Kingdom to discharge its
responsibilities in Rhodesia.

African contribution to the total assessed income tax in
Rhodesia. The Africans will never reach this level set for
them by Ian Smith-not because they are incapable of
reaching it but because the white Rhodesians will always
make it a national policy to keep African incomes down by
denying to them their fair share of the profits of the
Rhodesian economy. Ian Smith’s constitution further provides for the establishment of a senate to be composed of
twenty-three members. Ten of these will be African
chiefs-1 make no comment on their status-ten will be
Europeans, and three are to be appointed by Smith. The
three will no doubt be white, thus ensuring a permanent
white majority in the senate. There will be a senate legal
committee and a declaration of rights purporting to
entrench certain rights in the constitution, However, no
court in Rhodesia will have the right or power to challenge
any legislation on the ground that it is inconsistent with the
so-called declaration of rights,
46. Furthermore, the so-called Senate Legal Committee
will have no power .to examine kgislation on constitutional
matters and any amendment to the Smith constitution will
require a two-thirds majority in both houses, which the
whites are assured under the proposed constitution. Land
will be apportioned equally; that is to say the 220,000
whites will own the same amount of land as the 4.5 million
Africans. But this is not the end of the sad story: the land
allocated to the Africans will be, as it has always been, the
most barren, unproductive, and uninhabitable land in the
colony.

43. My delegation is bemused when in the current debate
the United Kingdom delegation, with great audacity, even
at this late hour tries to bluff the Council about some
fictitious consultations between the British Government
and African Governments-and, alas, these consultations are
to be conducted after the projected referendum. Why, we
ask, after the referendum? We are further told that,
according to Scripture, “the Lord was not in the great and
strong wind, nor in the earthquake nor in the fire, but in a
still small voice” (1475th meeting, para. 65/. However, the
same Scripture reminds us that the Lord of the manor was
angry and reprimanded his servants when they failed to
discharge their duties. Like the Bible, we call upon the
British Government to give full account of its stewardship.

47. This is, in brief, the nature of the proposed Smith
constitution. It is a constitution which will sound the
death-knell of majority rule in Rhodesia and divide the
colony into two hostile racial groups, one the master and
the other the slave. It is a constitution the intention of
which is to refine Rhodesian white racialism so that the
colony may be in the same social mould as South Africa.
The provision in the constitution for African representation
in parliament should not mislead us into believing that
Smith intends to keep Africans in parliament. On the
contrary, Smith for the time being merely intends to
placate his friends in Europe, the United States and
elsewhere, by pretending that he too favours African
representation. The truth is that before long even the
present trimmings of African representation will be swept
away just as was don,ein South Africa.

44. I should like to comment briefly on the constitutional
changes which the rebel Ian Smith intends to put to a
referendum on 20 June. As has been pointed out in the
present debate, Ian Smith’s aim is to block for ever any
chance or hope of giving the four-and-a-half million
Africans in Zimbabwe the opportunity to share in the
affairs of the colony. From now on the Africans in
Zimbabwe can hope for no better position than that of
slaves, with the minority whites as perpetual masters.

48. The Security Council, as well as the entire world
community, has therefore the duty to take appropriate
measures to meet this open challenge. Apart from calling
upon the United Kingdom to use force to end the rebellion
in Rhodesia, the Council at this present SeSSiOnmUSt
impose full economic sanctions, a military blockade of
sanction-breaking ports, and the use of United Nations
troops to enforce sanctions under Chapter VII of the
Charter. The scope of sanctions against Rhodesia should
now be widened to include all measures laid down in
Articles 41 and 42 of the Charter, and sanctions should be
imposed on South Africa and Portugal. The Council should
reaffirm that the r@me in Salisbury is illegal and that it
will remain so until a democratically elected government
has been established in Rhodesia. The present Smith
constitution is an illegal document drawn up by an illegal

45. The so-called White Paper issued in Salisbury on 20
May, giving details of the new constitutional changes,
indicates that the new constitution provides for the
establishment of a house of assembly with sixty-six
members. Fifty of these will be whites elected by white
voters only. Sixteen will be Africans of whom eight will be
elected on an African roll and the remaining eight will be
elected by tribal chiefs-who,
we know, are all paid
employees and stooges of the Smith Government. In other
words, 220,000 whites wiI1 have fifty representatives,
against the sixteen members for more than four million
Africans, That is Smith’s democracy in practice. The
outside world has been told that African representation will
be increased, but the condition for the increase is that it is
pegged to an increase to a predetermined level ln the
5

than three resolutions of the committee on decoloniza.
tion,? and two Commonwealth conferences, each vying
with the others in pertinence and clarity, plus the constant
agitation and mobilization of world opinion, a ca.refiilly
selected range of economic sanctions, meetings on warship
off the coast of Africa on the calmest of seas-all that, after
nearly eight years, has still not brought down a r6gime born
in illegality and living in illegitimacy.

rigime, and it must be made clear to Smith and his rebel
group that one act of illegality cannot be legalized by
another.
49. Finally, the Council should address an urgent call to
all Member States of this Organization, as well as to other
parties concerned, to refrain from doing anything that
might imply support or recognition of the illegal r&ime.
The report of the Committee established in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May 1968,
[S/9252] reveals that there are countries which still
maintain consular and trade representation in Rhodesia,
contrary to earlier appeals by the Security Council to
withdraw such representation. These countries should once
again be requested to comply with the decision of this
Council.

55. Five years ago the President of the Republic &
Guinea, His Excellency Ahmed Sekou Touri, sent the
Secretary-General of the United Nations a message from
which I should like to quote a few sentences:
“The new situation created in Rhodesia cannot remain
a matter of indifference to any African State conslciaus &
its historic duty to defend ceaselessly and vigorously uua
peoples’ freedbm and sovereignty-the fundameniti
pre-condition for their dignity and progress-a:nd ctin.
scious also of the dangerous implications of the suprclmacy of a foreign minority for the legitimate interests and
rights of the Rhodesian people. It is imperative for &e
continent to muster all its forces to answerthis challenge
to Africa and to the Organization of African Unity.”

50. I should like to emphasize once again that failure to
act in the present crisis will further increase the danger of a
future racial conflict in Rhodesia and, indeed, the entire
southern part of the continent of Africa. The Africans in
that colony have no longer any alternative but to plan for
and use violent means to end their state of slavery and
exploitation, We Africans in Africa would like to seejustice
and honour given peacefully to our brother Africans in
Rhodesia. Indeed, Africa’s commitment to a peaceful
solution of the Rhodesian problem was stressed by the
representatives of thirteen East and Central African States,
meeting in Lusaka in April 1969. In their manifesto, the
Lusaka Manifesto, the States &ending that meeting
declared:

56. This challenge to Africa and its organization is aIs+%
JJ
challenge to the conscience of the world.
57. His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie recently stated k>,
Addis Ababa:
“The United Kingdom Government is still constir i.
tionally responsible for Rhodesia and it has the duty a&
the responsibility to crush the rebellion and grr-j.5
independence to the Zimbabwe people. Force is the ~l:>~
language that colonial and racist regimes undcrs!rrr:.J
African nationalists are now compelled to resort to &a:,;~
and armed struggle in order to obtain their freedom 3ax$
independence.”

“We would prefer to negotiate rather than destroy, to
talk rather than kill. We do not advocate violence; we
advocate an end to the violence against human dignity
which is now being perpetrated by the oppressors of
Africa.”
51. But Africa and the African population in Rhodesia can
never commit themselves for ever to a policy of peaceful
change while the desire to effect changes peacefully is
blocked by those in power in Rhodesia. The course of
events in the British colony is therefore headed towards a
violent conflict. This can still be avoided and this Council
is, I am confident, able-if only it could be willing-to avoid
such an unhappy end.

58. The decision by the Ian Smith clique to pult its &:eQ
constitution to a referendum wasnot really the main rc3~”
which prompted the Afro-Asian countries to call S#*X!Council meeting. The announcement of the su&1&
Referendum Act in fact came as no surprise to alIly of F~A:,“.
so far as it bore on the scope of the reactionary @K-l
pursued by Salisbury up to then; on the contrary, il OC*%
strengthened our conviction that the racists of SOUBZWS
Rhodesia are more determined than ever to make nf&:,&
the system of apartheid that has infested the c<)b:c,:*i
unofficially for eight years.

52. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish]: The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Guinea, on whom
I now call,
53. Mr. TOURfi (Guinea) (translated from French): Allow
me first of all, Mr. President, on behalf of the Government
of the Republic of Guinea, to express my delegation’s
sincere thanks to the members of the Security Council for
permitting us to take part in the debate on the question of
Southern Rhodesia.

59. The fact cannot be over-emphasized that t!lerr” E’BE*:I
in Southern Rhodesia an explosive situation created h! R&C
racial neurosis of a minority of white settlen whit f.ge
attempting, against every rule of morality an.d lraaa-,2. /
establish an anti-democratic supremacy the like <?f %%i:?
hasneverbeenseen.

54. The delegation of the Republic of Guinea takes this
opportunity to emphasize the grave situation existing in
Rhodesia, and adds its voice to the voices of so many others
in an Africa now self-aware, wounded in its flesh and in its
dignity, More than five resolutions of the Security Council,
more than six resolutions of the General Assembly, more

60. We have been asked by the representative @f tt:&
United Kingdom not to go back over the long and u~&q$a
2 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the 19-2~
mentation of the Declaration on the Granting of Indepcndr,p+: f ” ::
Colonial Countries and Peoples,

6

history
ViOknCe

Of illegal aCtiOnS
in Rhodesia and to eschew the
Of accusations
among
ourselves. That would be

the minority racists in Southern Rhodesia. It is clear to all
and, sundry that the partial sanctions advocated against the
racists in Southern Rhodesia have been a failure because
they were inadequate and ill-suited to subdue a rebellion of
that magnitude.

sound advice if the United Kingdom .had not patently
renounced the very great responsibility it has in Southern
Rhodesia; for we must not lose sight of the colonial
duplicity which is at the root of the Rhodesian situation.
The United Kingdom, as the administering Power, cannot
.stand by while a gang of rebels openly seizes a colony for
which it is responsible and rest content with preaching that
the rebellion is illegal and that partial economic sanctions
are the only appropriate way of quelling it.

67. In this drama through which Africa’s flesh and Africa’s
dignitY is living today, we firmly believe that the primary
responsibility lies with the United Kingdom, which by its
attitude of passivity and complicity has long directly or
indirectly aided and even encouraged the activities of the
Rhodesian settlers, those constables who have been given
the task of taking over command and forming a bridge with
the inhuman system of apartheid in South Africa and with
the Portuguese colonial regime that infests Angola and
Mozambique.

61. The colonial history of the United Kingdom is too
long and too rich in precedent for us not to reahze that this
attitude is at odds with the normal principles of its colonial
policy and with its usual practice in similar circumstances.
Just recently the case of Anguilla, a little island under
united Kingdom domination, filled several columns of the
w&Id pfess. The United Kingdom did not hesitate for a
moment to land men on the island to suppress and take in
hand, according to the usual phraseology, the so-called
rebellion in Anguilla.

68. That is why, despite the attempts organized by the
United Kingdom to sidetrack the debate, the Council
should not for one moment forget the need to remind that
country of its very great responsibility. The Council must
also bear in mind that this problem is above all a colonial
problem. In keeping with the spirit of General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV), it is therefore entitled to consider
not only the symptoms but also the substance of the
problem of Southern Rhodesia, that British colony illegally
grabbed by a neurotic racist minority which enjoys the
subtle complicity of the parent administering Power and is
bent on imposing an illegal de facto situation on international opinion, morality and law.

62. In South Africa, in the Portuguese colonies, in Angola,
in Mozambique, and in Rhodesia, a new colonial policy is
beginning, virulent and relentless, the aim’ of wmch is to
take the place of the old colonial systems that the peoples
of Africa have managed to extirpate. For some time now
there has been increasingly clear evidence of a movement in
Africa south of the Zambesi to establish a colonial system
run by the white minority which would apply a policy of
apartheid throughout that part of the African continent,
thus replacing the former colonial structures already condemned by international opinion and by history.

69, If the United Kingdom refuses to shoulder its responsibilities, it is only right for the international community to
shoulder its own. The conscience of the world cannot
remain deaf, far less blind, to this explosive situation, and
the Security Council must focus its attention on all the
practical aspects of the Rhodesian drama, reminding the
administering Power plainly of its responsibilities and
condemning this masquerade of a referendum which is the
direct result of the administering Power’s irresponsibility.

63. It should be noted that these white settlers have
fundamental ties of race, of culture and of economic and
commercial interests with the United Kingdom, and hence
they are nothing more nor less than an extension of that
country. That is the crux of the matter.

70. The fact remains that in a few days Ian Smith, who is
no novice at the game, will be dealing democracy and
justice another blow. Vigilant Africa therefore appeals
earnestly to all the Powers that have so far maintained
consular services and other attributes of sovereignty with
the administering Power in Southern Rhodesia, to regard
the maintenance of such consulates henceforth a~ undisguised support for the situation that would emanate from
the notorious Constitution Act of Ian Smith and his racist
followers.

64, The intention is to replace the old system of colonization by a system based essentially on the take-over of
allegedly liberated colonies by a minority of white settlers
wielding a Nazi dictatorship over a majority of blacks
oppressed, spurned, humiliated, deprived, used and abused
at will. These so-called States would be a choice area for big
private interests, better than any colony has been since the
epic days of British colonial trade in India.
65. It is a great pity, however, that the representative of
the United Kingdom went no further than proposing that
we merely reiterate our well-known disapproval of the rebel
racist clique in Southern Rhodesia. He asked us to condemn
it; we have done so and we are still doing SO this very day.
The meeting of the Council at this time, and our words,
provide eloquent testimony. He also suggests that we decry
a referendum which in fact is only the obvious outcome of
the United Kingdom policy I just mentioned. Have we not
already done so in calling this urgent Council meeting?

71. We reiterate our appeal to all the Powers to sever all
their relations of every kind with that part of Africa, where
unauthonzed seizure and injustice constitute the sole basis
for government. No economic sanction against the illegal
and illegitimate regime spawned by the British colony of
Rhodesia can be effective unless it is directly applied to the
apartheid regime of South Africa and the colonialist regime
of Portugal. It is well known that these two regimes, which
have been sentenced to economic boycott more than once
by the world Crganization for violating the principles of the
Charter, aid and abet their accomplices the Rhodesian
racists.

66. We have the impression, therefore, that an attempt is
being made to steal a march on us by appealing to us to
make a concerted reiteration of a platonic condemnation of
7

States which associate themselves politically with the
condemnation of the illegal regime and, at the same time,
collaborate with it for material gains.

72. The fears that we have continually expressed about a
racial war in southern Africa are about to be confirmed.
Should the United Kingdom fail in its {uest for a just
settlement of the Rhodesian problem, we shall shortly
witness an intensification of the struggle already started in
that part of the worlc by the people of Zimbabwe and
other long-subjugated peoples of southern Africa, who have
already prepared other means of showing the neurotics of
Southern Rhodesia anci the upholders of apartheid that
from now on no people f;an accept the crushing humiliation
and the wretched conditions of life under colonial rule.
Freedom-loving people vi11 never agree to be idle spectators
of this heroic struggle b;. the freedom fighters in that part
of the world.

79. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Smith regime
could claim in April this year that it had succeeded in
breaking economic sanctions in 1968 and forecast an even
healthier economic outlook for 1969. The r&irne, claimed
that, despite sanctions, it had managed to channel about
$178 million worth of exports through the sanctions net in
1968 and had increased the country’s gross national
product by 5-l/2 per cent.
80. The export figure-about
$2 million less than in
1967-was reached despite a reduction of almost 12
per cent in agricultural production caused by reduced
tobacco output. The economy showed a current account
deficit of about $55 million, but that was almost entirely
offset by a net capital inflow of about $51 million.

73. The United Nations still has time to act before it is too
late.
74. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): I should
like to inform the Council that I have just received a
request from the representative of Somalia to be invited to
take part in this debate. Following the usual practice, and if
there are no objections, I shall invite him to be seated at the
Council table so as to participate in the debate without the
right to vote.

81. It is also clear that the illegal racist rdgime has gone
from strength to strength, secure in the knowledge that it
could extend and intensify its racism and oppression
without any fear that the United Kingdom, the administering Power, would resort to force to carry out its
responsibilities to the people and restore constitutional rule
to the Territory.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. A. Farah
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

82. The Smith regime has today in operation a machinery
of political oppression that is very similar to the repressive
laws of South Africa, as embodied in the Suppression of
Communism Act of 1950 and the Terrorism Act of 1957.
In consequence, at the beginning of 1968, almost 100 men
were in Rhodesian gaols-all Africans, under sentence of
death for political offences. No official figures for the total
number of political prisoners, detainees and restri.ctees have
ever been given, but the Zimbabwe African People’s Union
estimate between 10,000 and 15,000 people have been
detained for varying periods of time during the past nine
years, The representative of Senegal has described to the
Council [1475th meeting] in detail the kinds of brutalities
to which many of those unfortunate persons have been
subjected while under detention.

75, The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Somalia, on
whom I call.
76. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to thank the
Council for allowing me to participate in the debate on this
vital question.
77. In the view of my delegation, there are three things
which this meeting of the Council should accomplish. First
of all, it should serve to reaffirm the determination of the
United Nations to defend with all the resources at its
command the political, social and economic rights of
peoples when those rights are in jeopardy. Second, it should
recognize without further quibbling that the steps taken so
far to deal with the situation in Southern Rhodesia have
been inadequate and need to be reinforced, Third, this
meeting should have as its result a decision by the Security
Council to take those further measures commensurate with
the demands of the situation.

83. The so-called constitution which the racist rigime
proposes to impose on the people of Zimbabwe should not
distract our attention from other repressive racist measures
Vshich it has taken to destroy the dignity of the African and
to enhance the position of the white minority. Such
measures have been introduced in all walks of life and have
been used on a pattern similar to that in operation in South
Africa.

78. There are, of course, few Member States which do not
condemn the actions of the illegal regime in Southern
Rhodesia. Few would deny that apartheid is a crime against
humanity or that the withholding of political and social
rights and economic opportunities from the majority by a
powerful minority is contrary to the most fundamental
principles of democracy, of the United Nations Charter and
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. And yet it is
quite clear that economic sanctions as so far applied,
whether selective or comprehensive, have failed to bring
down the Smith regime. They have failed not only because
they are openly and avowedly ignored by Rtlodesia’s two
principal accomplices, South Africa and Portugal, but also
because they have not been supported by several other

84. The success achieved by the Smith regime in resisting
sanctions and the attitude of the United Kingdom have
enabled the regime to adopt a more confident stand.
Speaking recently of international recognition, Smith is
reported to have said that this might take “a couple of
years or five or six”. It would be a searing away process
that would really start once the new constitution was
finally drafted and introduced. It has been said that no
State has yet accorded recognition to the Smith rkgime. But
is this really necessary if it can get all the assistance it wants
from those who make no secret of where their sympathy
lies?
8

85. The South African Minister for Foreign Affairs has
informed the Secretary-General that his Government would
not support the resolution on Rhodesia as it did not believe
in boycotts, particularly in southern Africa. Portugal, too,
has adopted a similar attitude. In February this year its
Foreign Minister commented that Portugal’s policy towards
Southern Rhodesia was one of good-neighbourliness without formal diplomatic recognition.
86. These facts, if they are not self-evident, have been
supported by numerous surveys and reports of United
Nations committees and agencies. I need go no further than
to quote paragraph 48 of the second report of the
Committee established in pursuance of Security Council
resolution 253 (1968) of 29 May which is before the
Council and which states:
“As a result of the refusal of South Africa and Portugal
to take measures and the failure of some other States to
fully implement the provisions of resolution 253 (1968),
as stated above, the Committee is compelled to observe
that the sanctions established by that resolution against
the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia have not yet
brought about the results desired by the Security Council.” [S/9252.]
And that was evident before the United Nations became
seized of the situation posed by the forthcoming referendum on a so-called new constitution for Rhodesia, a
constitution which crystallizes the’ racist policies and the
profound injustices implicit in the Unilateral Declaration of
Independence. Although it is necessary for us at this time
to take grave note of this latest act in the Rhodesian
tragedy, we must not allow the immediate situation to
obscure our basic goals. In other words, it will not be
sufficient to condemn the proposed referendum in a flurry
of indignation, and then to continue the present ineffectual
policy without any further attempt to strengthen it.
87. My delegation therefore supports the position of the
representative of Zambia that if the Security Council wishes
to end the present situation in Rhodesia then it must be
prepared to apply the provisions of Articles 41 and 42 of
Chapter VII of the Charter. A further call should be
addressed to South Africa and Portugal to co-operate in the
imposition of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia and,
should they refuse to do so, then appropriate measures
should be taken by the Security Council to ensure
compliance with its decisions and to secure respect for the
authority of the United Nations, At the same time, every
effort should be made to bring before the scrutiny of
international public opinion the evidence which condemns
those other nations which openly or covertly continue to
support the illegal regime in Rhodesia by their trade and
investments,

88. Finally, my delegation would like to join its voice to
those which have pointed out that there are only two
alternatives to comprehensive sanctions against the regime
in Rhodesia: one of them is the use of force against the
regime by the administering Power; the other is armed
conflict between the forces of oppression and the people of
Zimbabwe. The latter alternative would no doubt be costIy
in lives and would likely result in a long drawn out struggle
involving peoples from many areas and of different races. If
some members of the Council find both courses distasteful,
surely they will not be slow to recognize the lesser evil.
89. In conclusion, my delegation believes that the problem
of Rhodesia-which is a component of the general problem
of colonialism and imperialism in southern Africa-challenges many of the basic assumptions that brought the
United Nations into being. The continued failure of this
Organization to bring about any improvement in the
situation is a dangerous indication that the United Nations
is indeed at the crossroads. In Rhodesia, as in South Africa,
South West Africa, Angola and Mozambique the United
Nations is committed to a course of action but has been
unable to carry it through to a logical conclusion because of
the conflict between its decisions and responsibilities, on
the one hand, and the economic and other interests of
powerful Member States, on the other hand.
90. The issues which confront the United Nations in
Rhodesia are the same as those which confront the
Organization in the whole of southern Africa. The issues are
these: will the United Nations take decisive and concerted
measures in order to forestall the inevitable conflagration in
southern Africa or will it stand by helplessly until it is too
late for effective measures? Will the United Nations allow
black Africans to be deprived in perpetuity of their basic
human rights by a white minority on the premise of racial
superiority? Will history repeat itself and see the United
Nations founder on the conflict between national interests
and international morality, as did the League of Nations in
1935? The answers to these questions will be indicative of
the future of the United Nations as an effective force for
international order and international morality.
9 1. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): No other
representative has expressed a desire to speak during this
meeting. If the Council agrees, therefore, I shall close the
meeting.
92. In accordance with the informal consultations that
have been held, the next meeting of the Security Council to
continue discussion of the question we have had before us
today will be held tomorrow, Wednesday, 18 June, at
3 p.m.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

I

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

Ler

SE PROCURER

publications

der

((AK

llOflY’4HTb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Los publicociones
en todar
porter
Ventas,

in United

Nations,

PUBLICATIONS

may
bookstore

Nations

dCpositairer
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

Litho

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

Nueva

New York

PUBLICACIONES
de

York

Unier

sonl

entier.
Informer-vow
des venter,
New York

MBAAHMfi

del

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Nations,
Sales
Section,

DES NATIONS
en

vente

OPTAHMIA~HH

les

votre

librairier

librairie

et
ou

OSbEAMHEHHblX

DE LAS NACIONES

las Nocioner
Unidos
est6n
mundo.
Conrulte
a su librero

UNIES

dons

oupr&s
de
ou Genive.

en venta
o dirljase

throughout
New York

les

agences

adresser-vow

21:

HAuIIfl

UNIDAS
en tibrerios
a: Nociones

y casar distribuidoros
Unidas,
Sccci6n

de

o Ginebra.

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

&,2070-November

1972-2,050
