VII.

1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Belize to self-determination and independence;
2. Reaffirms that the inviolability and territorial
integrity of Belize must be preserved;
3. Calls upon the Govemment of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, as the
administering Power, acting in close consultation with
the Govemment of Belize, and the Govemment of
Guatemala to pursue vigorously their negotiations in
strict conformity with the principies of General Assembly resolution 343 2 (XXX), in consultation as
appropriate with other especially interested States in
the area, with a view to concluding the negotiations
befare the thirty-third session of the General Assembly;
4. Also calls upon the parties involved to refrain
from any threats or use of force against the people of
Belize or their territory;
5. Urges all States to respect the right of the people
of Belize to self-determination, independence and territorial integrity, and to render all practica! assistance
necessary for the secure and early exercise of that right;
6. Requests the Govemments concemed to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session on
the outcome of the negotiations referred to above;
7. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to remain seized of thc question and to
assist the people of Belize in the exercise of their inalienable rights.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/33.

169

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

lnformation from Non-Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e
of the Charter of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General under
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and
to take such information fully into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of
the Declaration,
Recalling also its resolution 31 /29 of 29 November
1976, in which it requested the Special Committee to
continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolu,tion 1970 (XVIII),
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee dealing with the transmittal of information under Article 73 e of the Charter4 2 and the
action taken by the Committee in respect of that information,
Having also examined the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the item, 43
Deploring that sorne Member States having responsibilities for the administration of Non-Self-Governing
42 [bid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.1), vol. IV, chap. XXXII.
43 A/32/253.

Territories have ceased to itransmit information under
Article 73 e of the Charter,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementatíon of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
the information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that, in ,the absence of a decision by
the General Assembly itself that a Non-Self-Governing
Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter, the administering
Power concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of thc Charter with respect to
that Territory;
3. Requests the administering Powers concerned
to transmit, or continue to transmit, to the SecretaryGeneral the information prescribed in Article 73 e of
the Char,ter, as well as the fullest possible information
on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned, within a maximum period of six
months following the expiration of the administrative
year in those Territories;
4. Requests the Special Committee ,to continue to
discharge the functions entrusted to it under General
Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures, and to report thereon to the
Assembly at its thir,ty-third session.

83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

32/34.

Qucstion of East Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of ali peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principies of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Indcpendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory, 44
Having heard the statements of the representatives
of Portugal 45 and lndonesia, 46
Having also heard the statements of the representativcs of thc Frente Revolucionária de Timor Leste
Indcpcndente, 47
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
44 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 23 (A/32/23/Rev.1), vol. II, chap. X.
4 5 [bid.,
Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th
meeting, paras. 22-26.
46 !bid., 19th meeling, paras. 4-58.
4 7 !bid., 11-th meeting, paras. 135-155, and 20th meeting,
paras. 101--130.
