TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 29 MAY 1967
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 343) . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoptionoftheagenda

Page

..... ...... ..............,.... . ,.. ... .

1

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and \
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907) . . . . I . . . . . . . .

1
’

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . . + . . . . . . . a , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . a . . . .

S/PV. 1343

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol $1, , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securiiy Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTY-THIRD

Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. LIU Chieh (China).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and United States of America,
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 343)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Repre-

sentatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3. Complaint

of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27, May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).

4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Repre-

sentative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/79 10).
Adoption

of the agenda

1. The PRESIDENT:
In addition to item 2 of the
provisional agenda [S/Agendu/l3#3],
on which discussion
was adjourned at our last meeting, members will note that a
third and a fourth item have been included as the result of,
first, a letter dated 27 May 1967 (S/7907] from the
Permanent Representative of the United Arab Republic
requesting the inclusion of one item in the present agenda
of the Security Council and, secondly, a letter dated 29
May I967 (S/7910] from the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom requesting that the Secretary-General’s
report of 26 May 1967 (S/7906] be included in the
provisional agenda of today’s meeting.

MEETING

29 May 1967, at 3 p.m.
Secretary-General of 26 May is before us amongst the
documents for discussion in the Council.
4. The PRESIDENT:

It is so understood.

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)
Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern
Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910)

5. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1341st meeting, I shall now, with the consent
of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel and the
United Arab Republic to take places at the Council table in
order to participate without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. 6. Rafael (Israel)
and Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab RepubEicj took places
at the Council table.

6. The PRESIDENT: Since our last meeting letters dated
27 and 29 May have been received from the representatives
of Jordan /S/7909]
and the Syrian Arab Republic
[S/7912] requesting that they be invited to participate in
the Council’s discussion. In accordance with the usual
practice of the Council, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of Jordan and the
Syrian Arab Republic to take places at the Council table in
order to participate without vote in the Council’s discussion.

I shall consider the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr. G. J. Torneh (Syria) todk places at the
Council table.

3. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I take it that,
following on the adoption of the agenda, the report of the

7. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have received copies of the report submitted by the Secretary
General [S/7906] following his recent visit to Cairo, which
was circulated on Saturday, 27 May. May I, on behalf of
the Council, thank the Secretary-General for his quest for

2. If there is no objection,
adopted.
l%e agenda was adopted.

Mr. president, I am sure you had the unanimous support of
the Council when you expressed your appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his excellent report. I wish to read to
the Council a section of the report to which the Secretary- (
General clearly attaches particular importance:

peace. in the Middle East. I believe that all of us in the
United Nations are indebted to him for the energy and the
sense of urgency with which he has met his heavy and
trying responsibilities. He has now set forth in the report
before us his observations, his hopes and his fears. Members
of the Council will, I am sure, agree with me that this is an
extremely important document on the basis of which the
Council must now act urgently and constructively to avert a
course of disaster not only for the Middle East but for the
whole world.

“The decision of the Government of the United Arab
Republic to restrict shipping in the Strait of Tiran, of :
which I learned while en route to Cairo, has created a new I
situation, Free passage through the Strait is one of the /
questions which the Government of Israel considers most
vital to her interests. The position of the Government of !
the United Arab Republic is that the Strait is territorial ’
waters in which it has a right to control shipping. The
Government of Israel contests this position and asserts
the right of innocent passage through the Strait. The
Government of Israel has further declared that Israel will
regard the closing of the Strait of Tiran to Israel flagships
and any restriction on cargoes of ships of other flags
proceeding to Israel as a casus beZZi.While in Cairo, I
called to the attention of the Government of the United
Arab Republic the dangerous consequences which could
ensue from restricting innocent passage of ships in the
Strait of Tiran. I expressed my deep concern in dris
regard and my hope that no precipitate action would be
taken.” [Ibid., para. 10.1

8. The Council will now proceed to discuss the items on
its agenda. Normally items are discussed in the order in
which they are listed in the agenda. Since the three items
on our adopted agenda appear to be more or less
interrelated, I invite the views of members as to how they
may wish to proceed with the discussion.
9. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I think
that it might satisfy all the members of the Council if all
the items were considered together. As the President has
said, they all relate to the same subject.
10. The PRESIDENT:
As there is no objection to that
suggestion, we shall proceed in that manner.
11. Mr, GOLDBERG (United States of America): We are
met here today to consider what means the United
Nations-and
specifically the Security Council-should
adopt to deal with the present crisis in the Near East. The
SecretaryGeneral has correctly assessed this crisis. He has
described it as more serious, indeed more menacing, than at
any time since 1956.

15. The Secretary-General further pointed out:
“The freedom of navigation through the Strait of Tiran
is not, however, the only immediate issue which is
endangering peace in the Near East. Other problems, such
as sabotage and terrorist activities and rights of cultivan
tion in disputed areas in the demilitarized zone between
Israel and Syria, will, unless controlled, almost surely lead
to further serious fighting.” [Ibid,, para. 13.1

12. In dealing with this problem we should at all costs
avoid wasteful recriminations over the response of the
United Nations to recent events. The Organization has
played a crucial role for many years in maintaining peace,
however fragile, in the Near East, The General Armistice
Agreements, the Truce Supervision Organization, the
admirable ten-year service of the United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF), the many important actions of the
Security Council and tire General Assembly, the successive
Secretaries-General and other United Nations officialsthese are a great and memorable chapter in United Nations
history. In the Near East, more than in any other region,
the world has looked to the United Nations to keep the
door closed on the spectre of war.

16. And it is, of course, quite clear from other references
in this and in the Secretary-General’s previous report of 19
May 1967 [S/7896/ that the tensions which arise from
substantial military confrontation in the Gaza Strip follow
ing the withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency Force
from the area are also sensitive and serious.
17. Soberly appraising the situation and taking intt~
account his conversations in Cairo with leaders of t.hd:
United Arab Republic, the Secretary-General, in a ke)
paragraph of his report, said:
“In my view, a peaceful outcome to the present crisi
will depend upon a breathing spell which will allor,
tension to subside from its present explosive level.
therefore urge all the parties concerned to exercise speci;;
restraint, to forgo belligerence and to avoid all otht:
actions which could increase tension, to allow the Count
to deal with the underlying causes of the present cris
and to seek solutions.” [S/7906, para. 14.1

13. Now the door has come unhinged, That fact is not a
reason to question the motives of the United Nations
handling of the matter. Nor is it a reason for despair or
handwringing. Our duty is rather to find new ways by
which the United Nations can reassert itself for peace, to
the end that war may be averted and the area may achieve
the “reasonable, peaceful and just solutions” [S/7906,
paru. 191 of which the Secretary-General has spoken in the
concmding passage of his report. We have seen one chapter
of the United Nations role in the Near East come to an end.
It is now our task to open a new chapter in this long search
for peace.

I cannot conceive that any member of the Security Count:
will not support this appeal.
18. This grave appeal from the Secretary-General has lo
none of its relevance since his report was issued. A blockat
of the Gulf of Aqaba has been announced. Armies star

14. In addressing ourselves to this task, we have before us,
notably,
the report of the SecretaryGeneral-and,
3

within sight of each other on the armistice lines between
Israel, Syria and Egypt, including the Gaza Strip. Incidents
have occurred resulting in casualties, some of which have
been reported this very day. Thus, the dangers in these
three areas, which the Secretary-General has rightly identified as the most sensitive of all, remain at their height.
Passions, regrettably, are still high and the need for utmost
restraint on all sides has in no way abated.

the United States is firmly committed to the supp& of
the political independence and territorial integrity of all
the nations of the area.
“The United States strongly opposes aggression by
anyone in the area in any form, overt or clandestine. This
has been the policy of the United States led by four
Presidents-President Truman, President Eisenhower,
President Kennedy and myself-as well as the policy of
both of our political parties. The record of the actions of
the United States over the past twenty years, within and
outside the United Nations, is very clear on this point.

19. But we can take note today not only of the continuing
dangers, to which I have referred, but also, I am glad to say,
of a favourable development.
20. Yesterday the Prime Minister of Israel stated that his
Government had decided to rely on “the continuation of
political action in the world arena” to stimulate ‘<international factors to take effective measures to ensure free
international passage” in the Strait of Tiran. That statement
is very much to be welcomed. It is clearly in the spirit of
the Secretary-General’s appeal for a “breathing spell” and
his urgent request that to this end the parties “exercise
special restraint” and “forgo belligerence”. It has followed
also upon strenuous diplomatic efforts by the Governments
of Member States, including my own, in support of the
Secretary-General’s appeal. Last week, indeed, while he was
still in Cairo, I made, in this very Council, on behalf of my
Government, a parallel appeal “to avoid any action which
might exacerbate the already tense situation which preveiled when the Secretary-General departed on his mission”
/13#2nd

“The United States has consistently sought to have
good relations with all States of the Near East. Regrettably this has not always been possible, but we are
convinced that our differences with individual States in
the area and their differences with each other must be
worked out peacefully and in accordance with accepted
international practice.”
25. These general observations have direct application to
the concrete casebefore us. In the view of my Government,
the first step-the very first step-which the Council must
take is to put its great authority behind the appeal of the
Secretary-General, This first step is urgently required; for,
however welcome yesterday’s statements of restraint may
be, tension remains great and the time span in which to
avert a clash is short. We need a breathing spell for
diplomatic activity and for this Council’s more deliberate
disposition of the underlying issues.

meeting, para. 81.

21, Prime Minister Eshkol’s statement will be all the more
effective if it is now matched in the same spirit by other
parties and by all the Governments principally concerned.

26. Therefore, the United States believes that the Council,
as an interim measure and without extended debate, should
endorse the Secretary-General’s appeal and call upon all
parties concerned, in his words, “to exercise special
restraint, to forgo belligerence and to avoid all other actions
which could increase tension, to allow the Council to deal
with the underlying causesof the present crisis and to seek
solutions” [ibid., para. 141. The full authority of the
Council would thus be placed behind this righteous appeal.

22, We note in this connexion the Secretary-General’s
account, in his report of his conversations in Cairo, in
which he tells us that: “President Nasser and Foreign
Minister Riad assured me that the United Arab Republic
would not initiate offensive action against Israel”[S/7906,
paru. 9). But, regrettably, since then President Nasser has
reiterated that the restrictions on shipping through the
Strait which he imposed while the Secretary-General wasen
route to Cairo remain in effect. Therefore, it would be a sad
mistake to suppose that the crisis has now substantially
eased,

27. We believe, from the context of the situation, that
with respect to the particularly sensitive area of Aqaba,
forgoing belligerence must mean forgoing any blockade of
the Gulf of Aqaba during the breathing spell requested by
the Secretary-General, and permitting free and innocent
passage of all nations and all flags through the Strait of
Tiran to continue as it has during the last ten years. This
would enable the Council to deal with the situation
deliberately and free of the threat of-and again 1 quote the
Secretary-General-“dangerous consequences” which, as the
Secretary-General says in his report, “could ensue from
restricting innocent passageof ships in the Strait of Tiran”

23. Diplomacy is still operating within very narrow limits
and on a short time schedule. We in the Security Council,
therefore, must intensify our efforts, both collectively and
in our separate capacities, to promote a modus vivendi,
particularly at the points of greatest danger. Surely all will
agree that means must be found to liquidate this conflict as
a military one and, in particular, to defuse the most
sensitive area, the Gulf of Aqaba.

[ibid., para. IO].

24. It is necessary for me, in the circumstances, to make
explicit the basic attitude of the United States as we
approach this task. Our attitude is rooted in the Charter, in
opposition to aggression from any side and in full support
of international law and the role of the United Nations.
Ours is not an attitude of partisanship, I repeat-ours is not
an attitude of partisanship. The foundation of our policy
remains, asPresident Johnson stated last week:
“To the leaders of all the nations of the Near East l
wish to say what three Presidents have said before-that

28. But such an expression of support for the SeCretaW
General’s appeal would be only the beginning of our task. If
the momentum for peace thus generated is to endure, the
Council must addressitself in longer-range terms to all three
of the points of tension which the Secretary-General has
identified in his report: the Gulf of Aqaba situation, the
confrontation in the Gaza area and on the Syrian-Israel
frontier, and the problem of terrorism. Let me comment on
each of these three matters in turn.
3

arrangements,
choice.

29. Concerning the Gulf of Aqaba problem, the basic view
of the United States was stated on 23 May by our President
in these words:

or other peaceful means of their own

“2. The Security Council shall, when it deems necessary, call upon the parties to settle their dispute by such
means.”

“The United States considers the Gulf to be an
international waterway and feels that a blockade of Israel
shipping is illegal and potentially disastrous to the cause
of peace. The right of free, innocent passage of the
international waterways is a vital interest of the international community,”

33. It is particularly important, in the light of what the
Secretary-General has told us in his report, that the
long-established practice in the Gulf of Aqaba and the
Strait of Tiran not be disturbed during the period in which
efforts are being made under Article 33 to deal with claims
that have been raised. This, I repeat, is our specific
understanding of the meaning, in the context of the Aqaba
problem, of the Secretary-General’s appeal to the parties to
“exercise special restraint” and to “forgo belligerence”.
Surely, stopping, searching and preventing the passage of
ships through the Strait would clearly fall within the
category of acts against which this appeal is directed.

30. With respect to innocent passage through the Strait of
Tiran, it must be said with all gravity that the issue of
international rights in the Gulf and in the Strait cannot be
solved by unilateral steps to change the status quo which
has existed for more than ten years and has made peace
possible in the area throughout that period, and which is in
accordance with international law. Not only are the rights
of the immediate parties at stake, but also the rights of all
trading nations under international law. Such law, indeed,
has been expressed in the 1958 Geneva Convention on the
Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, to which many
nations are parties. Article 16, paragraph 4, of that Convention states:

34. I turn now to the second highly sensitive problem
mentioned by the Secretary-General: the military confron- :
tation in the Gaza Strip and on the Syrian-Israel frontier.
This confrontation is obviously highly dangerous, particularly in the heavily populated area of the Gaza Strip. The
next step for the Security Council in both areas should be
to find practical means, through whatever United Nations
machinery is readily available, to minimize the danger of a
military clash along this line, and to help the opposing
forces to disengage. We have only to read the news bulletins
which are even now coming in, with their reports of firing
going on in Gaza, to realize how urgent action is on this
problem.

“There shall be no suspension of the innocent passage
of foreign ships through straits which are used for
international navigation between one part of the high seas
and another part of the high seasor the territorial sea of a
foreign State.“’
I should like to observe that both the United States and the
Soviet Union, among others, are parties to this Convention
and joined in the declaration of article 16, paragraph 4,
thereof.

35. Third, it is necessary to face other problems, such as,
in the Secretary-General’s words, “sabotage and terrorist

activities and rights of cultivation in disputed areas in the
,demilitarized
zone between Israel and Syria” [ibid,,

31. We are all aware, of course, that the United Arab
Republic is a coastai State and possessesterritorial sea along
the shores of the Strait of the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf
of Aqaba. However, it is also necessary to be aware that it is
only one of four such coastal States possessing territorial
seas bordering on these waters.

para. 131.

36. The Security Council has many times called upon the
parties to observe scrupulously the General Armistice
Agreements with their strict prohibition of all hostile acts
from the territory of any of the parties, and to return to
the normal operations of the armistice machinery.

32. We are aware of the claim of the United Arab
Republic to control shipping through its territorial sea in
the Strait. But surely it is not in keeping with the spirit and
obligations of the United Nations Charter for such a coastal
State to embark unilaterally upon measures of force or
threats of force to press its claim. For over ten years the
settlement made by the United Nations in 1957 has been
the basis of a peaceful r&ime for the Strait and the Gulf. If
any State wishes to alter the status quo, it has a clear
obligation under the Charter to proceed by peaceful means,
Article 33 of the Charter is unmistakable in the obligation
that it lays upon all Members, and I quote it:

37. Fourth, there is a final step we must take under our
responsibility if we are to achieve a more lasting reduction
of tension in the Near East. Effective steps must be taken
to reaffirm the General Armistice Agreements and revitalize
the armistice machinery.
38. This critical hour is no time for selling the United
Nations short. Its resources are far greater than some
suppose. The diplomatic arsenal is not confined to debate
or the adoption of resolutions. It encompasses quiet
diplomacy by the Secretary-General and the Members, tile
good offices of Member States, the use of intermediaries,
and all the devices comprehended in Article 33 of the
Charter.

“1. The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall, first of all, seek a solution
by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitratiori, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
1 United
p. 216.

Nations, Treaty~Series,

1
t

39. Therefore, the United States looks beyond today’s
debate towards further effective steps by all concerned, in
the highest tradition of this Organization and the spirit 01

vol. 516 (1964), NO. 7477,

4

the Charter, to save the peace in the Near East, What we do
here today and in the days to come will affect not only the
peace of the Near East but the good name and standing of
this great Organization. The eyes of the world are, quite
literally, upon us in this debate. Now, more than ever,
world opinion expects the United Nations to live up to its
promise of peace. But the United Nations is not and cannot
be an abstract entity in the clouds. Its life and vigour
depend totally on certain very concrete entities here on
earth, namely, the Governments of Member States. The
issue of war or peace lies “not in our stars, but in
ourselves”. It lies in whether or not we, the Members, are
sufficiently alive to our common humanity and our
manifold common interests, including the vital interests
each one of us has in the maintenance of peace in
accordance with the Charter.

46. I submit that we cannot, in all fairness and in all
honesty, just forget the happenings of the last twenty years.
Indeed that cannot be done if the Council wants to
discharge faithfully its responsibilities. It has to look boldly
at the events-the tragic events-which have been perpetrated in our part of the world in utter disregard of the
values of human life and international law. The Council
should, furthermore, examine most thoroughly its own
records and decisions. And, indeed, it should have the
courage to take the necessary measures to bring the
situation back to where it should be,
47. I shall not tax the patience of members by recounting
in detail the tragedy of Palestine, The way that tragedy was
planned and implemented made it surpass all previous
tragedies, and unfortunately it took place on our part of
this planet.

40. If we are alive to those interests, then surely we shall
find ways to transcend today’s conflicts and to ‘harmonize
the actions of nations”, as the Charter bids us to do, and
thus to win together the only true victories, the only
victories truly worth having, which are victories for peace.
41. The PRESIDENT:
United Arab Republic.

48. It suffices to remind the Council that a people who
had lived in peace for more than thirteen centuries in their
land found themselves within a short period of time
arbitrarily and illegally driven out of their homes and lands,
Families were broken up as a result of the most inhuman
acts of brutality and were forced to flee here and there.
Those innocent people-more than a million of them-have
been living for the past eighteen years in misery on an
UNRWA ration of seven cents a day. And even that is not
guaranteed any more. Many of those people were well-todo, but since the implantation by colonialism of that alien
body in their land, they have been living in miserable camps
overlooking their own lands and witnessing their harvests
being collected by the aggressors.

I call on the representative of the

42. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): It is no secret
that my country has been, during the last week.or more,
subjected to a fierce and persistent, campaign aimed at
misrepresenting and distorting the true facts of the situation. My Government has no doubt that that campaign
represents, and indeed is designed to be, a deliberate
attempt to force the partial discussion of a problem in total
and utter disregard of the true nature of the problem. I dare
say that, in its awareness of this attempt, my Government is
not alone; its assessment of the situation is indeed shared
by others. The Secretary-General himself, in his report to
the Council, made this worthy reference:

49. That is why my Government decided to request the
Security Council to include on its agenda the item entitled
“Israel aggressive policy, its repeated aggression threatening
peace and security in the Middle East and endangering
international peace and security”.

“It has been alleged in some quarters that the prompt
compIiance with the request for the withdrawal of the
Force is a primary cause of the present crisis in the Near
East. This ignores the fact that the underlying basis for
this and other crisis situations in the Near East is the
continuing Arab-Israel conflict which has been present all
along . . . .” [S/7906, para. 2.1

50. That is the root of the present situation in the Middle
East, and I would certainly be neither honest nor coherent
in speaking about the problem if I did not refer in detail to
the origins of the tension and trouble in the area.
51. Since its imposition on the area, Israel has had a long
history of violations of international law and various
agreements concluded under the auspices of the United
Nations. It has also had a heavy record of intimidations
against its neighbours and an insatiable appetite for
expansion.

43. It is therefore necessary to keep in mind that the few
aspects which some of the Members seek to dramatize-for
their own purposes-are only symptoms of the basic
problem, that is to s$y, “The Palestine question”.
44. The Palestine question has been a perennial item on
the agenda of the Council. This important body has hardly
spent a month since the illegal dismemberment of Palestine
without either discussing or being seized of one aspect or
another of this problem.

52. For instance, not even a fortnight had elapsed when
Israel armed forces advanced in the Negev and annexed the
village of Umm Reshresh, now being referred to as the
Israel port of Eilat. Thus they presented the world with a
fait accom&i in flagrant violation of the Armistice Agreement, I shall explain in detail, at a later stage of my
submission, the gravity and importance of that violation.

45. We are advised, or shall I say we are told, not to look
into the past; that we should, rather, confine ourselves to
the situation that has been so dramatically presented to this
Council-even disregarding the absence of the Secretary
General who was performing an important mission for the
sake of that same situation.

53. We have always believed, and we still do, that Israel
was planted in the Middle East by colonialism to serve
colonial interests. In order to serve those interests, the
Israelis cannot help but view expansion as a corner-stone of
their policy, This has been declared by many Israel leaders
5

64. The aggressive policy perpetrated by the Israel authorities is not only expansionist in nature but also
destructive in purpose. I refer in particular to the Gaza raid
on 28 February 1955, during the course of which Gaza was
subjected to heavy firing from Israel field artillery. Do I
need to remind the Council also that during this one attack
thirty people were killed in cold blood and thirty-three
were severely injured?

on various occasions, both before and after that year of
disgrace: 1948.
54. As I have just stated, they had hardly signed the
Armistice Agreement before they advanced and occupied
further territory. As further evidence of this policy of
expansion, we cite the case of the demilitarized zone of El
Auja. Beginning in 1948 Israel authorities embarked on a
series of acts which culminated in 1955 in complete and
total occupation of El Auja and its annexation to the
territory of Israel.

65. I cannot fail to refer to the repeated raids carried out
against the refugee camps at Deir El Balah, El Bureij, and
Rafah, the establishment of which has been financed by
UNRWA. The attack on Khan Yunis, however, surpassed
any other because it was conducted by armoured cars
which attacked even the police station within the city itself.

55. Israel has a twofoid approach toward expansion;
namely, territorial expansion and the elimination of the
indigenous population. I offer the following cases to
illustrate the insidiousness of its policy.

66. This persistent campaign of provocation, murder and
plunder culminated, as we all know, in the treacherous
attack against my country in the autumn of 1956. That was
an act which shook the conscience of the entire world and
was thoroughly condemned by the world community.

56. The expulsion by Israel in September 1950 of about
7,000 Bedouin residing in the area of the Azazma tribe into
Egyptian territory. This was followed by the expulsion of
the whole tribe, totalling about 15,000.

67. Attacks of a more recent date by Israelis against the
Arab nations have been intensified, escalated and carried
out with perfidy and viciousness. These attacks are neither
new nor unknown to the members of the Council.

57. The non-compliance of the Israel authorities with
decisions of the Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission of 30 May 1950, which demanded the return of the
Azazma Bedouin to their lands. This case was examined by
the Security Council in the autumn of 1950.

68. It was less than a year ago that the Israel authorities
arrogantly announced that they had undertaken a limited
retaliatory “expedition”, using their Air Force against the
Syrian Arab Republic on 14 July 1966. It is tragic but true
that the Security Council, when seized of this shameful and
avowed attack, failed to condemn the aggressor in spite of
Israel’s admission of its guilt.

58. The expedition in 1953 of its armed forces to the El
Auja region under the guise of police forces-an act
condemned by the Mixed Armistice Commission on
2 October 1953 on the grounds that the continuous
presence of Israel police forces constituted a violation of
articles IV and VIII
of the Egyptian-Israel General
Armistice Agreement.

49. Israel, feeling strong because of the complicity of its
allies in the Western camp, struck again on 13 November
1966. This time it was against the peaceful village of As
Samu, a village of some 4,000 people, and innocent men,
women and children were killed and the town was reduced
to rubble.

59. The establishment of settlements within the demilitarized zone, against which, once again, the Egyptian
Government addressed a complaint to the Security Council
in February 19~54.~ This complaint has been dormant
before the Security Council since that time.

70. The policy of the Israel authorities, as there has been
occasion to state, is neither incidental nor occasional. It
merely reflects a policy of direct provocation, and the role,
that of lackey for imperialism, given to Israel to play within
the context of a larger conspiracy.

60. The occupation of the whole of the El Auja region,
the expelling of the United Nations observer and the
lowering of the United Nations flag.
61. May I remind the Council of the present plight of the
Azazma tribe, which, because its expulsion post-dated the
Armistice Agreement, does not enjoy the relief provided by
UNRWA.

71. On 7 April 1967, a considerable number of Israel jet
fighters crossed the armistice demarcation line and penetrated deeply into Syrian territory, as far as the Damascus
area. They were intercepted by Syrian fighters, which led to
full-scale aerial combat. This latest Israel provocation was
executed with the sole determination of provoking Syria
into a full-scale war and thus inflicting destruction and
catastrophes upon Syria, where water projects on the
Jordan River were in process for the sake of reclaiming
land. In fact, beginning with the first day of 1967, Israel
started preparing the ground for a large-scale attack on
Syria. Proof of this was furnished by the declaration of Mr,
Levi Esbkol, who stated on the 13th of this month that:
“Israel is prepared to risk all-out war in a military offensive
to topple Syria’s army r&ime”. He went on to say: “We
may have to adopt measures no less drastic than those of
7 April”.

62. Need I also remind the Council that the Armistice
Agreement had stipulated that the Mixed Armistice Corn
mission would maintain its headquarters at El Auja, which
was established by the same agreement as a demilitarized
zone,
63. I shall not dwell on the fate of the other demilitarized
zones, for the Secretary-General in his report of
2 November 1966 [S/7573] to the Council has objectively
stated the case.
2 See Ofjiccial Records of the Security Council, Ninth Year,
Supplement for January, February and March 1954, document
S/3172.
6

72. This was no empty threat and my Government had
every reason to believe that on 17 May 1967 the Israel
authorities seriously contemplated an attack against Syria.
On 13 ‘May, we received accurate information that Israel
was concentrating huge armed forces on the Syrian border.
These forces were divided into two fronts, one south of
Lake Tiberias and the other north of the lake. The decision
made by Israel at this time was to carry out an aggression
against Syria as of 17 May. On 14 May, my Government
examined the situation, took measures, and contacted our
Syrian brothers, who apparently already had this information,
73. In the discharge of our responsibilities towards the
security of our people and our Arab brothers, in both
Palestine and the other Arab countries, and in fulfilment of
OUT sovereign rights, we have decided, in co-operation with
our Arab brethren, to defend the Arab nation by all
measures. Since the presence of UNEF would have conflicted with this decision, and also for the sake of UNEF’s
safety, in the exercise of our sovereign rights we requested
’ the Secretary-General
to withdraw the United Nations
Emergency Force. Thus, we have peacefully brought the
situation
back to what it was before the 1956 aggression
against my country.

years. It always has be& a national inland waterway subject
to absolute Arab sovereignty. Its geographical location is
conclusive proof of its national character. By its configuration it has a nature of a mareclausumwhich does not
belong to the class of international waterways. An accepted
norm of international law is that some bays with more than
one littoral State are not considered open sea due to
geographical and historical conditions, An international
tribunal adjudicating a similar gulf case in Central America
reached that conclusion-a
conclusion which was
recognized by several countries, including the United
States. In 1917, the International Court of the Central
American Republics ruled that the Gulf of Fonseca, which
is surrounded by three countries-Honduras, El Salvador
and Nicaragua-is “an historic bay possessedof the characteristics of a closed sea”3 and that it therefore was part of
the territories of El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua.
80. Hence, it was decided that the three littoral countries
are entitled to exclude the vessels of other countries when
at war. Therefore, as I have already said, since the Gulf of
Aqaba has only three legitimate littoral States, namely,
Saudi Arabia, Jordan and the United Arab Republic, all of
which are in a state of war with Israel, the three legitimate
littora1 States on the Gulf of Aqaba have a right recognized
by public international law to ban the vesselsof an enemy.

’ 74.

We have attempted to outline very briefly the realities
the situation. We have endeavoured to depict the true
picture and, to the best of our ability, we have tried to
diagnose the real causes of the tension in the area,
of

81. It certainly will be argued that the Israelis have a port
on the Gulf. But even that presence lacks legitimate
foundation.

75. Against this background, of which I believe every
responsible statesman is aware, it is indeed surprising that
certain Powers are seeking, for their selfish interests, to
divert the attention of the world from the true culprit.
Instead of candidly recognizing where the responsibility lies
and honestly facing up to their duty in this regard, those
?ywers are presently casting doubts on the legitimacy of
the measures taken by my Government within the framework of its sovereignty. and in particular with respect to
the Gulf of Aqaba.

82. The Israel armed forces on 10 March 1949 usurped
and occupied the village of Umm Reshresh, along with a
stretch of about five miles overlooking the Gulf of Aqaba.
This, as I have already stated, occurred four months after
the Security Council decision calling on all parties concerned to desist from further military actions and territorial
accruement. This illegal act was perpetrated two weeks
after the signing of the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice
Agreement on 24 February 1949. This action completely
and drastically violated the letter and spirit of the Agreement, article IV, paragraph 1, of which stipulates explicitly
that:

76. I <am firmly convinced that no one can argue or
corltest our basic rights. Nevertheless, for the sake of clarity
and in order to put it on record, may I be allowed to state
my Country’s case.

“The principle that no military or political advantage
should be gained under the truce ordered by the Security
Council is recognized.”

77. As members of the Council are well aware, the Gulf of
Aqaba is a long narrow gulf on the eastern side of the Sinai
Peninsula. ‘Ihe length of the Gulf is about ninety-six miles
and the widest breadth less than fifteen miles. The entrance
to the Gulf is situated in the joint territorial waters of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Republic. Due to navigational
hazards the only navigable route to the Gulf runs less than
one mile from the Sinai Peninsula, Hence, it crosses our
undisputed territorial waters.

It is also relevant to read out paragraph 2 of article IV of
the Armistice Agreement:
“It is also recognized that the basic purposes and spirit
of the Armistice would not be served by the restoration
of previously held military positions, changes from those
now held other than as specifically provided for in this
Agreement, or by the advance of the military forces of
either side beyond positions held at the time this
Armistice Agreement is signed”.4

78. The Israelis claim that they have the right to navigate
in the Gulf. This we proclaim is without foundation. A
cogent reply which refutes the allegation of the Israelis rests
on the following facts.

3 See “Central American Court of Justice, 9 March 1917, The
Republic of El Salvador V. the Republic of Nicaragua”, in American
Journal ofInternational Law (New York), vol. 11, p. 693.
4 Official Records of the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 3.

79. Historically,
the Gulf has been under continued and
uninterrupted
Arab domination for over one thousand
7

87. In the light of these facts, it is quite obvious that the
Israel authorities have no legitimate right to be present on
the shores of Aqaba since no legal right or claim, in either
muncipal or international law, could be based ‘on illegal
actions, Moreover, I wish to state that, according to
international law, a state of war confers certain rights upon
the belligerents. Also, it is a general, incontestable rule of
international law that the conclusion of a partial or general
armistice agreement does not end the state of war. It only
terminates the hostilities.

83. Furthermore, this illegal occupation of that port in
Palestine and the advance of the Israel armed forces was put
before the Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission,
whose Special Committee decided on the matter on 20
March 1950. This was further examined by the Security
Council, which, in its resolution 89 (1950) of 17 November
1950, stated that the Council:
“Takes n&e of the statement of the Government of
Israel that Israel armed forces will evacuate Bir Qattar
pursuant to the 20 March 1950 decision of the Special
Committee provided for in article X, paragraph 4, of the
Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement, and that
the Israel armed forces will withdraw to positions
authorized by the Armistice Agreement.”

88. Oppenheim states that armistices and truces are
“all agreements between belligerent forces for a tern.
porary cessation of hostilities. They are in no wise . . , to
be called temporary peace, because the condition of war
remains between the belligerents themselves, and between
the belligerents and neutrals, on all points beyond the
mere cessation of hostilities. In spite of such cessation the
right of visit and search over neutral merchantmen
therefore remains intact, as does likewise the right to
capture neutral vessels attempting to break a blockade,
and the right to seize contraband of war.“’

84. In this respect, I would like to clarify that the
reference to Bir Qattar includes the vicinity of Umm
Reshresh which the Israelis called “Eilat” after their illegal
occupation of the territory. This Israel occupation violated
also Security Council resolution 54 (1948) of 15 July 1948
ordering the parties “pursuant to Article 40 of the Charter,
to
desist from further military action”. It also violated
resolution 56 (1948), adopted by the Council on 19 August
1948, in which it was stated that “no party is entitled to
gain military or political advantage through violation of the
truce”. In fact, this Israel action violated decisions of the
Security Council, including that of 15 July 1948, which
invoked Article 40 and therefore, according to the Charter,
should have entailed the application against Israel of the
enforcement action provided for in Chapter VII.

89. Basing ourselves on either legal facts, as we shall read
them from the provisions of the General Armistice Agree.
ment, or the facts of life in our part of the world, as we
have been witnessing them through the years, there is not a
shadow of doubt as to the continued existence of the state
of war between the Israelis and both the Arabs of Palestine
and their brethren in the Arab countries.

85. In view of these specific orders, Israel’s possession of
the coastal strip does not entitle it to any legal claim to
sovereignty, This is in conformity with the well-established
doctrine in international law that belligerent occupation
cannot legally be converted into sovereignty over the
occupied territory. An occupant, according to international
law, and I quote Oppenheim, “in no wise acquires
sovereignty over such territory through the mere fact of
having occupied it”.5 Annexing a territory occupied by
military force can have legal effect only if the state of war
ends by the conclusion of a peace treaty. This view was
held by the United States, as portrayed in 1931 by the
United States Secretary of State Henry Stimson, who
declared that the United States “cannot admit the legality
Therefore it would be natural
of any situation de facto”.
for the United States Government to abide by this doctrine
in its international relations. This doctrine was also incorporated in several international multilateral treaties such
as the treaty signed in ‘Rio de Janeiro on 10 October 19336
and that at the Ninth International Conference of American
States on 30 April 1948.

90. The Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement of
1949 stipulates in article I, paragraph 3, that:

86. Thus the Arabs’ consistent refusal to accept Israel’s
claim to authority over the coastal strip is in strict
conformity with the Stimson doctrine of non-recognition.
It is ironic that the United States position in the matter
under consideration is contrary to that doctrine.

92. After this rather lengthy elaboration, it is quite
evident and unequivocal that according to international law
a state of belligerency exists between the Arab States,
whose territories circumscribe the entirety of the Gulf of
Aqaba, and Israel. The Armistice Agreement does not
vitiate our rights to impose restrictions on navigation in the
Gulf of Aqaba.

Yhe right of each Party to its security and freedom
from fear . . . shall be fully respected”.
The existence of a state of war between the parties is
distinctly and explicitly stated in article IV, paragraph 3,
where it is stated that:
“The provisions of this Agreement are dictated exclu.
sively by military considerations , . .“.
91. The continued violations and the numerous prew
meditated acts of aggression, in all dimensions, against the
Arabs, which culminated in the cowardly attack on Sinai in
1956, clearly mean that a state of overt war has been
existing. Hence my Government has the legitimate right, in
accordance with international law, to impose restrictions on
navigation in the Strait of Tiran with respect to shipping to
an enemy.

5 L. Oppenheim, International
War
and
Neutrality,
7th

Law: A Treatise, vol. II, Disputes,
ed. (ed. H. Lauterpacht), London,
Longmans, Green and Co., 1952, p. 433.
6 Anti-War Treaty of Non-Aggression and Conciliation.

7 L. Oppenheim, op. cit., pp. 546 and 547.

8

93, The 19.56 aggression did not change the legal status of
the Gulf of Aqaba and consequently did not affect the
United Arab Republic’s rights over its territorial waters. In
this respect the Secretary-General, in his report of
6 November 1956 to the General Assembly, stated that:

relating to Israel’s withdrawal. We take it that the
Assembly is unanimous in expecting full and honest
implementation of its resolutions calling for immediate
and unconditional withdrawal by Israel. This position,
which is the only position the Assembly could possibly
take, remains intact and entire. Nothing said by anyone
here or elsewhere could shake this fact or detract from its
reality and its validity.“’ 3

“It follows from its terms of reference that there is no
intent in the establishment of the Force to influence the
military balance in the present conflict and, thereby, the
political balance affecting efforts to settle the conflict.“s
94. This fact was re-emphasized by the Secretary-General
when in his report to the General Assembly on 24 January
19.57 he referred to the invasion of Egypt and stated that:
“The United ‘Nations cannot condone a change of the
status iuris resulting from military action contrary to the
provisions of the Charter. The Organization must, therefore, maintain that the status juris existing prior to such
military
action be re-established by a withdrawal of
troops, and by the relinquishment or nullification of
rights asserted in territories covered by the military
action :‘g
That the invasion of Egypt should not affedt the statusquo
out by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations when he stressed that:

97. I wish to bring to your attention the fact that,
according to The New York Times, President Eisenhower,
fwho wasPresident of the United States of America during
that period, declared as recently as Thursday last, 25 May,
with reference to the Israel claim concerning the Gulf of
Aqaba that: “I cannot recall that Egypt itself ever agreed to
his.”
98. It is quite clear that Israel tried to derive a legal right
by committing an illegal act and that the Secretary-General
did not allow himself to be drawn into supporting its
unlawful assertions. Nothing said in the General Assembly
by Israel and some other delegations could affect the lawful
rights of the United Arab Republic or legally obligate its
Government to endorse an unaccepted premise.

ante was also pointed

99. The obviousness of this fact renders any controversy
about it mere sophistry, with no relevance whatsoever to
the legal realities of the situation.

“It follows from principles guiding the United Nations
that the Israel military action and its conse uences should
not be elements influencing the solution.“’ 8

100. The attitude of the United Arab Republic Government regarding navigation in the Gulf of Aqaba is not new.
In 1950, the Egyptian and Saudi Arabian Governments
decided that since the entrance to the Gulf was in their
joint territorial waters, it was incumbent upon both
Governments to preclude enemy vessels from ingress into
and egress from the Gulf. Egyptian troops established
military installations to exclude all Israel naval traffic and
bar strategic material from reinforcing its war effort.

95. Also, the establishment of the United Nations Emergency Force was not envisaged as the implementation of
any policy affecting this issue. The Secretary-General
further stated that:
“In accordance with the general legal principles recog
nized as decisive for the deployment of the United
Nations Emergency Force, the Force should not be used
so as to prejudge the solution of the controversial
questions involved. The Force, thus, is not to be deployed
in such a way as to protect any special position on these
questions . . .“.I ’

101. This practice has been scrupulously maintained since
1950. The Egyptian Government sent two memoranda to
the United States and United Kingdom Embassies in Cairo,
on 30 January and 28 February 1950 respectively, informing them of the decision to occupy the islands of Tiran
and Sinatir and to protect the two islands and the entrance
of t.he Gulf.

The Secretary-General also reiterated that the Force “must
II I be impartial, in the sense that it does not serve as a
means to force settlement, in the interest of one party, of
political
conflicts or legal issues recognized as controversial.“’ ’

102. Furthermore, the Government of Egypt declared its
intention to guarantee “free and innocent passageaccording
to international law”. This obviously could never be
construed to guarantee “free s,id innocent passage” to an
enemy during a state of war. The United Kingdom
recognized our rights by an exchange of letters between the
British Ambassador in Cairo and the Egyptian Minister for
Foreign Affairs. I shall, with your permission, Mr. President, read the texts of the two letters; the first, dated 29
July 1951, read:

96. My Government’s position on that point was amply
and clearly stated by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
United Arab Republic when he declared before the General
Assembly, at the end of the debates on 1 March 1957, that:
“The Assembly has heard the statement made by the
representative of Israel and the other statements made
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, First Emergency
SpeclalSession, Annexes, agendaitem 5, document A/3302, para. 8.
9 Ibid., Eleventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 66, document
At35 12, para. 5 (al.
10 Ibid., para.ii.
11 Ibid., para. 29.
12 Ibid., para. 5 (b).

“I am authorized to inform Your Excellency that His
Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom are ready
to agree to the following arrangement in regard to British
vessels other than naval or military craft sailing direct
13 Ibid., Plenary Meetings, vol. II, 666th meeting, para. 87.

9

Government of the United States of America against Cuba
and the People’s Republic of China, respectively.

from Suez or Adabia to Aqaba. The Egyptian cum-m
authorities at Suez or Adabia, after searching and issuing
ciearance foi- such vessels, will immediately inform the
Egyptian naval authorities at Tiran Island so as to
preclude any necessity for the latter to make a further
visit and search of the vessels in question. On the Other
hand all British vessels will of course comply with normal
practice when passing through Egyptian territorial waters.
I would be grateful if Your Excellency would be good
enough to confirm the acceptance by the Egyptian
Government of the above-mentioned arrangement.”

108. The United States, while denying us today
the
inherent right to take the necessary measures in self-defence
h the face of Israel acts of aggression, itself saw fit in 1962
to take what it alleged to be necessary measures of
self-defence, namely, detaining, inspecting and diverting
commercial ships bound for Cuba on the high seas. Whifa
there is no state of war between the United States and
Cuba, the United States allowed itself this illegal COUrSC of
action.

The reply, dated 30 July 1951, from the Egyptian Minister
for Foreign Affairs wasas follows:

109. Today, although our case with Israel is of a different
nature-that is to say, there is a state of war and WC a~
exercising defensive measures within the limits of OUI
territorial waters-the United States continues to stand
against international law in supporting the Israel claims.

“I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your
letter dated 29 July 1951, the text of which follows:
‘L. . .

110. I cannot but wonder whether it is permissible for
those States to embark on such actions while admonislling
other States and threatening them when they perform their
rightful and, most certainly, their legal prerogatives. Such a
double standard obviously violates the principle
of
sovereign equality on which our Organization is based.

“I am authorized to communicate to Your Excellency
the Royal Egyptian Government’s agreement to the
arrangements and measures set forth in the above letter
since they are in conformity with Egypt’s rights as to her
ports and territorial waters.”
103. Vessels flying American as well as various other ff ags
accepted the Egyptian regulation until 1956. On 10 March
1953, the Danish vessel A&nizs Bay entered into the Gulf
and it was hailed, inspected and then released. Again, on
3 December 1953, the Egyptian Government authorized
the American vessel Ali Bon to enter the Gulf when it was
sure that this vessel carried grains as a gift of the United
States of America to Jordan and not equipment.

111. The world is witnessing nowadays in the policies of
certain great Western Powers a trend toward the total
disregard of principles and ideals. Their acts not only have
become devoid of those two elements; they also lack logic
and rationality.
112. Only a few days ago they washed their h;md~
completely of the question of South West Africa and
justified such conduct as the only practical and realistis
way of dealing with the problem, thus ignoring the Chatter
of the United Nations and sacrificing the very existence uf
the people of South West Africa, in their own land since ths
beginning of history. This they do unabashedly, stating lItal
they have vast economic interests in South Africa and that
the Government of that country is so powerful militarily
that it would be unwise to challenge it.

104. In this respect I should also bring to the attention of
the Council the fact that in 1953 the Egyptian vessel Samir
was forced by bad weather to enter Israel territorial waters.
Subsequently, in July 1953, the Egyptian-Israel Mixed
Armistice Commission resolved that merchant ships belonging to either party were not permitted to pass in the
territorial waters of the other. Thus was established a legal
precedent that no innocent passage could be attributed to
combatant parties.

113. Also, not long ago they shrank from their respond,
bilities vis-a-vis Southern Rhodesia, thus selling its people
to a white minority of adventurers, This, too, was atlri.
buted to economic interests and the ties of kith and k&
with that minority. Their conscience then was not aroused.
and their usually loud voices were kept mute.

105. Could there be a clearer recognition of my Government’s rights of visit and search? Could there be a more
formal acceptance of the correctness of the United Arab
Republic attitude?
106. Nowhere in the Charter can a provision be found
modifying or altering these accepted norms of international
law. The Charter clearly acknowledges the inherent right of
self-defence which United Nations Members are entitled to
exercise. Since the inception of the United Nations,
international practice has gone a long way towards confirming these rules. I hardly need enumerate the several
cases in which certain members of this Council deemed it
fit to initiate various types of restrictions even when their
security and territorial
integrity were not seriously
threatened.

114. These represent only two cases out of the lengthy lisi
of their actions in Africa and Asia. There are plenty ef
other wrong-doings; to mention only a few: apar&&,
colonialism, and so on.
11.5. Yet now wild cries of alarm are raised, not becausea
country is committing
a crime against humanity,
1101
because a country has violated or is violating the inlm=nt
rights of peoples to their homes and lands, but because 1
small country-an
Afro-Asian country-is exercising. iii
inherent right of sovereignty. Why this sudden outburst? b
it because we are not kith and kin, or is it because we refix
to act as tools of the interests of imperialism’? That rok
will certainly never be ours,

107. I shall limit myself at this stage to referring to two
pertinent examples, namely, the restrictions imposed by the
10

116. Having demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt
the soundness of both our basic political and legal
positions, I wish to add for the information of the members
of the Council that we have declared over and over again at
various levels of my Government that, having acted within
the limits of our sovereign rights, we do not contemplate
any offensive action. But we hasten to add that we would
not hesitate a moment, in the exercise of our inherent right
of self-defence, to repel any aggression committed against
us.
117. The truth of the matter is that the primary responsibility for the relief of tension in our area lies at the door of
those who foment trouble and threaten peace in words and
deeds, and most certainly not on those who in all good
faith exercise their sovereign rights. No one in all objectivity can contest or even intimate that we cannot exercise
our sovereignty over our territorial waters.

I
1t
re
Jr
Id

I
(
I

la

I
1

of I
1
of
ta1
we
gic
Ids
nd
tic
ter
of
the
1at t’
.lill f
:ily 1
nsi- !
ple 1
.trikin
;ed,
list
’ of

118. The search for a solution or the restoration of
tranquillity
in the Middle East should first and foremost
take as a stepping stone the full and total respect of the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian Arab people. My
Government firmly stands by this principle and is equally
committed to the cause of justice. It shall continue to do so
consistently in the discharge of its obligations to the people
of Palestine, in particular, and to the Arab nations as a
whole,
I19. It should therefore be incumbent upon the Security
Council to take appropriate action in the fulfilment of its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security and in view of the grave situation
resulting from the inability of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization to function in accordance with
the resolutions of the Council and in conformity with the
obligations of the parties to the Egyptian-Israel General
Armistice Agreement-an inability due to the attitude of
the Israel authorities, as indicated by the Secretary-General
in his report [S/7906/
when he refers to the General
Armistice Agreement.
120. We believe that the Security Council should take into
consideration in its approach to the problem the fact that
the unilateral denunciation by Israel of the Egyptian-Israel
General Armistice Agreement is legally invalid and unacceptable, and does not absolve Israel of its obligations
and responsibilities under that Agreement, and that such a
unilateral denunciation by Israel, as well as its flagrant
violation of the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement, is responsible for the deterioration of the situation in
the Middle East, threatening peace and security.

eid, i
I

sea 1
not !
rent !
se a
ifs
? Is i
fuse /
role ,
/

121. It is our considered opinion that the Security Council
should, in its endeavour to deal with the present situation,
recognize the continuing validity of the Egyptian-Israel
General Armistice Agreement, and that the United Nations
machinery emanating therefrom should be fully operative.

122. Accordingly, the Council should deem it appropriate
to call upon the Israel Government to respect and abide by
its obligations and responsibilities as stipulated by the
Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement, and simultaneously instruct the Chief of Staff of the United Nations

Truce Supervision Organization to proceed promptly to
reinstate within two weeks the headquarters of the
Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission in El Auja,
from which it discharged its duties prior to the Israel
unilateral action forcing its expulsion from that zone.
123. We believe that the Secretary-General should be
requested to report to the Security Council within fifteen
days, and that it should reconvene immediately upon the
submission of that report.
124. Mr. RUDA (Argentina) (translated porn Spanish):
The Security Council met on 24 May, at the request of the
delegations of Canada and Denmark, to consider “the
extremely grave situation in the Middle East which is
threatening international peace and security”. Generally
speaking, we agree,Mr. President, with the opinion of these
two delegations, which is shared by others in this Council,
and we agree, in particular, with the Secretary-General’s
statement in his report of 19 May [S/7896], when he
described the situation as “extremely menacing”, However,
we abstained from speaking at the last meeting, becausewe
felt that, although the Council should act with all promptness to discharge its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in the troubled area, it
should await the outcome of the Secretary-General’svisit to
Cairo, so that it could consider the problem with all the
facts before it and, more particularly, in the light of the
authoritative opinion of someone returning with direct
information about the conflict. This latest report (S/7906/
is now before the Council, and we must express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for submitting it in
such a short time.
125. Before entering upon consideration of the Mid&e
East question as it appears today in the light of the
Secretary-General’s report, I should like to make some
comments on the context in which my delegation views the
recent developments, in other words,how we interpret the
responsibilities of the Security Council under the Charter.
126. This principa! organ of the United Nations has been
entrusted as is so often stated here, with the Primav
responsibflity for the maintenance of internatiOnd
peace
and security. In discharging that responsibility, many lines
of action are open to the Council, depending upon the
gravity of the situation. In dealing with a question like the
present one, its main objective must be, first and foremost,
to avert a military confrontation and, to that end, it must
seek, bY means of effective decisions, to check the
aggression or disturbance of the peace and to prevent
threats from being translated into action. If faced bY a
dispute or a situation which is liable to lead to a
disturbance of the peace, the United Nations should seek a
settlement by peaceful means, in accordance with justice
and international law.
127, Events SO far indicate that, although fh,efe is ,nO
‘Eating at present, we are faced bY an acute cflsls whch
threatens the maintenance of peace. The Secretary-General
repeated, in the first paragraph of his latest report, his view
that the general situation in the Near East at Present is
more disturbing, indeed, more menacing, than at anY time
since the fall of 1956. The statements made bY both Parties

him to order the withdrawal of the Force and feels
confident that the presence of the United Nations through
its participation in the Mixed Armistice Commissions can
come to constitute as solid a guarantee for the maintenance
of peace asthat provided by the Force.

to the conflict in the Council last Wednesday [134.&d
meeting] and today and the. speeches made by political
leaders in the Middle East and elsewhere show clearly the
gravity of the situation.
128. In the opinion of my delegation, the Council has an
immediate task to perform before the conflict develops
further, In view of the urgency of the situation, we believe
that this is no time to aim at general decisions or seek
solutions to complex problems which have burdened
Middle East politics for many years.
129. My delegation believes that our work now, today, is
basically to use every means at our disposal to keep the
peace. We should not look for final judgements or
miraculous solutions, which we have not managed to find
over the years. Let us resolutely determine now to prevent
the conflict from becoming more acute. We have the
advantage that all parties have adopted an attitude of
caution and that there has been no armed conflict. Let us
do nothing to provoke one, for the consequences of such a
conflict are impossible to foresee.
130. For these reasons, both particular and general, my
delegation considers that its responsibility in this hour of
crisis is to give full support to the Secretary-General when,
in his latest report, he urges the parties concerned to
exercise restraint and avoid an armed confrontation and
any action which might increase the tension, so that the
Council may deal with the underlying causes of the present
crisis and seek solutions.

134. Mr. SETTE CAMARA (Brazil): On behalf of my
Government and on my own behalf, as this is the first time
I am speaking I should like to express our deep appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for your kind remarks regarding
Brazil’s return to the Security Council. Brazil has served on
this Council for a total of eight years, and is now
discharging the duties of its fifth term as a member of this
body. The fact that the Members of our Organization have
once again chosen to elect Brazil to this organ is highly
gratifying to us. My country is honoured to succeed
Uruguay on the Council, for Uruguay is a country to which
Brazil is linked by very special ties of friendship.
13 5, Turning to the matter at hand, the Brazilian Govemment has been following closely-and with the greatest
concern-the mounting crisis in the Middle East. The
Brazilian people are linked to Israel and to all the Arab
nations by very close ties of friendship. Both Arabs and
Jews played an important part in Brazilian history and not
only contributed to our social and economic development
but also helped to shape the cultural and spiritual features
of Brazilian civilization. As a member of the Security
Council, which has primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security, Brazil has a special duty to
perform in discharging the responsibility entrusted to it by
the United Nations Charter.

131. We should like to think that none of the parties
would consider its rights or claims affected by a course of
action designed to prevent an aggravation of the conflict.
We fee1 sure that the Council will be able to find solutions
which take into account the vital interests at stake and
which will re-establish the precarious peace that has existed
for ten years in the Middle East. These words are prompted
only by a genuine desire to protect the peace; in order to
achieve this aim, we shall exert every effort’in the search
for solutions. Our geographical position, our ties of
friendship with both parties and our peace-loving tradition
are the best guarantee of our impartiality.

136. For the last eleven years Brazil has been supplying
one of the contingents which make up the United Nations
Emergency Force. The role of the Force as an element of
stabilization of the political situation in the Middle East has
been a source of gratification to my Government. I might
add that the presence of our soldiers under the flag of the
United Nations on the territory of the United Arab
Republic has strengthened the friendship between Brazil
and the United Arab Republic.
137. Because of those considerations, my Government
cannot but approach this issue in an entirely objective and
impartial manner. In connexion with the crisis in the
Middle East, the Brazilian Minister for Foreign Affairs, in a
recent statement, reiterated our purposes to co-operate,
within the United Nations or elsewhere, in the efforts of
the international community to avoid any further deterlora.
tion of the situation and to restore stability. It is not our
intention to pass judgement on any action, but rather to
seek ways and means of easing the present tensions and
paving the way for the restoration of peace and security in
the area.

132. As I said earlier, we do not want, at this time, to
embark on an analysis of the substance of the issues
involved. However, we should like to reserve the right to do
so at the proper time, in order to reiterate, if necessary, the
various positions taken by our Government in similar
circumstances in favour of peace and the application of the
principles of international law.
133. Before concluding, I should like to place on record
my Government’s opinion on the role played by the United
Nations Emergency Force during its presence in the Middle
East. There can be no doubt in anyone’s mind that its
presence was a fundamental factor in maintaining stability
and peace in the area assigned to it. It carried out its work
with propriety and dignity and achieved the objectives set
for it while it was in the area. Furthermore, its experiences
will be important
for the future of United Nations
peace-keeping operations. My delegation shares the Secretary-General’s regret that circumstances should have forced

138. The Brazilian Government wishes to put on record
the fact that it fully endorses the principle that the consent
of the host country is the basis of any peace-keeping
operation, My Government fully agrees with the statement
of the Secretary-General, in his report to the Security
Council on developments in the Middle East, that:
“The decision of the Government of the United Arab
Republic to terminate its consent for the continued 1

12

.

L

presence of the United Nations Emergency Force on
United Arab Republic territory in Sinai and on United
Arab Republic controlled territory in Gaza came suddenly and was unexpected. The reasons for this decision
have not been officially stated, but they were clearly
regarded as overriding by the Government of the United
Arab Republic. It is certain that they had nothing to do
with the conduct of the Force itself or the way in which
it was carrying out the mandate entrusted to it by the
General Assembly and accepted by the Government of
the United Arab Republic when it gave its consent for the
deployment of the Force within its jurisdiction. There
can be no doubt, in fact, that the Force has discharged its
responsibilities with remarkable effectiveness and great
distinction. No United Nations peace-keeping operation
can be envisaged as permanent or semi-permanent . . . ,
On the other hand, it can be said that the timing of the
withdrawal of the Force leaves much to be desired
because of the prevailing tensions and dangers throughout
the area. It also adds one more frontier on which there is
a direct confrontation between the military forces of
Israel and those of her Arab neighbours.” (S/7896,
para. 10.1

139. The whole world has been enriched and enlightened
by the contributions of Arab and Jewish culture, thought
and civilization. Let us fervently hope that the Jewish and
Arab nations will Iive up to the traditions of their wisdom
and lucidity. In our view, the first duty of the Council is to
prevent the escalation of the present tensions in the Middle
East into an armed conflict whose far-reaching repercussions would surely affect the whole world. To achieve this
objective, the Council needs the full co-operation of all
parties directly involved in the crisis and their utmost
caution and restraint.
140, If anything can be done by the Council at this
moment, it is to initiate or support all efforts-without
taking sides in the confrontation-to
prevent further
aggravation of the crisis. What is at stake in the Middle East
is of vital concern to nations all over the world. We reaffirm
our confidence in the efforts and the ability of the
Secretary-General. We reiterate our support of the role to
,be played by the United Nations in bringing the parties
concerned together for a fruitful discussion of their
problems. As the Secretary-General himself has pointed
out, within the framework of the United Nations there still
exist operating organs that can be helpful in this emergency
in trying new approaches for a settlement of the crisis.

conflict removed? Second, how can the rights of free and
unimpeded passagethrough the Strait of Tiran be guaranteed and assured? Third, how can effective United Nations
measures and machinery to keep the peace and prevent
violence and conflict through the whole area best be
worked out for the future? Fourth, what new measures
and additional action can be taken to prevent such dangers
to the peace from recurring in future years?
143. I said that no one could doubt the danger, and no
one could doubt the urgency, and I spoke of the challenge
and the opportunity which faced the United Nations. There
were those who sought to belittle the danger and to doubt
the urgency. We were told that we were artificially
dramatizing the situation, that there was no need for the
Council to meet. We were even told that no serious
incidents had been reported,
144. We have pressed from the start that the Council
should meet and act. Our first purpose was to support the
Secretary-General in his mission to Cairo. But there were
those who maintained-and their arguments prevailed-that
we should await the Secretary-General’s report. Now we
have that report. We have had ample time to study it. The
report more than confirms both the danger and the
urgency. In fearless language, all the more forceful by
reason of its simplicity and restraint, the report both shows
the imniediate dangers and points the way to the action we
must take.
145. We have very good reason, as we expected, to be
gratefu1 to the Secretary-General for his decision to go to
Cairo and for the dispatch with which he completed his
mission. We are grateful, too, for the service he has done in
giving us so soon after his return from that exacting and
critical and Ionely expedition a report so compelling in its
statement of the dangers and so constructive in its
indications of the action required.
146. The report in cIear and direct words teIls us how the
Secretary-General called attention to “the dangerous consequences which could ensue from restricting innocent
passageof ships in the Strait of Tiran” and expressed his
deep concern in this regard that “no precipitate action
would be taken” [S/7906, para. 101, and went on to state
the fear that a clash between the United Arab Republic and
Israel over this issue would inevitably set off, to use his
words, “general conflict in the Near East” [ibid., para. 121.
147. We cannot fail, in the light of that warning, to
concentrate first and foremost on the vital need for finding
a solution of the critical problem of the Gulf of Aqaba.
And, as I made clear when I spoke last week, we consider
that this must take into account not only the normal
requirements of the States bordering the Gulf, but also the
interests of all maritime Powers.

141. In the light of those remarks the Brazilian delegation
gives its whole-hearted support to the appeal contained in
paragraph 14 of the most recent report of the Secretary
General /5’/7906/. Without “special restraint” and a strong
decision on the part of the Powers directly involved in the
crisis-to avoid any further act which might lead to the
increase of the tension-it will be extremely difficult for the
Council to find an immediate solution to the problem
before us.

148. From the first, my Government has made its position
on that main issue of the Gulf of Aqaba absolutely clear. It
was stated by a representative of my country ten years ago
in the General Assembly. It has been consistently maintained and repeatedly and positively confirmed. It is on this
main issue that we should first ensure that belligerence is
avoided and special restraint exercised.

142. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): When we met
briefly and inconclusively last week I stated [1342nd
meeting] that we had four questions to tackle together:
First, how can tension be relieved and immediate dangers of
13

149. But, as the Secretary-General also emphasized in his
report, the freedom of navigation through the Strait of
Tiran is not the only immediate issue which is endangering
peace in the Near East. He points to the possible courses of
action which could contribute to the reduction of tension.

i
i
i
j
’

stake, We seek a solution compatibic with the sovereign
rights of all nations since we are all pledged, to use the
words of the Charter, to defend “the equal rights . . . of
nations large and small”. We are pledged too, and again I
use the words of the Charter, “to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising from
treaties and other sources of international law can be
maintained”. We must be ready to work with the Secretar-y-General and with each other, in mutual respect, to save
the peace and achieve a just settlement and restore the
authority of the United Nations.

150. Having urged all concerned “to exercise special
restraint, to forgo belligerence and to avoid all other actions
which could increase tension” (ibid., para. 141, the Secretary-General turns to practical proposals, proposals to
reduce immediate tension and to keep the peace in the
whole area in the future. Now we must surely engage on an
urgent study of ways and means by which the United
Nations can assist in achieving those purposes. AS the
Secretary-General says, we must fill the vacuum left by the
withdrawal of the United Nations Emergency Force. He has
proposed full recourse to the United Nations peace machinery still present and available, so that there can be a
continuing and effective United Nations presence in the
area. We must persuade those directly concerned to
co-operate to the full. We must be ready to consider new
and original methods, with special reference to the possible
steps which could be taken by mutual consent to which the
Secretary-General has referred in his report. Without the
positive and constructive contribution of the United Nations we should be left with the fuses still lit which at any
moment could lead to a series of explosions doing
irreparable damage. We are ready and eager to work with
the Secretary-General and all members of the Council and
with the parties concerned to find urgent means to restore
the effectiveness of the international effort.

:
1
1
r

155. Those must be our purposes, and for my country I
say now that from the first we have sought to work for a
solution within the framework of the United Nations. And
that is our purpose now. We trust that all will join in that
international endeavour. If they do, we could even at this
late hour turn the dangers of untold bloodshed and
disastrous conflict which we face today into a triumph for
the rule of reason and law. We could take together a long
step forward towards the creation of a stable world order.
156. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Israel.

I now give the floor to the

157. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): On Saturday, 13 May-just
two weeks ago-the streets of Cairo reverberated with the
sound of tanks and the cries of agitated crowds whipped up
by cheerleaders chanting: “We want war with Israel”.
158. We in Israel looked on this spectacle with detachment, thinking that this was just one more outburst of
chauvinistic frenzy which is such a common feature of the
Arab military dictatorship regimes. But the tanks and the
marching columns did not return to barracks, They moved
forward into Sinai as the spearhead of a massive military
concentration along the southern borders of Israel.

151, I trust that today we all realize the extent of our
obligation and our opportunity.
152. For ten years the United Nations has successfully
performed a most valuable task. All who have contributed
to that success have earned the gratitude of the world in
preventing bloodshed and enabling the pursuit of peace to
go forward.

159. While the military machine was moving with ever
increasing momentum, the Egyptian propaganda machine
poured out a torrent of threats. against Israel and charges
that we had massed large forces on our northern border in
preparation for an attack on Syria.

153. A supreme effort is now required of us to save the
situation. Surely all of us, permanent and non-permanent
members of the Council, must join in that effort. I might
say in passing that I trust that my friend, the representative
of the United Arab Republic, will also co-operate in the
search for a solution. We listened with close and respectful
attention to the speech which he made today, and I
determined that I shall say no word which shall increase
tension or animosity. When we have studied his speech, it
may well be that we shall wish to make some comment on
his detailed statements. I would only say now, with respect,
that I trust that the somewhat more moderate tone of his
speech today, as compared with his speech last week, may
indicate some improvement in the general situation.

160. Although the trumped-up nature of these propaganda
allegations was obvious, my Government nevertheless instructed me to inform the Secretary-General of their
complete unfoundedness. As the Secretary-General confirms in his first report to the Security Council [S/7896], I
conveyed to him on 15 May the assurances of my
Government that Israel had not concentrated any troops
anywhere and harboured no aggressive intentions against
any of its Arab neighbours. I requested the SecretaryGeneral to convey these assurances to the Arab Govemments concerned.

154. This is no time for any of us to hold back. It is a time
for international understanding and international
good
faith, and international co-operation. For we must all surely
recognize that what is at stake, as was pointed out by the
representative of Brazil just now, is not only the peace of
the Near East and the saving of the peoples of the Near East
from the scourge of war: the effectiveness of the world
Organization which we are all pledged to support is at

161. He acted without delay on our request and added
that the independent inquiries which he had conducted
through his own United Nations representatives in the area
confirmed the facts conveyed to him by Israel. At the
1342nd meeting of the Council on 24 May, I drew the
Council’s attention
to the relevant paragraph-Pam
graph g-of the Secretary-General’s report. This not*
withstanding, the representative of the United Arab Re.
14

1
1
j
/
i
1
1
i

public, in his letter of 27 May to the President of the
Security Council /S/7907], not only brazenly repeats this
fabrication, but in doing so he distorts the Secretary
General’s report. I understand his predicament, but I
cannot admire his audacity.

Tiran. I expressed my deep concern in this regard and my
hope that no precipitate action would be taken,”
[S/7906, para. IO.]

168. This is President Nasser’s reply to the representations
made to him by the Secretary+General; on 26 May he said:
“Sharm El Sheikh means real confrontation with Israel.
Taking such a step means that we should be ready to enter
full-scale war with Israel. It is not an isolated operation.”
This speaks for itself.

162. The unfounded charge of alleged Israel troop concentrations is the keystone of the Egyptian case for moving its
forces against Israel. If it is pulled away, the whole flimsy
edifice of Egyptian propaganda will collapse like a house of
cards. By the alchemy of a process of constant repetition,
the Egyptian propaganda machine tries to transmute the big
lie into golden truth. This technique has been tried before,
and not so long ago, with initial success and final disaster
for its practitioners.

169. As the Secretary-General himself has stated, the
important immediate fact is that the situation in the Strait
of Tiran represents a very serious potential threat to peace.
170. The position of my Governyent was stated in
unambiguous terms by the then Foreign Minister of Israel
at the 666th plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
1 March 19.57, and I repeated that statement when I spoke
at the 1342nd meeting of the Security Council on 24 May
last. I wish to confirm today again in the most solemn
terms that this is the position of the Government of Israel.
Every interference with the freedom of navigation in these
waters is an offensive action and an &t of aggression against
IsraeI, the infringement of the sovereign rights of atf nations
to the unimpeded use of this international waterway and a
grossviolation of international law I

163. To return to the narration of the events: on 16 May,
one day after my Government had conveyed these assurances to the Secretary-General, President Nasser moved
against the United Nations Emergency Force and deployed
heavy Egyptian forces right along the Israel border. In his
report to the General Assembly, the Secretary-General,
with his accustomed restraint and courtesy, has painted a
vivid picture of the attitudes and actions of the Egyptian
authorities. An ultimatum
was issued, and while it was
being delivered Egyptian military forces took over positions
held by the Emergency Force, and shells were even fired to
speed up the evacuation. With the Emergency Force safely
out of the way, more Egyptian forces were poured into
Sinai. At this point the situation became critical.

171. There is today no controversy whatsoever over the
international character of the waterway in question. For
ten years now it has been used uninterruptedly; hundreds
of thousands of tons of shipping with all their different
cargoes and under many different flags, including Israel’s,
have freely passed to and fro.

164. Israel’s Defence Forces were still on their normal
peace footing. But in the light of these sudden and
threatening moves, my Government was compelled to take
limited precautionary measures.

172. I wish to recall that statements recognizing the
international character of the Strait of Tiran and acknowledging that freedom of navigation for all countries is the
rule there were made at the 666th, 667th and 568th
plenary meetings of the General Assembly in March 1957
by many countries, particularly those with important
maritime interests, notably the United States of America,
Argentina, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Australia, Japan, Belgium, Canada,
Norway, Sweden, Portugal, Iceland and Denmark, and
others.

165. On 22 May, the Secretary-General, alarmed at the
rapidity with which the situation was deteriorating, left on
his journey to Cairo. While he was en route, President
Nasser, in a fiery speech, proclaimed the blockade of the
international waterway of the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf
of Aqaba.
166. When the Secretary-General arrived in Cairo, not
only did he find himself confronted with the fait accompli
of the blockade, but also with the same whipped-up crowds
greeting him with cries of: “We want war with Israel”. Next
came announcements that operational blockade measures
were being put into effect, and that mines were being laid
in the international waterway.

173. In response to the recent unilateral and arbitrary
action of the Egyptian Government, many more unambiguous and emphatic statements by these and other
Governments have been issued, not only in support of
Israel’s vital rights and interests in the Strait of Tiran and
the Gulf of Aqaba, but also to uphold their own rights and
interests and to safeguard the integrity of the law of the
sea.

167. The Secretary-General returned to New York earlier
than expected and his report is now before the Security
Council; jn that report he stated:
“The decision of the Government of the United Arab
Republic to restrict shipping in the Strait of Tiran, of
which I le?rned while en route to Cairo, has created a new
situation. Free passage through the Strait is one of the
questions which the Government of Israel considers most
vital to her interests , . . , While in Cairo, I called to the
attention of the Government of the United Arab Republic the dangerous consequences which could ensue
from restricting innocent passage of ships in the Strait of

174. In the face of the proclaimed lawlessness of the
Egyptian Government, the assertion of these rights and the
protection of the established law is a matter of supreme and
urgent concern to each member of the international
community.
175. In the light of this situation, the eviction of the
United Nations Emergency Force from its position at
15

Sharm El Sheik11 at the entrance to the Strait was not only
an act of defiance of the will of the United Nations and a
violation of Egypt’s pledged word, but was the signal for
the revival of belligerence after ten years of tranquillity in
the Gulf of Aqaba.

the United Nations Charter and of General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, was resisted and defeated by
the people of Israel. It is this unsuccessful attempt to wipe
out Israel which is the basic cause of the future developments. This Arab invasion of Israel was called at that time
by the principle members of the Security Council by its
true name, “aggression”, and all that followed can be
directly traced back to that aggression, and to that alone.

176. What was the real role of the Force? Its main tasks
were in Sharm El She&h and in Gaza to see to it that Egypt
did not interfere with the freedom of navigation, and to
deter terrorists and marauders from crossing the borders of
Israel. The Force acquitted itself of these two tasks with
distinction. Israel, along with all peace-loving nations, pays
tribute to the officers and men of the Force who have so
faithfully carried out their strenuous mission for peace.

183. If there is still any doubt over Egypt’s present-day
objectives, Colonel Nasser himself has dissipated the last
vestiges of it and thrown off all pretence. In his speech
before the Central Council of Arab Trade Unions on 26
May 1967 he revealed his true intentions-not new to Israel
or to those who knew the realities of the Middle East, but
shocking to those who believed that they were dealing with
a responsible leader. This was his message:

177. From what I have said it becomes obvious that a
United Nations Force has no tasks to fulfil in Israel. The
entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba is not in Israel, and the
marauders and infiltrators do not operate from Israel
territory.

“The Arab people want to tight.
“We have been waiting for the suitable day when we
shall be completely ready, since if we enter a battle with
Israel we should be confident of victory and should take
strong measures. We do not speak idly.

178. The proclaimed and practised policy of belligerence
so brazenly pursued by the Government of the United Arab
Republic is the crux of the matter. This is the underlying
cause for the present and other crisis situations in the
Middle East.

“We have lately felt that our strength is sufficient and
that if we enter the battle with Israel we shall, with God’s
help, be victorious. Therefore we have now decided to
take real steps.

179. This belligerence made an empty shell of the Armistice Agreement. The two central violations of the
Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement are the denial
of free passage in the Suez Canal and the denial of free
passage in Aqaba. In September 1951, the Security Council
ruled that such belligerent practices and blockades cannot
coexist with the armistice r&me.

“The United Nations Emergency Force stays as long as
we wish and until we are ready. I have said at one time
that within half an hour, we can say to UNEF: ‘Go’. And
this is what has really happened.

180. While the United Nations ruled that belligerence is
incompatible with the armistice regime, Egypt wants to use
the Armistice Agreements and United Nations machinery as
a cover for the continuation of that very belligerency which
the Armistice Agreement was intended to end. This is the
meaning of the innocent-looking sentence where the Secretary-General reports President Nasser’s assurances that all
that he wanted was a “return to the conditions prevailing
prior to 1956”. What were these conditions? Illegal
blockade of the Suez Canal; armed incursions by organized
gangs of fedayeen; and illicit interference with the freedom
of navigation through the Strait of Tiran. The Government
of Israel will not permit a return to these conditions.

“The battle will be a full-scale one and our basic aim
will be to destroy Israel.”
184. These threats do not need any interpretation. This is
not the first time in our generation that we have seen to
what lengths of folly dictators can go unless checked in
time and what disasters they can inflict on mankind,
including their own people. Is it too late to hope that this
Organization, born out of the shambles of a dictator’s
madness, will rally in defence of its own principles and
restrain President Nasser from the course on which he is
set? The people of Israel, steeled in hardship and oppression, stand firm, resolute and united and will not shrink
from defending their liberty and independence.

181. This is the real issue, and not the mixture of stale
allegations and fictitious charges put forward by the
representative of the United Arab Republic.

18.5. It is not too late for reason to prevail. The
Government of Israel believes that five immediate steps
should be taken in the present crisis: all inflammatory
statements and threats against the territorial integrity and
political independence of any State should cease; the
Charter obligation of non-belligerence must be strictly
complied with; the armed forces should be withdrawn from
their positions as at the beginning of the month; all forms
of armed incursion, acts of sabotage and terrorism should
cease and the Governments concerned should take all steps
to prevent their territory from being used for these hostile
acts; in the Strait of Tiran and the Gulf of Aqaba there
should be no interference with any shipping.

182. The representative of the United Arab Republic has
presented to the Council, at length and in detail, his version
of the historical developments of the last twenty years. It
was a fascinating exercise in fiction and diversion. Unfortunately, he forgot to mention one basic fact which
determined the course of events to follow. On 15 May
1948, the Egyptian Army and those of other Arab States
invaded the State of Israel with the avowed aim, conveyed
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to occupy
the territory of Israel and to destroy its independence. This
aggression, which was committed in flagrant violation of
16

I

186. If these steps are taken promptly, the deep anxieties
of the hour will be lifted and the present dangerous
tensions will subside.

understand the explanation given by the United States
representative who referred to some kind of mysterious
delicacy of the reasons why we shouId interrupt the
Security Council’s work.

187. The PRESIDENT:
There are three more speakers on
my list. Before we continue, however, I would suggest to
the Council a recess of ten minutes.

195. There is obviously no place here for dramatic effects,
and it would be reasonable for the members of the Security
Council to continue their businesslike discussion without
delays of any kind.

188. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Today we have heard
statements by a number of delegations which have ec
plained their positions, their approach and their understanding of the problem under discussion. The list of
speakers contains the names of only three delegations
wishing to explain their point of view. The Soviet delegation is one of those three.

196. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I find
my friend Mr. Fedorenko singularly obtuse. I withdraw my
request.
197. The PRESIDENT: I should like to say that the Chair
would in normal circumstances give equaI consideration to
a similar request on the part of any member. But, as I said,
the Chair will not insist on this recess.Now that the request
has been withdrawn, I call on the next speaker, the
representative of Ethiopia.

189, We would ask you, members of the Security Council,
to give us an opportunity of expressing our views today
before we adjourn this meeting of the Security Council. We
believe it is most important for us to do this now and not at
some other time or on some other day.

198. Mr. MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): My delegation feels
that the Council is in duty bound to thank and commend
the Secretary-General for his worthy and sincere efforts
that have resulted in the wise and balanced report which he
has presented to us and which is under consideration in
accordance with the item listed last on our agenda.

190. The PRESIDENT:
It is the Chair’s intention that the
meeting continue until the speakers’ list is exhausted. In
view of the hour, however, I believe it would be convenient
to have a very short recess. In fact, it has been suggested to
me that we have a short recess of ten minutes; I am sure
that the members of the Council wiIl find that that will not
interfere with our proceedings, which will continue after
the recess. If there are very insistent objections, I will not
press for it, but I propose that we recess and resume
promptly at 6 o’clock. I make this proposal because it has
been suggested to me that this short recesswill enable us to
pay closer attention to the speeches that will follow.
191.

199. In our earfier intervention on this matter in the
Council we suggested that it would be justified for the
Secretary-General’s report to be presented to us before we
embarked on substantive discussion. We are happy to note
that the report has not disappointed our expectations.
200. The Secretary-General is to be commended for doing
his best in the difficult and complicated circumstances
surrounding the Middle East crisis. The effort he has made
so far and the suggestions he has presented in his report
show clearly how objective and painstakingly careful he has
been in his whole approach to this matter. It is our view
that in this matter, as in other matters, he has shown
loyalty both to the universal trust on whichhishigh office
is based and to the spirit of the Charter, which for him, as
well as for us, is the guideline to all international action.
This is a course of conduct we expect of the SecretaryGeneral, and he is to be commended ,for living up to our
expectations.

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
I should merely like to know what reasons
prompted some delegations to suggest such an important
decision at this time and which delegations felt unable to
hear a few more speakers and allow the Council to continue
its work. Those reasons must be very weighty ones, for if
we were to break off our work at this point, that would
mean that we did not attach any great importance to the
task before us. So far we have not been informed of those
reasons, and I should therefore like to know what they are.
French):

192. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I am
the guilty man. If a reason is asked for, I can only say I do
not think it delicate to state it.

201. The job of the Secretary-General has been called the
most impossible job in the world, and those who become
too demanding in their impatient expectations of quick
results or who are ready to voice ill-considered criticism of
the Secretary-General’s actions are bound to add to the
inherent difficulties of his office and to create more
complications for an already formidable task. In any case,if
the world community really wishes to make the SecretaryGeneral an effective servant of peace, it should give him
continued support and should always be prepared to
consider his suggestions and counsel seriously. That is the
only way by which the Secretary-General can have the
necessary authority and prestige to enable him to contribute effectively to the solution of world problems. To the
extent that we help the Secretary-General in this manner,
we enable the United Nations to play a more active and a

193. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): Sometimes, as we sit in
this most important
body, we have an impression that
efforts are being made to engage us in conversation with
some kind of world beyond the grave;and that some voice
is therefore asking us to accept the obscure ideas of
nameless people.
194. We have already had occasion to point out that we
here are living people and want to talk to living people, and
we cannot understand why living people-whatever seat
they may occupy, even the President%should
wish to
reach out to the dead. We find it even more difficult to
17

208. My delegation concurs with the Secretary-General%
considered judgement that a breathing spell is required to
allow the Security Council to study the underlying causes
of the present crisis. The Council would therefore do well
to concentrate its urgent attention on the report and the
recommendations contained therein. The first and foremost
objective at this stage, it seems to us, should therefore be
the avoidance of conflict and of any step that is likely to
lead to confrontation. With this urgent objective in view
and by way of endorsing the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral as outlined in his report, my delegation is prepared
to join in an effort to work out an urgent appeal to all the
parties concerned to exercise restraint and to refrain from
taking any action which could give rise to confrontation
and conflict. The avoidance of all such action will allow the
Security Council to proceed with its urgent mission of the
preservation of peace in the region.

more effective role in international relations. This constant
dedication to and support for the United Nations should of
course be forthcoming from all Members of the Organization, be they large or small Powers.
202. It is unnecessary to emphasize that it is the support
and co-operation of the major Powers, permanent members
of this Council, that is of decisive importance in this respect
because the larger the Power the greater the responsibiIity.
The trouble is that the world seems to have fallen into the
dangerous habit of looking upon the Secretary-General as a
kind of one-man fire brigade which it allows itself to ignore
in times other than those of international crises, and then,
in such times of international crises-and only then-it
expects him and the United Nations to resolve difficult and
deep-rooted problems through some kind of miracle or
magic formula.
203. So long as this inconsistent attitude toward the
United Nations role persists and until such time as we-and
by “we” I mean the whole membership of the United
Nations-are prepared to back the United Nations all along
the line and to give our full and constant co-operation to
the Secretary-General, the world seems to be doomed to
living in vicious and dangerous cycles of tensions, alarms
and conflicts whose cumulative effect is bound, in the end,
to undermine the very cause of international peace and
security whose maintenance is the primary responsibility of
this Council.

209. I need hardly add that such an appeal should carry
the unanimous support of the Council if its great value is
not to be lost. This makes it all the more necessary for US to
strive with one mind and with common purpose in order to
achieve this end.
210. I reserve the right of my delegation to intervene later
should the need arise.
211. Mr. PARTI-IASARATHI (India): At the 1341st meeting of the Security Council on 24 May, I expressed the view
that the Council should await a report from the SecretaryGeneral on the result of his discussions in Cairo before
proceeding with the consideration of the matter on the
agenda. We felt-and subsequent events bear out this
conclusion-that no useful purpose would be served by a
public airing of the issues while the Secretary-General was
engaged in delicate diplomatic negotiations on the same
issues.

204. It is with those considerations and preoccupations at
the back of our minds that my delegation has studied the
report of the Secretary-General which is now before the
Council. We would not be doing justice to the efforts of the
Secretary-General nor would we be helping the cause of
peace which we want to preserve if we were to make rash
comments on the substance of the report.

212. My delegation would like to pay a most sincere
tribute to U Thant on his untiring efforts in the cause of
peace and the discharge of his onerous responsibilities in a
fair and impartial manner. We admire his dedication to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations and the
statesmanship which he has displayed in the current crisis.

205. My delegation, like the Security Council itself, needs
time to study and consider this problem. Our comments
today will therefore necessarily be preliminary and will not
include any substantive examination of the report.
206. We feel, as I have had occasion to state earlier, that in
the prevailing circumstances the Secretary-General has
acted rightly and with the same calm dignity that we have
come to associate with his character and personality. The
course of action that he has outlined in his report deserves
the Council’s consideration and support.

213. In his report of 26 May (S/7906/, the SecretaryGeneral has dealt with a number of issues relevant to the
present situation in West Asia and has suggested a number
of steps that could help reduce tension. He has also alluded
to other possible steps which could be taken by mutual
consent of the parties.

207. Moreover, my Government, for its part, approves the
general line and purport of the Secretary-General’s approach to the problem, and we agree with his concern to
gain time and to have wllat he himself has called “a
breathing spell” which, to quote him again, “will allow
tension ,to subside from its present explosive level”
[S/7906, pmn. I4/. It is our duty in the Security Council,
and indeed in the United Nations, to do our utmost, both
individually
and collectively, to ,help gain time for the
Secretary-General and to create a climate in which the
Council can undertake the appropriate initiatives to avert
military conflict which, in the estimate of the SecretaryGeneral, could “‘inevitably set off a general conflict in the
Near East” [ibid., para. 121,

214. The Security Council is meeting to deliberate on vital
issues affecting war and peace in West Asia. Tensions have
existed in the area for many years, but now they have
become critical. We are deeply concerned at this situation.
215. There are several issues in the area which can
endanger peace. They are set out in the Secretary-General’s
report, but it important to realize that these problems have
to be viewed in the perspective of the tragic history of the
area. The Council is charged under the Charter with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace. it is
the view of my delegation that our immediate endeavour
18

should be to work for restraint and reduction of tensions in
order to gain, in the words of the Secretary-General, “a
breathing spell”, The time thus gained can be utilized by
the Council to work for a dPtente and seek ways and means
to consolidate peace in the area.

221. Third, all parties should fully observe the provisions
of the General Armistice Agreements between Israel and
,the Arab States.
222. Fourth, in regard to the Gulf of Aqaba, the Minister
for External Affairs for India staled in Parliament on 25
May 1967:

216. The Secretary-General, in his report to the Security
Council, has given an indication of the possible courses of
action which might contribute substantially to the reduction of tension. He has stated that: “it would most
certainly be helpful in the. present situation if the Government of Israel were to reconsider its position and resume its
participation
in the Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission” [ibid., pnra. 15/. Similarly, in another paragraph
of the report the Secretary-General has repeated his earlier
suggestion that: “it would be very helpful to the maintenance of quiet along the Israel-Syrian line if the two part,&
would resume their participation in the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission, both in the current emergency
session and in the regular sessions” [ibid., para. 161,

“So far as the Government of India are concerned, we
had taken the position as far back as 19.57 that the Gulf
of Aqaba is an inland sea and thal: entry into the Gulf lies
within the territorial waters of the United .Arab Republic
and Saudi Arabia. We adhere to this view.”
It is our view that no State or group of States should
attempt to challenge by force the sovereignty of the United
Arab Republic over the Strait of Tiran. A modus vivendi is
most desirable, but any arrangement that is worked out
must be within the framework of the sovereignty of the
United Arab Republic.
223. Finally, it is our earnest hope that peace in the area
will be preserved. It is our duty to encourage efforts by the
Secretary-General and all Member States to work for a
dhnte which alone can lead to the consolidation of peace
in West Asia.

217. My delegation lends its support to those valuable
suggestions. It is a matter of record that while the
Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission has not been
able to achieve any concrete results, the Egyptian-Israel
Mixed Armistice Commission has not functioned at all since
1956. Both the Israel-Syrian and Egyptian-Israel, as well as
other, Mixed Armistice Commissions were established
under the provisions of the General Armistice Agreements
signed between Israel and its Arab neighbours. We believe
tllat the provisions of the various General Armistice
Agreements should be fulIy observed by the parties
concerned. The Counci can play a particularly useful role
in this connexion by strengthening the machinery of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization.

224. We earnestly wish to see a reduction of tension and
the establishment of peace in this area as in other areas of
the world. There are, no doubt, many obstacles, but we
share the Secretary-General’sbelief that in spite of all these
difficulties the United Nations can and must perseverein its
endeavours to find reasonable, peaceful and just solutions
to these problems. Towards this end my delegation is ready
now and in the future to extend its full co-operation to all
efforts to secure and maintain peace in West Asia. What is
required at this stage is the exercise of the utmost restraint
by all parties Concerned, to enable the Secretary-General
and the Security Council to take stepsto maintain peace.

218. The position of my Government in regard to the
basic issues is well known and was stated in Parliament on
25 May 1967 by the Minister for External Affairs of India.
At this stage I do not wish to go in detail on questions of a
substantive nature, but would only briefly restate my
delegation’s position.
,
’

225. I reserve my right to intervene again in the debate,
Mr. President.
226. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council
has before it a letter from the representative of the United
Arab Republic requesting the inclusion in the Council’s
agenda, as a matter of extreme urgency, of an item entitled
“Israel aggressivepolicy, its repeated aggressionthreatening
peace and security in the Middle East and endangering
international peaceand security”.

219. First, in asking for the withdrawal of the United
Nations Emergency Force, the United Arab Republic was
only exercising its sovereignty. The Secretary-General acted
correctly and wisely in agreeing to that withdrawal. The
Minister for External Affairs of India said in Parliament on
25 May 1967:
“India could not be a party to any procedure which
would make UNEF into an occupation force nor could
the Government of India agree to UNEF’s continued
presence in the United Arab Republic in the absence of
the latter’s consent and, in any case, Indian troops could
not remain part of UNEF without the United Arab
Republic’s approval.”

I

227. As is well known, at earlier meetings of the Security
Council the Soviet delegation has already given its appraisal
in principle of the situation which has arisen in the Near
East. We have pointed out in particular that in this part of
the world a situation is developing which gives grounds for
concern regarding the interests of peace and international
security. Attention must be drawn to the fact that Israel
appears before us once again as the real culprit responsible
for the dangerous aggravation of tension, and that Israel
could not of course act in the way it is acting unless it was
being directly and indirectly encouraged by certain imperialist cirdes which are trying to restore colonial oppres-

220, Second, we understand the reasons for certain
precautionary measures of preparedness taken by the
United Arab Republic and note that they are of a defensive
nature. In this context it is relevant to note paragraph 9 of
the Secretary-General’s report of 26 May 1967.
19

sion in Arab lands. These circles undoubtedly regard Israel
in present circumstances as their main weapon against Arab
States which are pursuing an independent national policy
and resisting the pressure of the forces of imperialism.
228. Today the United States representative once again
engaged in histrionics of all kinds in the manner characteristic of United States propaganda, and it was quite clear
from his utterances whom Washington is protecting and
whom it is trying to accuse. The United States representative praised Mr. Eshkol’s statement and made no attempt to
conceal whom the United States regards as responsible for
the present crisis, It is extremely regrettable that Washington should display such partiality in its efforts to protect
the forces of aggression and extremist circles in Israel, and
that it should go on giving generous assistance to them by
making pious appeals to both sides.
229. The United States representative went so far in
encouraging Tel-Aviv’s claims that he saw fit to offer here
an interpretation
of certain passages in the SecretaryGeneral’s report to the Security Council, in terms which
cannot in the least be regarded asjustifiable in any way. We
would like to point out in this cormexion that the
Secretary-General’s report does not need interpreting and it
certainly does not need an interpretation involving a
deliberate distortion of the fundamental issue.

connexion that the Council condemned Israel for its
aggression against Jordan and gave a warning that, if such
actions were repeated, it would be compelled to take
serious steps against Israel. In spite of this serious warning,
however, Israel is unwilling to renounce its policy of
provocation and military adventures against the Arab
States. Mention must be made in this connexion of the
armed incident that occurred on 7 April 1967, in the course
of which the Israel side went so far as to launch overt
military operations against Syria using aircraft, tanks and
artillery.
234. We also know that these acts of Israel were accompanied by declarations confirming Israel’s desire to settle
Israel-Arab differences from a position of strength, by force
of arms. It is well known for instance that the Prime
Minister of Israel, and following him the Chief of the Israel
General Staff, declared that the armed attack of 7 April
would not be the last and that Israel itself would at its own
discretion choose the forms, methods and timing of further
actions of this kind. The most recent statements by ruling
circles in Israel have been filled with equally blatant threats.
235. After the armed attack by Israel forces on tire
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic on 7 April of this
year, Tel Aviv continued to intensify the atmosphere of
military psychosis in the country. Leading statesmen,
including Foreign Minister Eban, openly called for Israel to
undertake large-scale “punitive” operations against Syria
and to strike it a “decisive blow”.

230. The United States representative was so carried away
by his own mood that he began to quote extensively from
certain articles of the United Nations Charter. But it is not
for Washington of all places to raise its voice here and play
the role of champion of our Organization’s Charter and
guardian of its integrity. Everyone knows that it is precisely
Washington which is flouting the basic principles of the
United Nations Charter from day to day in various regions
and on various continents from Latin America to Asia.

236. The Defence and Foreign Policy Committee of tire
Knesset (Parliament), in a decision dated 9 May, granted
the Government full powers to conduct military operations
against Syria. Israel forces were moved up to the Syrian
frontier and placed on a war footing. National mobilization
was proclaimed.
237. And today we have further evidence that Israel has
protectors who are not only giving it moral encouragement
in its military adventures but are ready to provide any form
of military assistance. The answers given by the Prime
Minister of Israel in his interview with the U.S. iVewys &
World Report, which was reported in the issue of 17 April,
are very significant in this respect. Asked whether Israel was
expecting help from the United States if it were attacked
by its neighbours, the Prime Minister replied: “We get these
promises when we ask the United States for arms and are
told: ‘Don’t spend your money. We are here. The Sixth
Fleet is here’.”

231. The United States representative expressed his distress at the situation in the Near East, where the Govern
ment of the United Arab Republic has recently exercised its
sovereign rights. It is a pity that the United States shows no
humane feelings or regret at the cruel and ruthless
destruction of peaceful towns and villages, or at the killing
of hundreds and thousands of women, children and old
men in another part of the world by interventionists from
across the ocean, But is this monstrous orgy of military
barbarism being enacted on planets in outer space, to which
the United States speaker also referred, or on our earth? Or
are the people of that country made of different stuff so
that in their case barbarous treatment is permissible?
232. The Security Council is aware of the true facts which
give rise to concern from the point of view of the interests
of maintaining peace and security in the Near East. The
situation in the Near East resulting from Israel’s aggressive
act against neighbouring Arab States has often been the
subject of discussion in the Security Council.

238. As is well known to members of the Council and1
particularly to the peoples of the Near East, it is precisely
at times when a new act of provocation is being prepared1
against one of the countries of this area that the United
States Fleet visits the Near Eastern ports with unambiguous
intentions. The peoples of the Near Eastern countries know
the real value of these “courtesy visits”, as they are called,
and remember their history only too well.

233. In July and August 1966, as we all remember, the
Council considered in some detail the serious situation
created by Israel’s aggressive acts against Syria. In November 1966 another Arab State, Jordan, fell victim to Israel’s
undisguised aggression. It is appropriate to recall in this

239. As we have said before, if Washington and London
really intended to ease tension in the Near East, then they
should start, for instance, by withdrawing from the
Mediterranean their fleets which constitute one of the most
serious sources of tension in this part of the world,
20

,

i

240. It is highly symptomatic that during the last few days
reference has once again been made to the notorious
concept of the power “vacuum” which is said to have been
created in the Near East after the former colonial Powers
had iost their position in most countries in this area, and
which the United States thinks it ought to fill.

248. The Soviet delegation considers it necessary to raise
its voice of warning in the Security Council and to point
out that those who are pushing Israel to the brink of the
abyss do not realize that it is much easier to spark off a
military conflict than to extinguish it.

241, As recently as today, me New York Times devoted a
very lengthy editorial to this blatantly neo-colonial concept, praising the police role of the United States Sixth
Fleet in the Mediterranean and regretting that the United
States does not have the same kind of cudgel to use south
of Suez as well.

249. The Soviet Union, together with all peace-loving
countries, condemns the intrigues of the imperialist forces
against the freedom and independence of the Arab peoples,
The statements made by the Governments of the Soviet
Union and other socialist countries have made it clear that
the peoples of our countries resolutely support the legitimate efforts of the Arab States to strengthen their security
in defence of their inalienable sovereign rights.

242. Surely everyone knows that, in the Mediterranean
and in other parts of the world as well, United States naval
fleets are engaged in premeditated provocative actions off
the shores of foreign countries including the Soviet Union,
thousands of miles from the North American continent,
with the aim of aggravating international tension. Is it not
time to stop these provocative adventurist escapadesin the
vicinity of foreign territory, which endanger peace and
international security?

250. In this connexion I should like to quote an extract
from the statement issued by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of the German Democratic Republic which, like the
other peace-loving countries, is concerned at the tenseness
of the situation in the Near East. This statement says, inter
alia, that:

243. One can only be astonished at the attempts made by
some members of the Council to suggest that the steps
taken by the Arab countries to safeguard their security in
the face of overt military threats by Israel are the cause of
the aggravation of the situation in the Near East. A study of
the sequence and logic of events is enough to show
absolutely clearly that these steps taken by the Arab
countries are a legitimate response to Israel’s threats and to
the dangerous concentration of Israel forces near the Syrian
frontier.
244. In his statement of 25 May President Nasser said:
“On 13 May we received accurate information that
Israel was concentrating on the Syrian border huge armed
forces of about 11 to 13 brigades. These forces were
divided into two fronts, one south of Lake Tiberias and
the other north of the lake,
‘The decision made by Israel at this time was to carry
out an aggression against Syria as of May 17. On May 14
we took our measures . . . .”
245. After Israel has so often unleashed aggressive acts
against the Arab countries in violation of the Armistice
Agreements, the apprehension felt by the Arab States at
Israel’s renewed military preparations is entirely understandable and fully justified.
246. Today, Mr. El Kony, the representative of the United
Arab Republic, has fully explained the position of the
Government of the United Arab Republic.

“The German Democratic Republic most vigorously
condemns the imperialist activities directed against the
Arab States.
“In contrast to the anti-Arab policy of the Government
of the West German Federal Republic, the Government
and people of the German Democratic Republic now as in
the past strongly support the Arab States and peoples in
their resistance to imperialist provocations. The German
Democratic Republic resolutely condemns the insidious
propaganda, which has appeared in imperialist publications in the West German Federal Republic against the
leaders of the United Arab Republic and the Syrian Arab
Republic and against U Thant, Secretary-General of the
United Nations.”
25 1. The Soviet Government is convinced that the peoples
are not interested in kindling a military conflict in the Near
East. Only a handful of colonial oil monopoIies, and their
myrmidons who enrich themselves by provocative and
adventurist actions, can be interested in such a conflict.
Only the forces of imperialism, with Tel Aviv following in
the wake of their policy, can be interested in it.
252. In these circumstances the Arab countries, in defending their legitimate rights, are showing moderation in the
face of Israel’s latest threats. Whether the militarist and
extremist circles in Tel Aviv will risk overstepping the
danger line will depend largely on those who stand behind
Israel.
253. The Soviet Government is watching the development
of events in the Near East very closely. It basesitself on the
premise that the maintenance of peace and security in this
area, which is directly adjacent to the frontiers of the
Soviet Union, is in the vital interests of the peoples of the
U.S.S.R.

247. The Soviet Union has repeatedly drawn the attention
of the Government of Israel to the fact that the hazardous
policy which Israel has been pursuing for many years in
regard to its neighbours is fraught with dangers for which
the entire responsibility rests with Tel Aviv; and it would be
a fatal mistake if military extremist circles in Israel,
unrestrained by sober political considerations, were to gain
the upper hand in the present tense situation.

2.54, The Soviet Union believes that in the situation that
has now arisen the Security Council, which under the
United Nations Charter is the body primarily responsible
for the maintenance of international peace, should reso21

General’s appeal contained in his very important report
(S/7906/
which was submitted to us today. I have
particularly in mind paragraph 14.

lutely condemn the provocative acts and threats against the
Arab States.
255. At the Council’s 1342nd meeting our delegation
explained its attitude to the so-called initiative by Canada
and Denmark in the Security Council and gave its assessment of it, We took the view then, as we do now, that the
appeal by these two NATO countries to the Security
Council was part of a campaign which is being artificially
inflated by certain forces and whose real objectives have
nothing in common with genuine concern for peace and
security in the Near East.

!
.I
j

263. What is now surely most urgently needed is the
exercise of special restraint by all concerned to allow a
breathing spell in the search for a peaceful outcome to the
present crisis. The Secretary-General in his report has urged
that tension be allowed to subside “from its present
explosive level”, The Secretary-General has also outlined a
number of possible suggestions which might be followed up
by the Council, suggestions which might contribute to a
reduction of tension which both he and, I am certain, all
members of the Council warmly desire at this stage.

256. The present initiative of Canada and Denmark also
reflects, like a drop of water, the dissatisfaction of those
imperialist circles which until comparatively recently considered themselves masters in the Near East and used to
deploy their military forces there as they wished, but were
then asked-by sovereign States exercising their lawful
rights-to clear out of the area.

264, It is clear from the Secretary-General’s report that
the Council bears a very heavy responsibility and has a
number of complex issues to examine. In these circum
stances, it would appear that some interim action by the
Council, as suggested by several delegations today, is most
desirable as a prelude to more specific action by the United
Nations later, when consultations which the SecretaryGeneral no doubt will have-consultations among members
of the Council and among the parties directly involvedmight have arrived at a maximum amount of understanding
as to precisely what the next step should be. But I do hope
that an early agreement will be reached on the terms of an
appeal, as suggested by several delegations this afternoon.

257. Even in today’s speeches some Western delegates
have gone on shedding tears of inconsolable grief at the fact
that the military contingents of the NATO countries, for
whom the bell tolled long ago, have had to abandon their
cherished “strategic deployment” on foreign territories.
258, The Soviet delegation has not of course supported
and will not support any initiative Iike this by Canada and
Denmark.

265. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I wish
to make a few remarks in exercise of my right of reply to
the comments made by the Soviet representative, Mr.
Fedorenko. 1 am quite content to allow the members of the
Council to judge whose statement on the agenda items
displayed in tone and content the most impartiality-my
statement or Mr. Fedorenko’s. Indeed, the record will show
that I stated in the same terms our commitment to respect
the political independence and territorial integrity of all the
nations in the area, Arab and Israel alike, and our fervent
desire to have good relations with all States of the Near
East. I failed to notice any such even-handed references in
his remarks.

259. If the Western Powers, which have been expressing
their concern about the Near East so vociferously and with
such prolix eloquence in the Security Council, were really
interested in maintaining peace and security in this area,
then all they would have to do would be to call to order
their unruly accomplices in this dangerous aggravation of
the situation-namely,
the extremist militarist circles in Tel
Aviv whose policy is the cause of the constant aggravations
of the situation in the Near East.
260. In view of all this, the Soviet delegation is convinced
that if the Security Council is now to consider in all
seriousness the situation which is developing in the Near
East, the situation must be considered in connexion with
the well-founded complaint submitted to the Council by
the United Arab Republic.

266. Also it is rather interesting that in attempting to deal
with the agenda items I referred only once to the Soviet
Union, and then only in the context of a factual statement
that the Soviet Union had adhered to an international
convention on the freedom of the seas.

261. In the present case the Security Council has before it
a complaint indicating the real causes of tension in the Near
East; and the Soviet delegation, which firmly supports the
appeal by the United Arab Republic, considers that the
question submitted by the United Arab Republic for
consideration by the Security Council should be given
priority
and should be considered by the Security Council
without delay.

267. On the contrary, Mr. Fedorenko’s statement was
studded with perjorative statements about my country,
statements which I reject as being totally without foundation. That type of statement contributes nothing to the just
resolution of the grave problem before us. Conspicuous in
Mr. Fedorenko”s statement was the virtually total absence
of reference to the Secretary-General’s report, which
practically ‘every other member of the Council pointed to as
the best guide-line that we could use in determining where
we are to go from here. Mr. Fedorenko’s statement heats up
the situation rather than cools it off. It diverts OUI
attention from the problem at hand. It does not-and I say
this most regrettably-advance our search for a reasonable
peaceful and honourable settlement.

262. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): At this stage and at this
time of the evening, I would only say this: The statements
made by previous speakers have only served to underline
what you, Mr. President, and a number of members of the
Council have said about the need of the Council at the next
stage to take heed of and to reinforce the Secretary
22

i
1
i
1
1
’

i
i
)
1

274. The representative of the Soviet Union bases his
evidence on President Nasser’s fabrications. He prefers them
to the objective report of the Secretary-General. I wonder
whether this is the kind of impartiality which the representative of the Soviet Union recommends. Were he to apply
only a modest measure of impartiality to the affairs of the
Middle East, I am convinced that his country would make a
major contribution to the establishment of peaceful conditions in that tormented region.

268. It is also a strange phenomenon that the Soviet
representative in a speech of this character always injects a
totally irrelevant subject, In the introduction to his speech
he sought to bring Viet-Nam into this Council for discussion although it is not on the agenda of this meeting. It is
also a strange phenomenon that the Soviet Union objected
to Council consideration of Viet-Nam when that subject
was,included in the Council’s agenda at the request of the
United States. If the Soviet representative would agree not
only to talk but to vote on the Viet-Nam problem in this
Council and if he would withdraw his objection to the
Council’s consideration of the subject, I should be very glad
to accommodate him at any time.

275. The representative of the Soviet Union referred to
provocations by Israel. What are they-the mining of roads
in Israel, the blowing up of houses in peaceful villages, the
waylaying and assassination of farmers plowing their
fields? These are the provocations, these are the acts of
hostility to which the people of my country have been
subjected for many, many years. These acts were the
subject of the Secretary-General’s press statement of 11
May 1967 when he said:

269. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (trarzslated from Russian): We have tried to listen
attentively to the statement just made by the United States
representative. We have endeavoured to understand the
sense of this reply of his to the statement by the Soviet
representative, and there is only one conclusion that we can
draw both from what the United States representative said
in his earlier statement and from what he has said by way
of clarification. This conclusion is that it is perfectly clear
that the United States delegation is attempting to divert
attention from the main issue, from the crux of the
problem which has arisen in connexion with the dangerous
situation in the Near East, and is trying by every possible
means to switch attention from the aggressive and adventurist acts committed by Tel Aviv against its Arab neighbours and to lead the discussion into the realm of
quotations, references and other legal stratagems.

“I must say that, in the last few days, the El Fatah type
of incidents have increased, unfortunately. Those incidents have occurred in the vicinity of the Lebanese and
Syrian lines and are very deplorable, especially because,
by their nature, they seem to indicate that the individuals
who committed them have had more specialized training
than has usually been evidenced in El Fatah incidents in
the past. That type of activity is insidious, is contrary to
the letter and spirit of the Armistice Agreements and
menaces the peace of the area. All ,Governments concerned have an obligation under the General Armistice
Agreements, as well as under the Charter of the United
Nations and in the interest of peace, to take every
measure within their means to put an end to such
activities.”

270. But, as we said earlier, no amount of eloquence,
however casuistic it may be, can conceal the gravity of the
situation which is being created with the co-operation,
participation or inspiration of Washington. And, if the
United States representative could look in a mirror at the
monstrous war which the United States is waging on the
Asian continent far from its own frontiers, then-as the
saying goes-“don’t blame the mirror if you are to blame
yourself”.

276. The Secretary-General, in his most recent report of
26 May (S/7906] to the Security Council, again drew
attention to the dangerous effects of sabotage and terrorist
activities.
277. The representative of the Soviet Union referred to
statements made by Israel Government leaders. I know that
Mr. Fedorenko is a famous scholar in oriental literature. I
am not aware if his wide erudition also includes a
knowledge of Hebrew. It may be that his lack of knowledge
of our Hebrew language is the reason for his misreading of
statements made by Israel Government leaders. I will
submit to the scrutiny of the members of the Council only
one example.

271. I could, of course, use the original expression with
which the immortal genius of the fable-writer K@OV
enriched our literature long ago. But I think that, as the
situation is so clear, there is no need to resort to poetic
quotations, since I am sure that this is well known
to
everyone from their primary school lessons.
272. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Israel.

I now give the floor to the

278. Mr. Fedorenko referred to Foreign Minister Eban’s
statement which I have here. Mr, Eban said:

273. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): The representative of the
Soviet Union deemed it tit to repeat his unfounded charges
against my Government and country. He spoke of provocations, military concentrations and threatening statements
by Israel’s leaders, I have already drawn his attention at the
1342nd meeting of the Council on 24 May to the report of
the Secretary-General, which in clear and undeniable terms
refutes the allegation of Israel troop concentrations. The
representative of the Soviet Union has spoken of mobilization by Israel, but has carefully avoided mentioning the fact
that Israel took precautionary measures only after Egypt
advanced several divisions in Sinai and along the borders of
Israel.

“The Syrian Government could not be more mistaken if
it believes it has discovered a method of attacking Israel
with impunity. The real or fictitious sessions of the
Israel-Syrian Mixed Armistice Commission have not
created an open season for murderous attacks and
sabotage against Israel, The Government of Israel will
take and carry out whatever steps it deems necessary to
protect its territory and the lives of its citizens regardless
of the formal state of the Mixed Armistice Commission
meetings”.
23

1
,
I /

279. I believe that the representative of the Soviet Union
has access to the statements made by Arab leaders.
Therefore, I can confine myself to just one quotation from
an inexhaustible stream of such threatening statements I
shall read the recent statement made by the Syrian Defence
Minister, General Assad, on 20 May 1967. He said:
“The Syrian forces were prepared to initiate the
liberation and the blowing up of the aggressive Zionist
existence in ‘our’ Arab homeland. The Syrian Army,
which has been waiting for a long time, is unanimous in
its will to precipitate the battle. However, the Army has
been waiting for a signal from the political leadership.
The Minister of Defence, as a military man, is of the
opinion that the time is ripe for a liberation war, and that
it is necessary, at least, to undertake minimum measures
to ensure a punitive blow on Israel that will return to her
her wisdom and compel her to go on her knees humiliated
and defeated”.
280. The Syrian Minister boastfully admitted that Syrian
aircraft had encroached upon Israel territory tens of times
since 23 February 1967 for observation and other purposes.
The last time, on 14 May 1967, Syrian aircraft penetrated
Israel air space for tens of kilometres.
281. I could continue with these quotations, but the hour
is late and the members of the Council are fully aware of all
these statements. I thought that the time was ripe to refute
the unfounded allegations that have been repeated by the
representative of the Soviet Union.
282. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): My
colleague and friend Mr. Fedorenko said that the meaning
of our statement was not clear. I should like to clarify it for
him.
283. The United States is opposed to belligerent acts and
violence by anyone in the Middle East, no matter what
their political ideology or alignment may be. We respect
their right to their own political systems and to make their
own alignments. We stand ready to endorse the Secretary
General’s appeal to all the parties concerned to exercise
special restraint, to forgo belligerence and to avoid all other
actions which could increase tension, to allow the Council
to deal with the underlying causes of the present crisis and
to seek solutions.
284.

Can the Soviet Union say the same?

285. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Syria.

I now give the floor to the

286. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I had not intended to take the
floor today, In fact, I had prepared a statement which at
the time I prepared it I had thought sufficient. The
members of the Council will be able to judge this when
they hear my statement tomorrow.
287. However, in listening to the statements made, respectively, by the representative of the United Arab Republic,
Mr. El Kony, and the representative of Israel and in
comparing their tones, I was really flabbergasted, to say the
least. We all have heard the two statements and we can all
judge for ourselves the restraint, the rationalism and the

logic with which the representative of the United Arab
Republic argued his case. I think that any professor or
teacher studying the case we are discussing here would
regard the statement of the representative of the United
Arab Republic as representing one point of view and
arguing that point of view.

j
I
!

288. However, the Israel representative started with a !
freshman-like presentation, describing the masses in the i
streets of Cairo chanting “We want war”, and things of that i
sort. He then proceeded to use most insulting and arrogant
language, referring to President Nasser as a “dictator” and !
so on. All of us remember what he said.
I
1
289. I remember the appeal made during the first of these i,
series of meetings of the Council by the representative of Im
Ethiopia. that we should refrain from using acrimonious 1
language: I submit that the language used by the represent@
tive of Israel was not only acrimonious but also arrogant. 1
have tried to discover the rather strange reason for the
language and tone of the representative of Israel. I could
not find one, and suddenly I remembered what had
happened in the streets of New York yesterday. For there
was a great parade on Riverside Drive and Mr. Rafael, my ,
little neiahbour to my right, was on the stand reviewing the i
45,000 people-it was later said to be 100,000 and still later
to be 150,000 people-who passed before him chanting the
songs of Israel. There were also military formations in the
parade. Undoubtedly, all of this must have gone to his
head, especially when we take into consideration that
seventy lonely Arabs also tried to march on Riverside Drive.
But they were hit by tomatoes and eggs and humiliated. All
that must have gone to the head of Mr. Rafael, and he must
have felt himself to be, not a big dictator, but a little
dictator, Certainly he must have thought that he was a
Roman emperor as he sat in the Council today and dictated
the five points which are the basis of the conciliation that
he is asking for; he was dictating his terms. I submit that
Mr. Rafael does not represent a little State. He acts like one
of the three super-Powers-although even the represent@
tives of the super-Powers do not use language like his.
290. I said that I had not intended to take the floor today,
but Mr. Rafael referred time and again to the statements of
Syrian representatives. I have a whole file with me here
which contains the statements of Israel representatives, but
I shall save the time of the Council by quoting just a few of
them.
291. The Jerusalem Post published the following in ifs
issue of 12 May 1967, under the heading: “Eshkol warns;
April 7 action may have to be repeated”:
“In view of the fourteen incidents in the past month
alone we may have to adopt measures no less drastic than
those of April 7.”
First of all, the threat in that statement is quite clear.
Secondly, I ask members to observe the words “we may
have to adopt measures no less drastic than those of
April 7”. That certainly means that they adopted measures
on 7 April and that they have applied those measures. With
respect to exactly what happened on 7 April, that will h
one of the basic points with which I shall deal tomorrow.

292, I have before me a photostatic copy of an article
wltich appeared in The Jerusalem Post of 7 May 1967,
which refers to the situation on the Syrian border:

Haganah was founded in 1936, before any Arabs attacked
Israel. The Haganah and the Zionists decided that the Arabs
should be thrown out of Palestine. There is considerable
Proof to that effect, but I shall leave it for a later stage.
However, to show the roots of terrorism in which the very
existence of Israel was founded, I shall quote Security
Council resolution 57 (1948) of 18 September 1948 which
stated:

“Mr. Galili said . . . Israel [must] take forcible
measures in self-defence. He said Israel must live its life
without excessive sensitivity to censure by Powers which
do not understand the conditions of our existence.”
293. The quotation to which the representative of the
Soviet Union referred has appeared in the 17 April 1967
issue of U.S. News h World Report; it reads as follows:

‘The Security Council,

“Answer: Surely, we expect such help-but we would
rely primarily on our own Army. I wouldn’t want
American mothers crying about the blood of their sons
being shed here. But I would surely expect such help,
especially if I take into consideration all the solemn
promises that have been made to Israel.

“Deeply shocked by the tragic death of the United
Nations Mediator in Palestine, Count Folke Bemadotte,
as the result of a cowardly act which appears to have been
committed by a criminal group of terrorists in Jerusalem
while the United Nations representative was fulfilling his
peace-seekingmission in the Holy Land,
“‘Resolves:

“We get these promises when we ask the United States
for arms and are told: ‘Don’t spend your money. We are
here. The Sixtl~ Fleet is here’.”

“1. To request the Secretary-General to keep the flag
of the United Nations at half-mast for a period of three
days;

294. I shall save the time of the members of the Council
by merely quoting the report of the Secretary-General,
~hiclz
reads as follows:

“2. To authorize the Secretary-General to meet from
the Working Capital Fund all expenses connected with
the death and burial of the United Nations Mediator.”

“Intemperate
and bellicose utterances, by other officials and non-officials, eagerly reported by the Press and
radio, are unfortunately more or less routine on both
sides of the lines in the Near East.“-and mark this-“In
recent weeks, however, reports emanating from Israel
have attributed to some high officials in that State
statements so threatening as to be particularly inflammatory
in the sense that they could only heighten
emotions
and thereby increase tensions.” /S/7896,

297. One month later, no answer was received from the
Government of Israel, and on 19 October 1948 the Security
Council adopted resolution 59 (1948) which stated, among
other things:

pura. 8. /

“1. Notes with concern that the Provisional Government of Israel has to date submitted no report to the
Security Council or to the Acting Mediator regarding the
progress of the investigation into the assassinations;

The Security Council,
“.. .

295.
An article which appeared in The New York Times of
13 May 1967 began in the following manner:

“2. Requests that Government to submit to the Security Council at an early date an account of the progress
made in the investigation and to indicate therein the
measures taken with regard to negligence on the part of
officials or other factors affecting the crime;

“Tel Aviv, May 12-Some Israel leaders have decided
that the use of force against Syria may be the only way to
curtail increasing terrorism.
“Any such Israel reaction to continued infiltration
probably would be of considerable strength but of short
duration and limited in area.”
Even a description of the military operation has been given
by the military leaders. In that particular week there was
some sort of neurosis that swept over Israel and Israel
leaders, including Abba Eban, Prime Minister Eshkol, Mrs.
Golda Meir, and Mr. Galili, the Chief of Staff, who were
going from one city to another clamouring for war against
Syria. Surely the Secretary-General’s statement which I
read out here about the inflammatory statements from
Israel is not unfounded and is worthy of our praise.
296.
One thing that really puzzles me a great deal are
statements
by representatives of Israel about the rule of
law, when the very existence of Israel-I repeat, its very
existence-was
founded on terrorism and gangsterism. The

“3. Reminds the Governments and authorities concerned that all the obligations and responsibiIities of the
parties set forth in its resolutions 54 (1948) of 15 July
and 56 (1948) of 19 August 1948 are to be discharged
filly and in good faith.”
298. Not long ago a letter wasaddressedby the SecretaryGeneral to the representative of Jordan regarding the death
in 1958 of a Colonel in the Mixed Armistice Commission,
Colonel Flint of Canada. In his letter to the Foreign
mister of Jordan the Secretary-General quotes a Security
Council resolution on that subject, and also the General
Armistice Agreement between Israel and Jordan.
299. I should like to suggestthat now, after twenty years,
the Security Council ought to hear from the representative

25

Of Israel about
the results of its ‘investigations concerning
the assassination
of Count Folke Bemadotte by terrorists.
To the best of my knowledge, one of them has become a
*elnber
of the Israel Parliament.
300. 1 shall refrain from further comment at this time, and
1 sllould like to reserve my right to intervene again at a later
stage.
301. Mr. FEDORENKO
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tran&ted
from Russian): We were not in the least
intending
to go on commenting on the statements made by
representatives
at this table. If we have taken the floor
a&in, it is only to show that we listen closely to what is
said here and we hope that our colleagues are listening with
the Same attention
to what we say here.
302. In this connedon, I have the impression that the
United
States
representative did not listen attentively
enough to our statement which set forth with the utmost
clarity
the position of the Soviet Union on the question
under consideration.
If he had done so, he could hardly
have asked questions such as those he has just put to us.
But since he has asked these questions, we will state our
views again.
303.
The positions of the Soviet Union and of the United
States of America on the question under consideration are
different.
T&y
are different in principle.

speaks for itself. Why, then, should anyone resort to a i
purely arbitrary interpretation which, ultimately, will only ’
play into the hands of those who are continuing their
aggressive actions? Instead of condemning and calling to
order the dangerous trends and dangerous policy pursued
by Tel Aviv, they exchange courtesies and expressions of (t
solidarity on the issue.
306. With regard to the comments made by the represeti
tative of Israel, my task has been greatly simplified by tile
able statement made by the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic, who has clarified a number of points raised
by the representative of Israel. There is scarcely any needto
repeat such elementary matters, including one point which
was purely a question of language.
307. As we pointed out in our statement-and I wasglad
to note the Syrian representative’s correct clarification of
this point-our
information came from a very specific
source. We quoted from the United States publication Ir.S.I
News h World Report. If our colleague from Israel hasany/
complaints regarding the wording, he should address them
to the publication U.S. News & World Report which, we
believe, obtains its information direct from first-hand I
sources, either from Hebrew-and they must have expertsin
this-or from oral statements made by the official represebI
tatives of Tel Aviv who, as everyone knows, speak’
American very well.
308. In conclusion, I would like to say once again that ae
fully confirm the statement which we made today in Le
Security Council.

3 04. The Soviet Union has stated that, moved by a feeling
of high responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and
security in tile Near East, it condemns the aggressive policy
pursued by Tel Aviv in regard to its Arab neighbours, while
the United
States-as we heard once again in the statement
made today by the United States representative-sees things
differently.
It does not join with us in condemning the
source and cause of the aggression. This is what separates
us, It would seem that this was clear even without further
clarifications.

309. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel ha!
agreed, in view of the lateness of the hour, to defer thr
exercise of his right of reply until the next meeting of thz
Council.

305.
As far as the Secretary-General’s report is concerned,
&is has been submitted to the Security Council and it

The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m.

310. I believe it is the consensus of the Council that 1~
should meet again tomorrow afternoon at three o’clock0

>
Lltho

in

U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

1.50

(or equivalent

in other

currencies)

06041-December

1970-1,1
