A /71/PV.63

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

63rd plenary meeting

Thursday, 15 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The President: Members will recall that, in
accordance with sub-paragraphs (a) to (e) of paragraph
4 of resolution 60/180, of 20 December 2005, the
Organizational Committee shall comprise the
following: seven members of the Security Council,
including five permanent members; seven members of
the Economic and Social Council, elected from regional
groups; five top providers of assessed contributions
to the United Nations budgets and of voluntary
contributions to United Nations funds, programmes
and agencies, including a standing peacebuilding fund;
five top providers of military personnel and civilian
police to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee.
Members will also recall that at the 81st plenary
meeting of its sixty-ninth session, the Assembly elected
Colombia, Egypt, Kenya, Malaysia and Morocco as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term of
office, beginning on 1 January 2015, and that at the 80th
plenary meeting of its seventieth session, the Assembly
elected El Salvador and Montenegro as members of

the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2016.
By a letter addressed to the President of the
General Assembly dated 28 November 2016 (A/71/664),
I was informed by the facilitator of the Group of the
leading financial contributors that, as decided by the
financial contributors, Brazil, Canada, Germany, Japan
and Norway will serve a full two-year term from 2017
to 2018.
Also, by a letter addressed to the President of the
General Assembly dated 8 November 2016 (A/71/610), I
was informed by the facilitator of the troop-contributing
countries of their decision that Bangladesh, Ethiopia,
India, Pakistan and Rwanda will serve from the troopcontributing-countries category of membership for a
term of office beginning on 1 January 2017 and ending
on 31 December 2018.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly
to take note of documents A/71/664 and A/71/610?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly will
now proceed to the election of five members of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission. By its resolution 60/261, of 8 May
2006, the Assembly decided that the members of the
Organizational Committee shall serve for renewable
terms of two years, as applicable. Accordingly,
Colombia, Egypt, Kenya, Malaysia and Morocco are
eligible for immediate re-election.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-44149 (E)

*1644149*

A/71/PV.63

Regarding candidatures for the five seats, I should
like to inform members that for the African States, the
Group has endorsed Egypt and Kenya; for the AsiaPacific States, the Group has endorsed Indonesia; and
for the Latin American and Caribbean States, the Group
has endorsed Colombia and Mexico.
Members will recall that by its resolution 60/261,
the General Assembly decided that the rules of
procedure and established practice of the Assembly for
the election of members of its subsidiary bodies shall
apply to its election of members of the Committee.
For this election, rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable.
Accordingly, the election shall be held by secret ballot
and there shall be no nominations.
However, I should also like to recall paragraph 16
of decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to or is less
than the number of seats to be filled should become
standard, unless a delegation specifically requests a
vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to the election on
that basis?
It was so decided.
The President: Since the number of candidates
endorsed by the Group of African States, the Group of
Asia-Pacific States and the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States is equal to the number of seats
to be filled, may I take it that the General Assembly
decides to elect Colombia, Egypt, Kenya, Indonesia and
Mexico as members of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission for a two-year term
of office, beginning on 1 January 2017?
It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate Colombia, Egypt,
Kenya, Indonesia and Mexico on their election as
members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
2/26

15/12/2016

Agenda item 14
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/407)
The President: I shall now make a brief statement.
Renowned poet Maya Angelou once said: “Hate — it
has caused a lot of problems in this world, but it has
not solved one yet.” It is a simple observation that goes
to the heart of one of the most fundamental challenges
the international community must address to build a
culture of peace across our world. Racism, xenophobia,
intolerance and other manifestations of hate drive
many of today’s conflicts, motivate violent extremism
and inspire acts of terrorism. Hate often lies behind
the persecution and targeting of ethnic and religious
minorities, migrants, refugees and other vulnerable and
marginalized people. And far too often, hate is used as
a tool by leaders seeking, for their own gains, to exploit
the insecurity of people, the disunity of societies and
the injustices of our world.
The scale of human suffering taking place around
our world, the need to break the cycles of conflict,
violence and disunity, and the call for us all to build
sustainable peace, could not be clearer. Fostering a
culture of peace requires dedicated attention to the
promotion of intercultural understanding and the
strengthening of interreligious dialogue. It must inspire
people’s hope for the future and motivate them to unite
for peace.
In that regard, I wish to commend the work
that is being undertaken by United Nations
agencies — including UNESCO and the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations — to promote non-violence
and mutual understanding. Their practical and
innovative initiatives to promote peace education, raise
awareness of cultural pluralism and support peace and
reconciliation processes, are invaluable. Such targeted
projects can have profound ramifications in helping to
rebuild fragmented societies and should be scaled up
and supported.
Building long-term, sustainable peace requires
comprehensive approaches that bring together peace
and security, human rights and sustainable development
efforts. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
is a fundamental tool in this regard. The Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) are premised on the
fundamental recognition of the importance of peace as
an outcome in itself — through SDG 16 — as well as a
16-44149

15/12/2016

cross-cutting priority necessary for the achievement of
all 17 SDGs.
The need to take a comprehensive approach to
building peace was also recognized in the sustaining
peace resolutions adopted earlier this year (resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016)).
I am committed to deepening understanding at the
United Nations, and among other relevant global
stakeholders, of the importance of sustainable peace
and the mutually reinforcing interlinkages between
implementing the 2030 Agenda and sustaining peace.
To this end, I will be convening a high-level informal
dialogue on 24 January 2017, here at the United Nations,
on the subject of “Building Sustainable Peace for All:
Synergies between the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Sustaining Peace”. I encourage
everyone to attend.
I would now like to briefly address the issue of
global health and foreign policy. The recent global
breakouts of Ebola and the Zika virus demonstrated
all too clearly how quickly global health crises can
cross national borders, divert limited heath resources
and wreak devastation on families, communities
and entire regions. The impact of global pandemics
stretches far beyond the health sector. They undermine
socioeconomic development, weaken social cohesion
and can ultimately threaten national and regional
security. The World Bank has estimated the annual
global cost of moderately severe to severe pandemics to
be around $570 billion, or 0.7 per cent of global gross
domestic product.
Addressing global health is therefore not only a
goal in itself of the 2030 Agenda. SDG 3 is a crosscutting precondition for achieving the rest of the SDGs,
including building peaceful and inclusive societies. In
our efforts to address global health crises, a number
of key steps must be pursued. First of all, we need to
accelerate our progress in fighting malaria, HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, hepatitis, Ebola and other communicable
and non-communicable diseases, including by
giving dedicated attention to addressing growing
antimicrobial resistance.
Secondly, our responses to global health crises
need to include specific mechanisms to ensure that
the particular needs of women and girls, children, the
elderly, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable
groups, are not overlooked.

A/71/PV.63

Thirdly, as agreed earlier this year at the highlevel meetings on HIV and AIDS and on antimicrobial
resistance, we need to better coordinate international
action, sustain political will and ensure more predictable
financing to improve global capacities to deal with
health crises. Well-functioning and resilient national
health systems that have the service delivery, finance,
human resources, infrastructure and informationand supply-management systems to respond to the
health needs of local and national populations are
naturally essential. So, too, is achieving our ultimate
aim of universal health coverage, in line with the 2030
Sustainable Development Agenda.
In conclusion, I want to recognize the efforts of the
Global Health and Foreign Policy group for bringing
concerted attention to global health issues, including
through draft resolution A/71/L.41, on global health
and foreign policy, which is to be adopted today. Given
the extent to which global health emergencies can arise
without notice, threaten our communities, undermine
our development and even destroy our futures, it is selfevident that we must do all we can to safeguard our
societies from their impact.
Mr. Ismail (Brunei Darussalam): At the outset, I
would like to extend our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims of the recent horrific attacks in
Turkey and Egypt. By promoting a culture of peace, it
is our hope that the hatred that fuels such violent acts
can be diminished and eliminated.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the 10 States members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand,
Viet Nam and my own country, Brunei Darussalam.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
annual report on the work of the Organization in the
area of promoting a culture of peace (A/71/407), which
provides a comprehensive and detailed overview of its
activities, achievements and challenges across a wide
range of common interests and concerns to all.
With its rich heritage and culture, Southeast Asia
is home to a diverse range of people who are wellknown for their friendliness and peace-loving nature.
The culture of peace has been instilled in us since
the founding of ASEAN in 1967. Paragraph 2 of the
Bangkok Declaration states that, among the aims and
objectives of the formation of ASEAN is the promotion

16-441493/26

A/71/PV.63

of regional peace and stability through abiding respect
for justice and the rule of law in the relationship among
countries of the region and adherence to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
The notion of promoting peace and stability
is further enshrined in the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia, which has greatly
contributed to this endeavour over the past 40 years.
We continue to be encouraged that, in addition to the
35 countries that have acceded to the Treaty, there is
growing interest from others, which reflects their
commitment to the purposes and principles contained
in the Treaty, strengthening cooperation with ASEAN
and contributing to peace and security in the region.
The adoption of the Joint Statement of the
Foreign Ministers of ASEAN Member States on the
Maintenance of Peace, Security, and Stability in the
Region at the 49th ASEAN Foreign Ministers Meeting
held in Laos earlier this year reiterates ASEAN’s
shared commitment to continue upholding the United
Nations Charter, the ASEAN Charter and the Treaty
of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, including
the purposes and principles contained in the declaration
on the Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality and the
Declaration of the East Asia Summit on the Principles
for Mutually Beneficial Relations, which serve as
the basic norms governing friendly relations and
cooperation among States.
As we work together towards realizing the ASEAN
Community Vision 2025, the Association reaffirms
its shared commitment to maintaining and promoting
peace, security and stability in the region and to the
peaceful resolution of disputes without resorting
to the threat or use of force, in accordance with the
universally recognized principles of international law.
In this regard, ASEAN will continue to play a central
role in developing a rules-based regional architecture
and reaffirms the important values of moderation,
tolerance, non-violence and mutual understanding as
well as respect for diversity and inclusiveness. In so
doing, we have embarked on a holistic approach towards
our region’s community-building where we take into
account global goals, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, in our efforts to build an
inclusive, people-centred ASEAN community.
Integral to that approach is the need to inculcate
the values of peace and understanding in our children
from a young age. That is why we have put in place
4/26

15/12/2016

the ASEAN Youth Volunteer Programme, which
provides a dedicated youth-volunteerism platform that
will facilitate multidisciplinary, knowledge-driven and
post-disaster recovery-projects across the region. The
programme aims to promote the values of equality and
mutual respect and strengthen mutual understanding
through dialogue and interaction among our young
people. It represents a facet of ASEAN’s determination
to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance.
Today, we are facing divisive borderless threats
that are clearly defined not by development status
but by harmful extremist ideologies that have led to
some major challenges to our security and capacity
to prosper. ASEAN strongly condemns all acts of
terror. Such attacks in our region and around the
world not only serve as a grim reminder of our need
to be vigilant in the fight against such threats, but
also underline the importance of cultivating a culture
of peace and tolerance and embracing mutual respect
and understanding. We believe that peace among
peoples and nations cannot be attained by individual
efforts alone. ASEAN therefore engages in continuous
dialogue with its external partners through the
ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ASEAN Regional
Forum Meeting on Confidence-building Measures
and Preventive Diplomacy and through numerous
activities related to non-traditional security, defence,
humanitarian assistance and disaster management.
ASEAN commends the role of the United Nations
in promoting the culture of peace through dialogue
and negotiations, in enhancing tolerance, trust and
mutual understanding, and in addressing all forms of
political religious disputes and radicalism, including
violent extremism. We therefore would like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation for the valuable
work of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
and UNESCO.
It is imperative to have a culture of peace if we
are to achieve the global agenda goals and develop
our priority areas. We will continue to explore
complementarities between the ASEAN Community
Vision 2025 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, as development is very much dependent
on peace prevailing.
Mrs. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Peace is not only the goal to be achieved but
the ultimate objective to safeguard. Peace is achievable
16-44149

15/12/2016

only if it is a product of a set of values, approaches,
traditions, behaviours and lifestyles of a culture of
peace. The purpose of the United Nations — to save
current and future generations from the scourge of war
and to assert the respect for the dignity and value of a
human being — calls for a culture of peace.
There can be no peace without the full respect
for the sovereignty of States. There can be no peace
without the respect for the self-determination of peoples
and the territorial integrity of States. Complying with
international law is a fundamental prerequisite for
achieving a culture of peace.
How can we speak of a culture of peace when
the very existence of nuclear weapons poses a grave
threat not only to international peace and security but
also to the survival of humankind on the planet? Cuba
notes with concern that the deep divide that separates
human society into rich and poor people and the
ever-increasing disparity between the developed and
developing worlds seriously threaten global prosperity,
peace, security and stability. We are convinced that to
safeguard and promote peace, State policies must focus
on the elimination of the threat of war, particularly
nuclear war; the commitment not to use or threaten to
use force in international relations; and the peaceful
settlement of international disputes, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
report (A/71/407) and, in this regard, would note that
his initiative on the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism fits within the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review. This initiative
contributes to the Review process but must not replace
the Strategy. It is clear that any decision on such a crucial
issue can be reached only through the consensus of the
States Members of the United Nations. In the creation
and promotion of a culture of peace, we must denounce
all terrorist actions, methods and practices, including
State-sponsored terrorism, and we must take concrete
steps to combat that scourge.
Despite the sustained international clamour to
achieve and strengthen a culture of peace, phenomena
such as intolerance and ethnic, religious or racial
discrimination persist. Furthermore, unilateral coercive
actions, the threat and use of force, the promotion
of hidden agendas of regime change in developing
countries, the development of new, more sophisticated
weapons, the persistence of large nuclear arsenals,

A/71/PV.63

and the violation of the principles of international
law by some States, also thwart the real possibility of
promoting a culture of peace.
Putting an end to the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba would be a unified step
forward towards peace and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. Manipulation and double standards in areas
such as human rights, with the purpose of singling out
developing countries and discrediting their legitimate
Governments, does not contribute to the ideal of
peace, nor does colonialism and the infringement upon
people’s right to self-determination and independence.
Cuba believes that education is the way to contribute
to promoting a culture of peace, by integrating
the study of diverse cultures and civilizations into
our curricula — including languages, history and
sociopolitical philosophy — and by sharing that
knowledge and information. At the same time, we
underscore the role of the media in disseminating
human values and the need to contribute to the mutual
respect of civilizations through ethical conduct.
Mr. El Haycen (Mauritania), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Finally, we reaffirm the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States’ Declaration of Latin
America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace, calling
for the full application of the Declaration and the Plan
of Action for a culture of peace, and we reiterate that
peace is a fundamental prerequisite for the promotion
and safeguarding of all rights for all people.
Ms. Taranatham (Thailand): The Kingdom of
Thailand aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the Permanent Representative of Brunei Darussalam on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on this important subject (A/71/407).
Thailand is taking the floor today because we
believe that sustained focus and effort are needed
for a culture of peace to prevail and be manifest in
everything we do and allow to happen. Peace depends
on how we — the people — perceive the world and on
what we want to make of the world. We therefore have
the shared responsibility of promoting and sustaining
peace, so that it becomes a culture and way of life
without which we cannot live.

16-441495/26

A/71/PV.63

This year, Thailand has again co-sponsored all draft
resolutions under agenda item 14, namely, “Follow-up to
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace” (A/71/L.47) and “Promotion of interreligious
and intercultural dialogue, understanding and
cooperation for peace” (A/71/L.43) because we believe
in sustained efforts aimed at effectively implementing
the objectives set forth in these draft resolutions.
Let me also share Thailand’s perspective on this
issue. First of all, we believe it is our shared duty to
promote constructive dialogue and interactions between
different cultures and religions because learning
about different beliefs and values can help reduce our
ignorance, build common ground and prevent mistrust
and misunderstanding, which are often the cause of
intolerance, conflict and violence. Dialogue may not
bring instant results, but we need to constantly create
opportunities for dialogue for peace to prevail.
Thailand is proud to have hosted the International
Symposium on Interfaith Dialogue and Peaceful
Coexistence in Multicultural Societies, in collaboration
with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation Research
Centre for Islamic History, Art and Culture, earlier this
year, as a contribution to promoting more open dialogue
among peoples of different faiths.
Secondly, we believe that education can cultivate
and strengthen the culture of peace and that children
and youth should be given the opportunity to develop
their understanding of different cultures and religions
as early as possible and to appreciate diversity in
the societies where they live and beyond. In the
case of Thailand, we are focusing on the immediate
ASEAN region, with the aim of nurturing an ASEAN
community that respects and embraces the diversity of
cultures, religions and languages. Based on our belief,
Thailand has supported curricula and activities in
schools and universities that emphasize multicultural
understanding, especially within ASEAN, and the
concept of community-building.
Thirdly, we recognize the exceptionally powerful
role of the media in creating and maintaining a culture
of peace. Our perceptions and understanding are
almost always a product of what we read, hear and see.
We therefore must ensure that the media responsibly
disseminates information that is conducive to peace and
mutual understanding, counters hatred and prejudices
and promotes mutual respect and tolerance among
peoples of different backgrounds and identities.
6/26

15/12/2016

In conclusion, Thailand would like to reiterate its
commitment and continuous support for the promotion
of a culture of peace. Maintaining a harmonious society
and promoting the peaceful settlement of conflicts has
always been part of our values and our national policy.
We are proud to have played a role in building bridges
among different religions, beliefs and cultures and wish
to reaffirm our commitment to continuing that effort
as well as our readiness to work with the international
community towards this shared aspiration.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the topic (A/71/407) and also to
express our appreciation for the efforts of Pakistan, the
Philippines and Bangladesh as the main sponsors of
draft resolutions A/71/L.47 and A/71/L.43, under the
agenda item before us today.
As the quest for international peace and security
forms the foundation of the United Nations, today’s
agenda item, “Culture of peace”, is at the heart of the
work of the Organization. At this juncture, a culture of
peace is secondary to no other issue in terms of most
urgency and relevance.
Just as peace is precious, it is also fragile.
A broad range of threats, including occupation,
aggression, terrorism, violent extremism, xenophobia,
Islamophobia, intolerance, injustice, political rivalry,
weapons of mass destruction — in particular nuclear
weapons — poverty, inequality, underdevelopment or
absence of development, water and resource crises and
climate change can pose grave threats to peace — each
in different ways and at different levels. What is
happening today in many parts of the world, from the
occupied Palestinian territory, Yemen, Syria, Iraq,
Libya and beyond, all reflects our failure to bring about
a more peaceful world. At the same time, at the core of
the culture of peace is hope for the common future of
humankind and not giving up on our efforts in favour
of solidarity. What the world needs at this time is a
renewed commitment to peace by everyone.
The human tragedies of the past century have
taught us many lessons on the importance of diversity,
tolerance, human rights and fundamental freedoms,
moderation, dialogue among cultures and coexistence.
We need to move forward instead of backwards on
these core values.
The recent setbacks imposed on us by such
violent extremists as Da’esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and
16-44149

15/12/2016

other terrorist groups in our region, clearly show that,
however brutal and ruthless the forces of terrorism and
violent extremism are, they have no hope of succeeding
against the determination of nations. However, peace
means more than the absence of war; indeed, for a
culture of peace to flourish, we need to address the
culture that spreads hatred and intolerance. Genuine
peace can be fostered only by planting the seeds of
wisdom, compassion, dialogue and respect for one
another in the minds of all individuals.
Those who root their identity or power in
confrontation, rejection and excommunication are
inherently antagonistic to tolerance and peace. The
whole world knows that an absurd mentality is nurturing
the dark forces of terrorism. However, while resolute
action against this cult of hatred is long overdue, what
has prevented such action is the short-sighted political
gains and vested interests of a few. To envision peace, it
is imperative to abandon the mentality of intervention,
world domination and cultural and military hegemony.
If we want genuine peace once and for all, the centres of
power should acknowledge that there can be no possible
military solution to the world’s complicated problems.
War and conflict have always imposed themselves
in societies. However, the cost of war today has taken
it away as an option. It is therefore imperative to make
long-lasting peace a reality. To that end, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, as the main proponent of a world
against violence and extremism, once again invites
all peace-loving nations to join forces for the cause
of peace.
Ms. Al-Temimi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to pay tribute to the efforts in
preparing the rich and comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General (A/71/407) presented under this
agenda item. There is no doubt that the consecration
of peace in societies and among peoples cannot be
achieved without a favourable environment and the
proper conditions. The role of the United Nations and
its Member States in to create an environment that
secures the unalienable rights of people and achieves
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), as set
forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
There can be no sustainable development without peace
and no peace without sustainable development.
I would like to focus on the central role played by the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in enhancing
the culture of peace and dialogue among civilizations,

A/71/PV.63

and affirm the importance of the continued support of
Member States for the activities of the Alliance, which
directly contribute to the promotion of a culture of
peace, as indicated in the report before us. I would also
like to affirm that Qatar was among the first States to
support the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations,
and continues to provide all forms of support to
the Alliance.
The adoption of the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals and of the concept of promoting and enhancing
a culture of peace is an important step on the way to
achieving peace and justice for all nations. We in Qatar
attach great importance to that objective, which we
have long sought to achieve. Believing as it does in
the value of promoting societies that enjoy peace and
justice, Qatar has focused on the participation of all
citizens, especially young people, who are responsible
for securing a future of prosperity and peace. At the
same time, Qatar works with a group of States within
the Alliance to support Member States in their efforts
to achieve Goal 16 by reporting the achievements
and challenges faced by the State, with a view to
encouraging them to continue their successes and in
order to render counsel and guidance to them.
Like the United Nations, the State of Qatar also
focuses on conflict prevention and mediation through
the adoption of policies aimed at preventing armed
conflict and resolving conflicts peacefully. At the
request of the parties concerned and on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations, Qatar has participated
in mediation efforts grounded in the principle of
dialogue as a key approach to resolving their conflict.
That approach has yielded satisfactory results that have
been welcomed by the international community in the
context of international efforts to combat the terrorism
and violent extremism that are threatening global peace
and security. Qatar has adopted a cooperative approach
to addressing the root causes of violent extremism
through capacity-building that empowers communities,
provides employment opportunities, enhances the
economy, and encourages dialogue, tolerance and the
renunciation of sectarian or racial discrimination.
In view of the grave effects of violent extremism
on the minds of young people and children, Qatar, in
cooperation with the President of the General Assembly
at its seventieth session, has initiated a substantive
high-level debate on the protection of children and
youth affected by violent extremism. On that occasion,
the State of Qatar announced its support for a joint

16-441497/26

A/71/PV.63

project with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, with the aim of empowering young people
in the Arab region and protecting them from terrorism.
Qatar attaches great importance to education as one
of the most effective ways to foster peace for posterity.
It has launched numerous educational initiatives
nationally, regionally and internationally — especially
in regions plagued by conflicts and wars, such as the
most recent effort to train and educate Syrian refugees,
as well as the World Innovation Summit for Education
initiative. Those initiatives are all in the context of
Qatar’s commitment to achieving the Qatar National
Vision 2030, which aspires to enhance cultural exchange
among nations, support dialogue among civilizations
and promote coexistence among States.
In addition to achieving international peace and
security, the State has harnessed its resources to
establish national institutions to propagate a culture
of peace, promote acceptance of the other and combat
terrorism and extremist violence, including the Doha
International Center for Interfaith Dialogue to build
bridges of cooperation and understanding, and the
establishment of the Islamic Hamad Bin Khalifa
Civilisation Center in Copenhagen with the aim of
supporting international efforts to promote peaceful
coexistence among States.
Finally, I would like to affirm that Qatar is
commited to efforts to promote dialogue among
cultures and regions and a culture of peace in order to
secure a better future for posterity, in our society and
all over the world.
Ms. AlGharabally (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my thanks, on behalf
of my country, to the Secretary-General and his team for
today’s introduction of the report under consideration
(A/71/407), which provides a broad overview of the
activities carried out by the main United Nations
agencies working for a culture of lasting peace, dialogue
and cooperation between religions and cultures.
We also welcome UNESCO’s work to strengthen
a culture of peace that promotes tolerance, facilitated
by resolution 53/243, entitled “Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”, the
condemnation of violence and the International
Decade for the Rapprochement of Cultures 2013-2022.
We also note resolutions 70/19 and 70/20, which are
inextricably linked to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Those resolutions call on all communities
8/26

15/12/2016

to favour peace and justice, in line with Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals. Similarly, we express
our thanks to the Member States that have submitted
draft resolutions to enforce the principle of a culture
of peace.
We live in a world where the culture of peace is
threatened by conflicts and disputes not only among
nations and communities, but also among individuals.
There is increasingly appalling sectarian and religious
extremism, violence and tension, and even intellectual
conflicts. Indeed, we reject the opinions of others and
we exclude them. We do not live in harmony with them.
We must therefore try to understand the reasons behind
intolerance and the rejection of others and their views,
and the reasons why we resort to violence to express
our opinions. We must also work together at the local,
regional and international levels to turn the hatred and
violence into a culture of dialogue and coexistence.
The world faces other threats: extremism and
terrorism. No State or community is safe from those
scourges, which pose a significant threat to the
culture of peace and dialogue. That is why we must
promote peace, tolerance, dialogue, understanding and
collaboration among religions and cultures.
The Charter of the United Nations reads “We, the
peoples”, that is to say, we the different peoples who
come from different environments, with cultures,
civilizations and beliefs that are also unique. We all live
in one world and together make up a global civilization
of humankind. Thus, the State of Kuwait attaches great
importance to the question of strengthening peace,
especially today, as extremism and terrorism are on the
rise, striking many countries and spreading chaos and
fear in our societies. For example, in June 2015, we had a
terrorist attack in my country that killed 27 people. The
objective was to sow discord, but we worked together
with all members of the community and we have stood
firm in the face of criminal attacks. This despicable
act does not terrorize us, but instead unites us to fight
together against terrorism and extremism.
The State of Kuwait promotes tolerance and
coexistence, consistent with the values and principles
of its Constitution, which set forth the rights and
obligations of all citizens without discrimation of
any type — social, linguistic or religious. Kuwait’s
Constitution also establishes that justice and liberty
are the pillars of the community. Thus, the Government
of Kuwait decided to create a high level committee to
16-44149

15/12/2016

work on behalf of the community to combat extremism
and radicalism. All of those efforts aim to promote the
principle of national unity for the different factions.
Peace is a culture that we have seen in our
community and society even before the existence of our
modern State. We live in harmony with other cultures
and religions, and our history provides many examples
of rapprochement and openness. We have incorporated
those values into a Constitution that guarantees the
freedom of opinion, expression and religion. In terms
of geography, Kuwait may be a small State, but we have
citizens from different cultures and religions who live
in security and stability, on the basis of mutual respect.
In conclusion, we affirm that the culture of peace
depends on our efforts to strengthen and enforce
principles such as respect for human rights, the freedom
of opinion, equality and the fight against poverty and
unemployment. The people must also work towards
those objectives. For example, people who do not have
the right to a decent life will never live in a culture
of peace and non-violence. We therefore call for those
rights to be respected so that we can work together for
a world of tolerance and friendship for all.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Before delivering my national
statement, I wish to associate myself with the statement
delivered today by the Permanent Representative
of Brunei Darussalam on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on a culture
of peace.
I take good note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/71/407), which highlights global activities
that promote a culture of peace. My delegation
supports the idea that we should do more to prevent
and mediate global crises rather than merely focus on
conflict management.
It is important for the global community to
embrace Sustainable Development Goal 16, which
aims to promote peaceful and inclusive societies, while
supporting effective Government institutions based on
the rule of law. Promoting the participation of young
men and women in international governance structures
will help to grow more representative and inclusive
societies. In the same vein, enhancing the participation
of developing countries in global governance
institutions will aid in the attainment of the universally
accepted culture of peace.

A/71/PV.63

Young people are the hope for a better world;
they are the future of progress and our civilization’s
development. In that light, we can safeguard young
people’s future while promoting a global culture of
peace only through adequate social, political and
economic conditions worldwide. As such, it is important
to note that no sustainable socioeconomic development
can be successfully attained without first securing a
safe and prosperous future for young people. This year,
my Government has focused increasingly on young
people as a driving force for maintaining our country’s
culture of peace. Thanks to Government policies, more
and more young leaders hold high positions in both the
executive and legislative branches of Cambodia.
It is unfortunate that today, armed conflicts
continue to rage and claim the lives of both combatants
and civilians, including children, in some parts of the
world. Violent extremism, which continues to pose a
threat to peace and security, has dimmed our hope.
It is my view that some conflicts have resulted from
people being left out, marginalized, excluded and
malnourished. Hence, those people can easily fall into
the trap of violent extremist groups, organized crime
and terrorism. Those factors can stall development.
My delegation is deeply concerned by the intensity
and spread of terrorist attacks, as well as the unabated
recruitment of terrorist fighters. In promoting a culture
of peace, the global community needs to work closely
together to stop the spread of terrorism and counteract
the violent narratives and distorted ideologies of terrorist
organizations. In that context, counter-terrorism must
take a comprehensive approach. In line with Security
Council resolution 2178 (2014), the global community
must focus on combating radicalization and terrorist
recruitment by countering terrorist propaganda, and
stopping terrorists’ exploitation of social, Internet
communication technologies used for incitement and
the propagation of violent extremist messages.
It goes without saying that United Nations
peacekeeping operations play an important role in
ending global conflicts and establishing peacebuilding
principles in many regions. However, the success of
peacekeeping operations requires disciplined United
Nations troops. Better coordination with the relevant
agencies is necessary, as is the full cooperation of
host countries. Moreover, peace is hard to achieve
and even harder to maintain. Therefore, I believe that
good governance and the rule of law are essential
preconditions for stability. Without them, societies

16-441499/26

A/71/PV.63

cannot function, let alone flourish. All Governments
need the stability and the predictability of good
governance to advance. Such partnerships at all levels of
Government and society will be essential to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals and the broader
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In a wider context, my country believes that
the culture of peace must be cherished in the hearts
of all people, regardless of their religious beliefs.
Confidence-building-measures
and
preventive
diplomacy through multilateral and regional
mechanisms must be enhanced. Likewise, mediating
the interests of all social groups, whether they be poor
or facing inequality and regardless of ethnicity, and
attempting reconciliation in a step-by-step process
at a variety of levels will bring about durable peace
and security.
Ms. Konurbayeva (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General before
us (A/71/407) and thanks the co-facilitators — the
Permanent Representatives of Bangladesh, Pakistan
and the Philippines — for their contribution in
promoting two resolutions under agenda item 14,
“Culture of peace”.
The Programme of Action on the Culture of Peace,
in the context of sustainable development, takes on
even greater meaning and significance in the light of
increasingly protracted conflicts, violent extremism,
gross violations of human rights, humanitarian crises
and massive refugee flows. The many landmark
global processes of 2015 require peaceful, inclusive
societies and political, economic and social stability
for their implementation in 2016 and hereafter. Hence,
a synergistic plan of action, including the eight areas
of the Programme of Action on the Culture of Peace,
is a mandatory factor for the achievement of the 17
Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goals 1,
4, 16, and 17. In partnership with all actors engaged, the
roots of peace grow forth from the individual into an
evolutionary shift for our world as basic human needs
are fulfilled and poverty is eliminated as the primary
Sustainable Development Goal.
We need to chart a new course for humankind,
addressing these challenges by drawing on a broad
range of basic social and human-centred environmental
approaches drawn from education, science, culture
and communications to minimize violence and
extremism. Well-coordinated action is needed on the
10/26

15/12/2016

part of the United Nations, its Member States, regional
organizations and all other stakeholders to foster
social cohesion and the democratic participation of all
sectors, which include women, young people, ethnic
and religious minorities, migrants, indigenous people,
refugees and displaced persons. We must concentrate on
building respect for human rights, pluralism and gender
equality while stepping up our efforts to end all forms
of xenophobia, racial discrimination and intolerance.
To use the wisdom and the influence of spiritual
leaders to foster pace and stability, Kazakhstan
triennially convenes a Congress of Leaders of World
and Traditional Religions. Our cooperation with the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and UNESCO
strengthens implementation of the culture of peace.
At the initiative of Kazakhstan, this year the General
Assembly held the Religions for Peace forum, while
the Religions against Terrorism conference, in which
dozens of parliamentary and faith leaders from around
the world came together to discuss how to fight violent
extremism and the ideologies that nurture, was hosted
in Astana.
Peace has become hostage to science and
technology, which are misused to produce and
proliferate radiological, chemical, biological and
nuclear weapons of mass destruction. Kazakhstan
stands for total disarmament and non-proliferation.
A nuclear-free world, as envisaged in the recent
Manifesto: The World. The 21st century of President
Nazarbayev, is an ambitious but achievable goal. We call
upon parliamentarians, politicians and faith leaders to
endorse the concept of a global anti-nuclear movement.
The trillions of dollars that are spent on lethal weaponry
should be invested in sustainable development, which
can help promote the culture of peace.
It is clearly time for a change in our consciousness,
both individually and in governance. As Kazakhstan
takes its seat on the Security Council on 1 January 2017,
it will continue to pursue peace as it has done since its
independence in 1991. We fully support the resolutions
submitted for our consideration and action. Today, we
celebrate 25 years of our sovereignty and pledge with
strong resolve to join the international effort to promote
a culture of peace in our country, across the regions
and globally.
Mr. Scappini Ricciardi (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Paraguay thanks SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his detailed report on the
16-44149

15/12/2016

promotion of a culture of peace and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace, contained in document A/71/407, which
gives us the opportunity to hold this discussion on one
of the main pillars of the Organization.
Paraguay would like a better life for all people,
without distinction. The culture of peace, as defined by
the United Nations, consists of
“values, attitudes and behaviours that… reject
violence and endeavour to prevent conflicts by
tackling their root causes to solve problems through
dialogue and negotiation” (resolution 52/13, second
preambular paragraph)
among individuals, groups and States. The breadth
of that definition, while showing us the correct path
to peace, also points out to us that it is necessary to
address the root causes of conflicts.
The promotion of development and the eradication
of poverty and inequality are vital. Our efforts must
therefore give priority to the pressing and long-term
needs of the most vulnerable populations. We have
already learned that peace is not only the absence of
conflicts and that poverty and inequality undermine
peace. We are going through a difficult situation in
which thousands of human lives are lost daily and
families are expelled from their homes, forcing entire
populations to migrate. If we add to this tragedy
the irreversible damage to the environment and the
irreparable damage to cultural heritage — the impact of
which, in many cases, will be difficult to reverse — the
gravity of the situation appears insurmountable.
With the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the entry into force of the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, States members
of the United Nations have understood that their actions
must be more concrete and prompt. We have been able
to agree, overcoming differences and interests, on these
valuable instruments that can and should contribute to
overcoming some of the challenges facing humanity.
We must not forget that with the 2030 Agenda we have
made a commitment in favour of people, the planet and
prosperity in order to strengthen universal peace and
access to justice.
In this context, the 17 Sustainable Development
Goals provide a pragmatic, broad and inclusive guide
with clear targets which facilitate the implementation
of the Goals by all countries. In the case of Paraguay,

A/71/PV.63

through its national development plan, Paraguay 2030,
100 per cent of the Sustainable Development Goals are
being focused on and reached in accordance with our
own priorities and challenges.
We must harness our creativity and renew our
political will in order to provide effective and sustainable
responses to the demands of a constantly changing
world. The crisis of refugees and the realities faced by
migrants, gender inequality, the deterioration of the
environment and climate change, to name but a few
challenges, require us to take further action urgently.
Paraguay believes that the multilateral system
must promote and guarantee a culture of peace and
trusts that it will do so by providing clear guidelines to
countries that allow them to translate such guidelines
into concrete actions. We should also bear in mind that
education is one of the fundamental means of building
a culture of peace. Since its re-election as a member
of the Executive Board of UNESCO, Paraguay has
been committed to the promotion of cultural diversity
through the safeguarding of cultural heritage in its
various forms and to the improvement of cultural
expression. Understanding and accepting that diversity
enriches our environment rather than divides us should
contribute to the consolidation of comprehensive peace.
In order to contribute to a culture of peace, my
country proposed to the General Assembly that 30 July
be declared the International Day of Friendship. This
proposal was adopted by consensus through resolution
65/275, in 2011. We believe that the universal value
of friendship inspires peace initiatives, compels us to
be tolerant and builds bridges between communities
honouring cultural and religious diversity. It also
contributes to the efforts made by the international
community, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, to promote dialogue among civilizations,
solidarity, mutual understanding, reconciliation
and peace.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that we have
learned some lessons. We have overcome barriers and
made progress on important issues, but much remains
to be done. Let us learn from our mistakes, share good
practices and accept diversity. Let us respect cultures,
instil values and join forces, but first and foremost
we should put humans and general well-being at the
heart of our work in order build a more just world for
all humankind.

16-4414911/26

A/71/PV.63

Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): First of all, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
A/71/407, entitled “Promotion of a culture of peace and
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”. The report provides an
overview of the activities that have been carried out by
the main United Nations entities working in the areas
of culture of peace.
The world today faces too many problems of
divisions and narrowness that disturb and derail our
shared objective of attaining sustainable peace, stability
and development. The number of displaced populations
is at its highest since the Second World War. Thousands
of migrants are being denied their rights and facing
difficulties in their countries of origin, transit and
destination. Many parts of the world are confronted
with a culture of prejudice, inequality, discrimination,
intolerance, xenophobia, jingoism and violence. It is
therefore our abiding responsibility to consciously
nurture and cultivate a culture of peace, nationally and
internationally, at the United Nations and beyond.
The issue of culture of peace is very close to our
heart. It must be our way of life. A culture of peace is an
aspiration of all humankind, the essence of the Charter
of the United Nations and an imperative in the current
global context. Promoting and inculcating a mindset
of a culture of peace is at the core of peaceful and
mutually respectful coexistence and dialogue among
different civilizations, cultures, religions, faiths and
beliefs around the globe.
Since 1997, Bangladesh has been actively involved
in bringing the resolution on the culture of peace to
the General Assembly, and since 2001 in introducing
this important resolution. Last year, resolution 70/20
received the strong support of Member States and was
sponsored by around 100 countries.
The father of the nation of Bangladesh, Bangabandhu
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, deeply ingrained a culture of
peace into Bangladesh’s foreign policy fundamentals
enunciated in this very Assembly 32 years ago.
Friendship to all and malice towards none, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, the renouncement of the use of
force in international relations and a contribution to
global peace and security have been his foreign policy
mantras, which we are adhering to fully.
These ethos have inspired Bangladesh to be at the
global forefront of promoting a culture of peace through
its leadership role in United Nations peacekeeping
12/26

15/12/2016

as one of the top troop-contributing countries. As a
founding member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Bangladesh is mainstreaming a culture of peace,
women’s empowerment and education for all into postconflict peacebuilding mandates. Remaining true to
its peace credentials, Bangladesh took the initiative
in 2000 to inscribe Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security for the first
time on the Council’s agenda. The present Government
in Bangladesh, under the leadership of Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina, is also committed to promoting peace
not only at the national level, but also at the regional and
international levels and maintaining a zero-tolerance
policy for all forms of terrorism, violent extremism
and radicalization.
The high-level forum organized by the President
of the General Assembly provided us with a unique
opportunity to bring together Member States and
stakeholders. The greater participation and increased
interest, inclusive collaboration among Member States,
international organizations and civil society, was
evidenced this year at the forum, held on 1 September.
We appreciate the sharing by the President of General
Assembly of the summary of the deliberations during
the day-long forum focusing on the implementation
of the Declaration and Programme of Action with all
Member States. This has been immensely useful.
We have concluded the negotiations on our flagship
draft resolution A/71/L.47, entitled “Follow-up to the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a culture of
peace”. We thank Member States and their delegations
for their active participation, understanding and
support in the negotiation process this year. We hope
that, as in past years, we will be able to adopt the draft
resolution this year by consensus and with a greater
number of sponsors.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the facilitators of the two
draft resolutions on the culture of peace (A/71/L.43
and A/71/L.47) for their commitment and their
renewed efforts year after year in the context of the
facilitation process.
My delegation is pleased to co-sponsor once again
draft resolution A/71/L.47, on a culture of peace,
entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace”. My delegation would
also like to take this opportunity to thank Ms. Irina
Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, and Mr. Nassir
16-44149

15/12/2016

A/71/PV.63

Abdulaziz Al Nasser, High Representative for the
Alliance of Civilizations, for their efforts to foster a
culture of peace, dialogue and respect for differences.

Institute for training imams opened in Rabat, almost
1,000 imams, national and international, have benefited
from its instruction.

As in previous years, my delegation is pleased
to be participating in today’s debate on the subject
of a culture of peace. For Morocco, its importance
goes without saying; our attachment to dialogue and
religious tolerance is clear, for it is based not just on our
ancestral secular values, which are genuine elements of
our spiritual capital, but also on practices that are firmly
rooted and continually renewed. Unfortunately, in the
context of the world today, in recent years religious
intolerance has grown and mutual incomprehension has
taken hold, and we can only deplore the cessation of
dialogue and the rise of extremism of every kind.

Thanks to its history and its civilization’s heritage,
Morocco is a country of tolerance, peace and openness,
diversity and blending, of intercultural dialogue and
harmonious coexistence between religions. King
Mohammed VI, commander of the faithful, has
emphasized the Kingdom’s commitment to portraying
a true image of Islam, one of tolerance and virtue
that calls for universal peace and rejects extremism
and discord.

It was with a view to recalling religions’ authentic
values and the essence of their messages of peace,
tolerance and solidarity that Morocco hosted a forum
on “The rights of religious minorities in predominantly
Muslim majority communities: legal framework and a
call to action”, held in Marrakech from 25 to 28 January.
In our view, the protection of the rights of Muslims and
non-Muslims, without distinction between them, is
founded as much on a religious message as it is on our
Constitution. In his address to the forum’s participants,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI recalled that we need
those shared values, not only to inspire us with the ideal
of tolerance that they convey, but also to supply the
resources we need to rebuild humankind and our ability
to mobilize so that we can enjoy a life free from war,
greed and incitement to extremism and resentment, and
in which humankind sees its suffering and crises melt
away as a prelude to eliminating the risks of a clash
of religions.
Morocco’s approach to combating religious
extremism is multidimensional, for one based purely
on security is not enough. Religious extremism must
be fought in depth by implementing concrete measures
aimed as much at society’s religious sectors, in the strict
sense, as at its socioeconomic ones. In a firm belief
in the need for a holistic approach, Morocco began
reorganizing the country’s religious realm in 2005 and
is now involved in training imams; in the institution
of the mourchidates, who help to transmit the message
of religion to women and, if necessary, their children;
in textbook reform and the launching of a television
and radio channel that spreads the message of religion
based on authentic and tolerant Islamic values. In
addition, since March 2015, when the Mohammed VI

Lastly, today cooperation among leaders of all
religions is more vital than ever. It must be based on
tolerance and respect but it must also strive to guarantee,
through national laws, our rights and freedoms, and our
right to peace above all, within our own societies and
regional neighbourhoods, but also at a universal level.
Mrs. Bourhil (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I
would first like to thank the President for convening
today’s debate on agenda item 14, on implementing the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report, entitled “Promotion of a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
understanding and cooperation for peace” (A/71/407).
Today, we are seeing increasing fear in the face
of radicalization and violent extremism in various
parts of the world, fuelled by dangerous and fanatical
ideologies, a lack of understanding and communication,
by enormous differences in countries’ levels of
development and by poverty. All of this has resulted in
various societies becoming cradles for the scourge of
terrorism. That demands that we redouble our efforts
at the international, bilateral and national levels to
confront this dreadful phenomenon and to establish
general stability, peace and security throughout
the world.
In that context, Tunisia — which has always
welcomed diverse civilizations and been a centre
for intercultural and interreligious interaction,
tolerance and dialogue — reaffirms its commitment to
establishing peace, bringing peoples closer together,
ensuring peaceful coexistence and promoting the
concepts of tolerance and dialogue in the service of
social stability. Tunisia has always supported the use
of peaceful means for settling disputes. We instituted
a national dialogue at an extremely difficult time, the

16-4414913/26

A/71/PV.63

period of democratic transition that we have undergone
in the past few years.
Thanks to that dialogue and to the establishment of
an understanding among our various sectors, including
civil society and other national forces, we have been
able to tackle our national challenges and arrive at a
consensus that has enabled us to transition towards
democracy and a society that respects the law, human
rights and the principles of justice and tolerance.
For that reason, a group of Tunisians was awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize in 2010 in recognition of our
national dialogue on peace, which sent the message
that the world needs peace, tolerance and dialogue,
particularly considering all the conflicts occurring
around the world.
In order to emphasize the values of tolerance and
acceptance of others, on 18 November, at the Bardo
National Museum, Tunisia announced the Tunis
Declaration against Terrorism and for Tolerance and
Solidarity among Peoples, Cultures and Religions.
The Declaration was drafted in collaboration with
the Museum of Civilizations of Europe and the
Mediterranean and in accordance with the principles
of tolerance, coexistence between peoples of different
religions and respect for others.
Today the international community, organizations,
civil society, the private and public sectors and the
media have an obligation to ensure the promotion of
a culture of peace and understanding among peoples,
religions and cultures, within the framework of the
United Nations and its programmes, including those
of UNESCO and the Alliance of Civilizations. Such
bodies and mechanisms should be aimed at building
peace and tackling violent extremism, intolerance and
incitements to terrorism through wider development
efforts that encompass young people and women. Those
efforts should include preventive measures that help to
promote counter-terrorism strategies.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
appreciation for the efforts to foster dialogue and
tolerance around the world, in which Tunisia is a
participant, based on the historic role it has played in
the area.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.
14/26

15/12/2016

Agenda item 127 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/71/601
and A/71/598)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.41)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give the
floor to the representative of South Africa to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.41.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Network, which consists of Brazil,
France, Indonesia, Norway, Senegal, Thailand and my
own country, South Africa.
Ten years ago, our foreign ministers agreed to
put health at the centre of foreign policy. United in
the recognition that policy coherence is paramount
in preventing and addressing health issues, they
acknowledged the important role that foreign ministers
have to play in global health, transcending the NorthSouth divide. That led to the adoption of the Oslo
Ministerial Declaration on “Global Health: a pressing
foreign policy issue of our time”, which recognized
that there are technical and political dimensions to the
protection and promotion of global health and human
security that belong not just to ministries of health
and the World Health Organization but also require
intergovernmental and inter-agency coordination, as
well as collaboration with businesses and civil society.
The Network is premised on the understanding
that health is one of our most important yet still
widely neglected long-term foreign-policy issues. As
such, investing in health is fundamental to economic
growth and development. That understanding has
guided our work in the General Assembly and our
approach to global health challenges. With the support
of our like-minded partners, we have witnessed the
Assembly’s successful adoption of eight authoritative
annual resolutions on health.
Today we have the honour to present our ninth
draft resolution (A/71/L.41) on the theme of health
employment and global health. The theme was inspired
by the High-level Commission on Health Employment
and Economic Growth, co-chaired by President Jacob
Zuma of South Africa and President François Hollande
of France. It follows up on resolution 70/183, on global
16-44149

15/12/2016

health and foreign policy, which in its nineteenth
preambular paragraph recognized, among other things,
“that investing in new health workforce employment
opportunities may also add broader socioeconomic
value to the global economy and national
economies and contribute to the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda”.
In its operative paragraph 22, it further requested the
Secretary-General to
“explore steps to meet the global shortfall of
trained health workers, including the possibility
of establishing a high-level commission on future
health employment and economic growth”.
The Commission issued its report on 20 September,
and it is our hope that its recommendations, which
would require stronger action and cooperation with
non-health sectors such as finance, education, labour,
social welfare and research and development, will be
taken on board by all Governments, civil society and
business. The success of the Commission will not be
measured by its report alone but by the extent to which
cross-sectoral coordination takes place at the regional
and global levels towards a substantially increased
global health workforce. The report’s recommendations
will remain mere proposals unless we actively advance
them and help to bring them to the attention of all
Member States.
My delegation had the privilege of presiding
over the negotiation process for this year’s draft
resolution, which was once again marked by vibrant
yet constructive engagements. The flexibility shown
by delegations again reaffirmed the commitment and
dedication embodied in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly Goal 3, regarding the
health of our populations. Notwithstanding some
divergent views, there was a shared understanding
among Member States that twenty-first-century health
challenges related to demographic, epidemiological and
technological changes will require a health workforce
geared towards health promotion, disease prevention,
people-centred community-based health services and
personalized long-term care.
We welcome the critical role played in this area by
women and girls, who are a majority in the health and
social sector workforce, and recognize that too much of
their work is in the form of unpaid and informal care.
We are also aware that such unpaid, informal care is

A/71/PV.63

likely to continue to be performed in homes and within
families in the future. In that context, we would like to
recall the commitment we made in the 2030 Agenda to
recognize and value unpaid care work and to promote
shared responsibility for it within the household and
the family.
We are pleased that Member States concur with
the recommendations of the report, in particular
that investments in the health sector should enhance
women’s economic empowerment and participation in
the health sector. Such investments could transform
unpaid and informal care roles into decent work and
promote opportunities for skills enhancement and
measures to retain and promote women into leadership
positions through policies and strategies that eliminate
gender biases and inequality.
Several initiatives have flowed from past General
Assembly resolutions on global health and foreign
policy. Recent examples are the Secretary-General’s
High-level Panel on the Global Response to Health
Crises and the High-level Panel on Access to Medicines,
as well as the United Nations high-level meetings on
HIV and AIDS and on antimicrobial resistance. We
look forward to the serious consideration by Member
States of the recommendations of the reports, as well
as the Political Declaration, in furtherance of achieving
universal health coverage with emphasis on resilient
health systems and access to medicine.
We are convinced that universal health coverage
will not be achieved without access to innovative
treatments for all. In this regard, we are of the view that
the international community must continue to build on
creative solutions to make this goal effective, such as
the International Drug Purchase Facility, and we take
note of the initiatives and discussions on this issue.
We welcome the decision of the General Assembly
to hold a high-level meeting in 2018 on the fight against
tuberculosis. South Africa is amongst those countries
with a particularly strong interest in this issue, as we
face a triple burden of antimicrobial resistance, namely:
drug-resistant tuberculosis, drug-resistant HIV and
antibiotic resistance. Tuberculosis remains the leading
cause of death among patients living with HIV/AIDS.
We are therefore confident that the outcome of the
high-level meeting in 2018 will have a lasting impact in
the fight against tuberculosis.
In conclusion, as our network approaches the
next decade of its existence, we wish to reiterate our

16-4414915/26

A/71/PV.63

unwavering commitment to continuing to advance
global health issues in the broader United Nations
framework and beyond, in particular by maintaining
and utilizing the item “Global health and foreign
policy” on the agenda of the General Assembly.
Mrs. Jariyadham (Thailand): I would like to first
thank the representative of South Africa for introducing
and presiding over the negotiations on draft resolution
A/71/L.41.
I have the honour to speak today on behalf of
the States members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam,
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines,
Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country, Thailand.
ASEAN has worked closely with the international
community on health issues, particularly since the
Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative was
launched by the Oslo Ministerial Declaration in 2007.
Indeed, ASEAN’s cooperation on health issues has
been a crucial component of the group’s communitybuilding efforts. The regular meetings of ASEAN
health ministers, the ASEAN Strategic Framework on
Health and Development and the Healthy ASEAN 2020
Vision are among examples of how ASEAN countries
cooperate on health-related areas and put health at the
centre of development.
This has been another year with remarkable
progress towards closer international cooperation on
global health. Although many challenges remain and
more collaboration is needed, ASEAN welcomes the
outcomes and recommendations at the various highlevel and regional discussions. These platforms allow
us to tackle common problems, such as HIV/AIDS,
communicable diseases and antimicrobial resistance
and to develop shared solutions, which requires both
national commitment and international support.
ASEAN appreciates the reports of the HighLevel Panel on Access to Medicines, the High-Level
Panel on the Global Response to Health Crises and the
High-level Commission on Health Employment and
Economic Growth, in which the importance of policy
coherence and coordination between health and foreign
policies are highlighted, along with the need to design
an institutional environment and policy instruments
that address health issues in a holistic manner.
16/26

15/12/2016

As ASEAN strives for community-building, the
well-being and standard of living of our peoples are
the priority area for development. ASEAN’s evolving
demographics and lifestyles are also affecting the
development of the health-care sector. Economic
growth and enhanced connectivity within ASEAN have
also led to greater demand for quality and innovative
health services. Therefore, a strong and dynamic health
workforce is needed to ensure adequate and effective
health systems for our populations. Let me share with
the Assembly some of the ASEAN perspectives on
global health and foreign policy.
First, dynamic health workforces are needed in
the strengthening of local and regional health systems
across our region. ASEAN recently endorsed the post2015 health development agenda, which identifies
clusters, goals and health priority issues, such as the
promotion of healthy lifestyles, response to hazards and
emerging threats, the strengthening of health systems
and access to health care and food safety.
Secondly, ASEAN is aware that investment in the
health-care sector workforce and institutions is crucial
to regional preparedness and resilience in the face of
public-health emergencies. During the ASEAN Health
Ministers’ special video conference on the threat
of Zika, held in September, ASEAN reaffirmed the
primary importance of enhancing our preparedness and
response to future outbreaks through active surveillance
and experience-sharing. To fulfil this, we require an
adequate number of trained health personnel.
Thirdly, we see the positive impacts that investing
in a health workforce could have on economic
growth and on the progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals. As health care is a universal need
that is in constant demand, investing in the health
economy can generate decent jobs in the health sector,
which can benefit the entire economy. Investing in
health employment therefore contributes not only to
Sustainable Development Goal 3, on healthy lives and
well-being for all, but also the achievement of other
Goals, including Goal 8, on inclusive growth and
decent work.
It is our belief that good health and the well-being of
people are essential to all other forms of development.
We call for more sharing of information with foreign
and health policymakers and more capacity-building
for health officials to understand the nexus and synergy
between these two areas.
16-44149

15/12/2016

Lastly, ASEAN would like to reiterate its
commitment to further collaborate and coordinate with
the international community and all relevant United
Nations agencies to ensure the highest attainable health
standard for everyone.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Ms. Loeber (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
We welcome this year’s draft resolution A/71/L.41
on health employment and economic growth. We would
like to thank South Africa for its excellent facilitation
and the Oslo Group in Geneva for providing a wellbalanced draft for our negotiations.
Strong health systems are a precondition for
sustainable development. Investment in health
improves growth sustainability. Most returns on health
interventions have the same characteristics as longterm investments. It is high time that we took this into
account when we calculate gross domestic product and
undertake macroeconomic analysis. Investing in health
for growth is a priority for the EU and its member States,
with the aim of securing healthy lives for all. It should
not be viewed as a cost but rather as an investment
in a critical area to promote poverty reduction and
economic growth.
In the EU, we strive to guarantee equitable access
to good-quality health care provided by well-trained
health workers, wherever they live and whatever
their status, to increase significantly the number of
health workers trained by 2030, and to ensure their
equitable distribution. The rising global demand and
need for health workers over the next 15 years present
a significant challenge. However, they also offer the
opportunity to generate employment in areas where
decent jobs are most needed.
We fully support the report of the Commission
on Health Employment and Economic Growth, its
10 recommendations and the call for urgent action to
invest in the health workforce, both now and in the
future. These recommendations will serve to reinforce
European and global actions to transform and scale up
the education and training of our health workforce and
ensure they are working in safe, appropriate working
conditions. We also welcome the strong political
message that there are many job opportunities in

A/71/PV.63

the health sector at a time when unemployment is so
high. Likewise, the report acknowledges the vital role
of women in the health sector, particularly in unpaid
care roles.
Through our global development programmes, and
in cooperation with our international partners, we will
continue to work towards implementing the Sustainable
Development Goals, and promoting education and
training. We will invest in improving health security
and in strengthening international health regulation
cooperation, and we will put efforts towards achieving
universal health coverage in countries worldwide.
With regard to the High-level Panel on Access to
Medicines, the EU and its member States take note
of the contribution provided by the final report of the
Panel and of the subsequent message by the SecretaryGeneral, which encourages all stakeholders to chart a
way forward in appropriate forums to ensure access
to medicines and health technologies for all who need
them, wherever they are. We deeply regret the lack of
nuance around the assumption for setting up the Panel,
according to which there is policy incoherence between
the justifiable rights of investors, international human
rights law, trade rules and public health. We would have
been in favour of a more comprehensive approach to
this crucial issue, and we think that the Panel could
have advanced more balanced, comprehensive and
workable solutions to the problem of access to health.
The challenge is to strike the right balance between
the need to promote and finance the research of new
and better medicines for all, ensuring that medicines
are accessible and affordable to those in need, while
guaranteeing the sustainability of health systems.
We believe that these goals are not contradictory
and must be pursued jointly. Regarding possible next
steps, it is important to recall that this report is merely a
contribution to the global discussion of a complex issue,
which is addressed in several multilateral bodies. In
this regard, we are waiting for the forthcoming report
of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development on access to innovative medicines and
sustainability of pharmaceutical spending. Given our
concerns, shared by many other members, we consider
that any future activities at the United Nations level in
this area should be conducted on the basis of a much
broader understanding of the complex issues involved.
This report would not constitute a basis for future work
of a consensual nature in this area.

16-4414917/26

A/71/PV.63

Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank the Director-General
of the World Health Organization for the comprehensive
analysis of the response to health crises (A/71/598).
In recent years we have witnessed serious challenges
in that area. There have been outbreaks of infectious
diseases, including the spread of yellow fever and the
Ebola and Zika viruses. There is therefore an everincreasing role to be played by medical personnel, on
whose skills and operational capacities depend the
timely and effective response to emerging threats.
Implementing a comprehensive strategy to train
and enhance the professionalism of medical staff is
particularly important in the light of the ambitious
targets for the global health system set out in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. The ambitious
nature of the Sustainable Development Goals obliges
the international community to take pre-emptive
steps to prevent the emergence of any shortage of
medical personnel and of any gap in their geographical
distribution within and among countries, and to prevent
any drop in the quality of their professional training.
We agree with the conclusions of the High-level
Commission on Health Employment and Economic
Growth. We believe that the recommendations
to enhance the qualifications of medical workers
throughout their professional life and to adapt medical
training programmes to national particularities and the
requirements of individual sectors of the population are
justified. We call for greater use of the potential offered
by information and communications technology.
We are particularly concerned by the continued
scarcity of medical personnel in rural areas, and we
believe that establishing various material or other forms
of stimulus would allow us to leave no one behind. In
particular, since 2012 my Government has successfully
implemented the Village Doctor Programme, aimed at
attracting doctors under the age of 45 to rural areas by
giving them a one-time bonus of more than $16,000
in national currency for the purpose of acquiring
housing. Problems can also be addressed by ensuring
the free movement of medical staff between countries.
To that end, we should continue to work to harmonize
legislation regarding the mutual recognition of medical
diplomas. We agree with the working group that the
service provision model for high-quality medical
assistance and disease prevention is important for all
sectors of the population.
18/26

15/12/2016

Ms. Etuk (Bahamas), Vice-President, took the Chair.
In conclusion, we note that the year now ending
has been marked by health issues. At the highlevel meetings of the General Assembly, the United
Nations set a new path forward to counteract HIV /
AIDS and resistance to antimicrobial medicines. We
now have new challenges and new goals. The adoption
today of draft resolution A/71/L.41, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy: health employment and
economic growth”, refers to the holding in Moscow in
November 2017 of a global ministerial conference to
combat tuberculosis in the context of the Sustainable
Development Goals. It also contains a decision to
organize in 2018 a high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on tuberculosis. These events should provide
a comprehensive analysis of the situation regarding
tuberculosis infections around the world and mobilize
broad medical expertise and the political will of States
in dealing with these dangerous infectious diseases
on the basis of an intersectoral approach. In Moscow,
we intend to discuss not only the medical aspects of
the problem but also the issue of social support to the
most vulnerable categories of the population, including
refugees and migrants. I take this opportunity to invite
all interested States to take part in this upcoming event
in the Russian capital.
Ms. Ryan (United States of America): The United
States appreciates the opportunity to address today
the importance of health employment in meeting the
global health challenges facing populations throughout
the world, and the impact of health employment on
economic growth. The United States plays a role, not
only by employing millions of health workers, but also
in providing some of the most up-to-date and cutting
edge training. We are proud to be able to help in
educating and training health professionals in our own
universities and through educators deployed abroad.
Trained health workers are needed not only to fight
infectious diseases and non-communicable diseases but
to promote sexual and reproductive health as well.
I would like to thank the Permanent Representative
of South Africa for introducing this year’s draft
resolution, entitled “Global health and foreign policy:
health employment and economic growth” (A/71/L.41),
on behalf of the cross-regional group of main sponsors
on this important topic. I also thank the South Africa
expert, Ms. Bengu, for her exemplary chairing of the
intensive negotiation process. As we adopt this draft
resolution today, the United States supports its focus on
16-44149

15/12/2016

the important topics of health systems and the challenges
for countries, both developed and developing, related
to a sufficient and well-trained health workforce. A
number of paragraphs reinforce that objective, including
in the larger context of the impact of an enhanced health
workforce on the Sustainable Development Goals. A
high-functioning health workforce is key to achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals across the board.
We appreciate the work done by the Commission on
Health Employment and Economic Growth and thank
the Chairs, President Hollande of France and President
Zuma of South Africa, for the thought-provoking and
concrete recommendations the Commission provided.
Moreover, we support the work of the Secretary-General
on the establishment of the Global Health Crises Task
Force and the work to standardize procedures for
humanitarian actors for large-scale response efforts.
We must make concerted progress towards getting
the health workforce needed in times of outbreaks and
humanitarian health crises. Health professionals can
face many dangers in the field when responding to
emergencies, and we owe it to them to have effective
shared procedures for human resource preparedness.
The United States welcomes the call in the draft
resolution to hold a high-level meeting in 2018 on the
fight against tuberculosis, and we look forward to
working with stakeholders and engaging on that process
going forward for a successful meeting. We see this as an
important step in tackling one of the world’s most lethal
diseases. This high-level meeting on tuberculosis will
also build on this September’s high-level meeting on
antimicrobial resistance, as tuberculosis has developed
many multi-drug-resistant strains.
Turning to a less welcome aspect of the text
of this draft resolution, I wish to reiterate the deep
disappointment of the United States with regard to
the report of the High-level Commission on Health
Employment and Economic Growth. The United States
is committed to working with international partners
and identifying practical ways both to increase access
to safe, effective, affordable and life-saving medicines
around the world and to support policies that drive the
development of new medicines. While there are real
problems pertaining to access, these barriers are due
to many reasons, but the report does not help us attain
these critical objectives; rather, it detracts from them.
We also note the Panel’s inability to find consensus on
its key recommendations, and we take strong objection
to the Panel’s narrow focus and presumption of policy

A/71/PV.63

incoherence. We share the concern expressed by several
Panel members that the report’s recommendations,
if taken forward, could have significant unintended
negative consequences for the innovation of new
medicines. This carries a significant public health risk
in relation to new treatments that save and improve
lives around the world.
For these reasons, the United States wishes to
register our strong disagreement with the references
made to the High-level Commission in preambular
paragraph 26 and operational paragraph 18. The United
States emphasizes that the reference in operational
paragraph 12 of the draft resolution to technology
transfer is premised on the transfer being on mutually
agreed terms by the parties. The United States
Government supports voluntary technology transfer
between private parties. We do not support the reference
to “advantageous”. The use of the word advantageous
is unclear and inappropriate, and the United States
disagrees with its use.
In conclusion, we reiterate our firm commitment
to working with multilateral and international partners
to promote stronger health systems and better health
outcomes throughout the world. We thank the Oslo
Group for continuing to bring attention to the issue of
global health and foreign policy, both in New York and
Geneva. We ask that this statement be made part of the
official records of the meeting.
Ms. Mouflih (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank the Director-General of the
World Health Organization for her report on lessons
learned from actions undertaken to tackle publichealth emergencies and on the management of previous
international crises that have had health consequences.
Ensuring that health systems are able to face up
to health emergencies as well as daily health-care
needs is a matter of pivotal importance. My delegation
also wishes to commend the efforts undertaken by
the delegation of South Africa in order to facilitate
negotiations under the Global Health and Foreign
Policy Initiative. We also wish to thank the team
responsible for drawing up draft resolution A/71/L.41,
which we will adopt today. The draft resolution is both
timely and appropriate, following the publication of the
report of the Commission on Health Employment and
Economic Growth.
The number of health crises has been rising
steadily in relation to unusual or unexpected events of

16-4414919/26

A/71/PV.63

a biological, chemical or radiological nature. The acute
severe respiratory syndrome epidemic, the H1N1 flu
pandemic or, recently, the Ebola epidemic, have clearly
demonstrated that emerging risks of infectious diseases
constitute a global threat. That requires effective and
proactive national monitoring and health security
systems acting together with the global health saftey
system, in accordance with new international health
regulations. In future we must ensure that international
action to tackle humanitarian and health crises is
undertaken in a timely and coordinated fashion.
The Kingdom of Morocco reaffirms its desire to
strengthen cooperation to prevent, tackle and combat
the emergence of new contagious diseases by improving
civilian health capacities and conducting research on
epidemics. I recall that my country was one of the first
to answer the appeals for aid from countries affected
by Ebola. At the national level, the 2011 Constitution
acknowledges that health is a fundamental human
right. The Constitution afforded a unique opportunity
to give rise to a number of reforms, ensuring progress
towards universal health-care coverage and making
progress towards the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
In that connection, in 2016 we have witnessed
the implementation of the national plan for medical
emergencies. The plan consists of five pillars: the
improvement of pre-hospital and hospital care,
strengthened training and management of medical and
paramedical personnel, the development of publicpublic partnerships and the promotion of regulatory
frameworks in this field. This year, we also adopted
Law No. 43-13, related to the practice of nursing, and
Law No. 44-13, related to the practice of midwifery.
These two laws complete our legal framework in the
health-care field, which is enshrined in the legislative
programme of the Ministry of Health for the period
2012-2016. These efforts have enabled the publication
of 93 pieces of legislation, decrees and bylaws, which
together underpin the health-care system in Morocco.
For over a decade, the Kingdom of Morocco has
committed to improving and broadening health-care
coverage in order to achieve universal health-care
coverage at the national level by 2020. Moreover, in
Rabat from 26 to 30 September, Morocco hosted the
fourth international health conference on economics
and health-care policies. This initiative, which was
co-organized by the African Health Economics and
Policy Association, the Maghreb Network on Health
20/26

15/12/2016

Economics and Health Systems and the World Health
Organization, allowed participants to discuss the
challenges that health-care systems must tackle if we
are to move towards universal health-care coverage.
Moreover, the Kingdom of Morocco has implemented
basic health-care coverage, which benefits around
20,000 sub-Saharan migrants.
My delegation commends the initiative of holding
a ministerial conference at the global level on the fight
against tuberculosis in November 2017 in Moscow.
Morocco also welcomes the convening of a high-level
meeting in 2018 on the same issue, as stipulated in
paragraph 17 of the draft resolution. The fight against
tuberculosis has always been and continues to be a
crucial priority in the sectoral strategy for the health
care system in Morocco. In order to curb the spread of
this disease, significant resources have been deployed at
the national level. More than $3 million were allocated
in 2012, and 65 million dirham, or $6.5 million, were
allocated in 2015.
Allow me to conclude by recalling the inextricable
link betweeen foreign policy and global health. The
promotion and improvement of health are crucial to
sustainable development as well as to the response to
climate change. What we need, therefore, is a more
comprehensive inter-sectoral approach to improving
health, reducing inequalities, promoting sustainable
food production and consumption and protecting the
environment. That will enable us to lay the groundwork
for a high-performing template for implementing a
global health system while protecting the health of both
individuals and the community as a whole, providing
them with a secure environment and with prevention
and vigilance when any urgent threats to individual or
collective health are at issue.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Israel welcomes draft resolution
A/71/L.41 and the report of the World Health
Organization (A/71/601).
Over the past two years, we have witnessed one of
the greatest health crises in recent history. The Ebola
outbreak and the global response to it served as a
sobering reminder that despite technological advances,
groundbreaking research and new treatment methods,
as a global community we still have a lot of work to
do to prevent and combat future health emergencies.
The aftermath of the Ebola outbreak left us with
shattered communities and dysfunctional health-care
systems and ruined economies, and reinforced our
16-44149

15/12/2016

understanding of the clear links between health and
sustainable development and the fact that one cannot
exist without the other.
Ahad Ha’am, one of our most prominent Zionist
thinkers, wrote that a healthy man instinctively loves
life, and that saying is as true today as it was in the
nineteenth century. Healthier societies are happy
societies. Strong public-health systems are crucial
to economic growth, peace and prosperity. Healthy
people can break out of the cycle of poverty and reduce
inequalities within countries. When communities are
healthy, Governments can invest in their peoples’
future by building sustainable infrastructure,
providing quality education and promoting technology
and innovation.
Israel believes firmly that health is the greatest
wealth. For decades, we have demonstrated an
unwavering commitment to strengthening public health
at home and around the world. Earlier this year, the
African Union Commission recognized Israel as the
largest per-capita donor in fighting and preventing the
spread of Ebola in Africa. When the Ebola virus spread,
Israel immediately responded by donating $8.75 million
to the United Nations Central Emergency Response
Fund. We also established fully equipped emergency
medical field clinics in Liberia, Sierra Leone and
Guinea, and sent protective gear and medical supplies.
In addition, we deployed public-health and infectiousdiseases experts to Cameroon and Côte d’Ivoire to train
local health professionals. When he spoke at the United
Nations in September, Prime Minister Netanyahu
declared that Israel has Africa’s back and Africa has
Israel’s. Israel is committed to continuing to strengthen
its cooperation with African nations, including in
confronting health hazards and disease.
In addition to responding to global health
emergencies, Israel has focused on prevention and
mitigation by building resilient health-care systems and
training health professionals around the world. Israel’s
Agency for International Development Cooperation,
MASHAV, serves as a bridge between our medical
community and the developing world. Its programmes
in emergency medicine, public health and infant
and maternal health care are focused on a long-term
approach to training the trainers. Such programmes
include assisting with organizational reforms, building
human and institutional capacity and delivering medical
services and health education to rural areas.

A/71/PV.63

One of the biggest health challenges still facing
the developing world is the high rates of maternal
and neonatal mortality. Last year, about 2.7 million
newborns died during the first month of their lives and
more than 300,000 women died from complications
related to pregnancy or childbirth in 2015. The great
majority of those deaths occurred in developing
countries and could have been prevented with proper
treatment and care. Israel has been working with health
professionals around the world to improve maternal
and neonatal care and to provide support and training.
This summer, MASHAV deployed two Israeli neonatal
experts to Ashgabat in Turkmenistan to share knowhow and skills on essential newborn care. It also sent a
team of leading experts to Kumasi, Ghana, to evaluate
the performance of a mother-and-baby intensive care
unit that it established in 2015 with the goal of reducing
maternal mortality.
Another major global health challenge is
antimicrobial resistance, which is rising owing to
the overuse and misuse of antibiotics. It is predicted
that by 2050, 10 million people will die annually as a
result of drug-resistant infections. In September, the
United Nations convened a high-level event on the
problem that highlighted the importance of reducing
the prevalence and transmission of bacterial infectious
diseases and scaling up collaborative cross-sectoral
efforts in order to combat this significant public-health
challenge. Israel is a member of the Joint Programming
Initiative on Antimicrobial Resistance, a platform set
up to pool national research efforts in order to develop
a common strategic research agenda and improve
national and international antimicrobial-resistance
surveillance systems.
Investing in science, technology and innovation
will continue to be crucial to unlocking the solutions
to many of today’s global health challenges. Israel has
been at the global forefront of medical innovation for
decades. Israeli scientists and doctors have invented
new devices and treatments for both communicable and
non-communicable diseases. One such invention has
had an impact on the global battle against HIV. PrePex,
a non-surgical circumcision device that requires no
anesthesia, has made HIV prevention affordable and
scalable. Last year, Rwanda became the first country
to launch a nationwide scale-up of non-surgical adult
male circumcision aimed at reducing HIV infection
using the Israeli device, and this year the World Health
Organization announced that PrePex will be made

16-4414921/26

A/71/PV.63

available as part of its AIDS-prevention programme
for all teenage males in 14 countries in southern and
eastern Africa.
Achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly Goal 3, will require an
integrated approach, enhanced international cooperation
and better coordination among all stakeholders.
Together, let us pledge to improve the health of every
family, community and country, laying the foundation
for a more secure, prosperous and peaceful planet.
Mr. Minami (Japan): At the outset, Japan would like
to commend the General Assembly for its forthcoming
adoption of draft resolution A/71/L.41, on global health
and foreign policy, following intensive and constructive
negotiations by Member States. Japan was very pleased
to be one of its sponsors, and we would like to thank
South Africa warmly for facilitating it.
I would like to take this opportunity to make a
short statement about the draft resolution. It focuses on
the importance of the health workforce, which will be
critical for us if we are to achieve the health-related
Goals and targets in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including universal health coverage and
an enhanced response to future health crises. Japan
believes that today’s draft resolution will contribute to
securing an appropriate and qualified health workforce
and to building that workforce’s capacity in every
country, which is what is needed if we are to achieve
our goals.
I would also like to take a moment to congratulate
the Inter-Agency Standing Committee on its completion
this month of the standard operating procedure
established for the Level 3 activation procedures for
infectious-disease events. Japan welcomes the inclusion
of that important element in today’s draft resolution. We
will continue to make every effort to ensure appropriate
preparedness for and responses to future health crises
around the world.
Today’s draft resolution also touches on the issue
of access to medicine, which is critical to achieving
universal health coverage and should be discussed
further from several perspectives, including research
and development and strengthening health systems.
Japan is ready to be constructively involved in that
important discussion.
For all those reasons and more, Japan decided to
become a sponsor of today’s draft resolution. But I
22/26

15/12/2016

would like to make a final comment on paragraph
15, on technology transfer. The adoption of the draft
resolution today will not change Japan’s position on
that issue from what was agreed on in the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda.
Mr. Velázquez Castillo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the report of the Director-General
of the World Health Organization on the lessons
learned in the public-health emergency response to
and management of previous international crises with
health consequences (A/71/601).
Mexico decided to become a sponsor of today’s
draft resolution A/71/L.41, entitled “Global health
and foreign policy: health employment and economic
growth”, because it is a priority issue of vital
importance to my country. It affects people’s wellbeing and national economic development and has an
increasingly global impact that goes beyond the work
being done in Geneva within the framework of the
World Health Organization. We therefore welcome
the draft resolution’s contribution to coherence
between the United Nations here at Headquarters and
the World Health Organization in their global health
efforts on issues such as antimicrobial resistance,
non-communicable diseases, universal access to health
and combating other pandemics and health risks. In
that regard, we reiterate our commitment to supporting
health-sector employment in order to advance the
Sustainable Development Goals. We commend
the constructive work done during the informal
consultations in order to ensure a fair balance between
the various positions under the leadership of the South
African facilitator, representing the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Network.
Mr. El Haycen (Mauritania), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
We would also like to express our special
appreciation to the representatives of the World Health
Organization here in New York, who once again
provided invaluable support in order to ensure that the
political and technical efforts of both bodies are aligned
and mutually reinforcing.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): With
respect to draft resolution A/71/L.41, I give the floor to
the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Mahmassani (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This statement is made
16-44149

15/12/2016

in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 22 of draft resolution
A/71/L.41, the General Assembly would decide to
hold a high-level meeting in 2018 on the fight against
tuberculosis, and would call on the Secretary-General,
in close collaboration with the Director-General of the
World Health Organization, and in consultation with
Member States, as appropriate, to propose options and
modalities for the conduct of such a meeting, including
potential deliverables, and building on existing efforts
in that regard.
With regard to the request in operative paragraph
22, it is understood that all issues related to the
high-level meeting, including dates, venue, format,
organization and scope, are yet to be determined.
Accordingly, in the absence of modalities for the
meeting, it is not possible at the present time to estimate
the potential cost implications of the requirements for
meetings and documentation. Following a decision on
the modalities, format and organization of the meeting,
the Secretary-General will submit the relevant costs
of such requirements, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, the dates of the meeting will have to be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution
A/71/L.41 would not give rise to any financial
implications under the programme budget for the
biennium 2016-2017. Copies of the statement that I
have just read out have been distributed desk-to-desk
in the Hall and will also be made available on the
PaperSmart portal.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.41,
entitled “Global health and foreign policy: health
employment and economic growth”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Mahmassani (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of draft
resolution A/71/L.41, in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors: Algeria, Andorra, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brunei Darussalam, Denmark,

A/71/PV.63

Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Namibia, the Netherlands, Palau, Peru,
the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, the
Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovenia, Sweden and
Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.41?
Draft resolution A/71/L.41 was adopted (resolution
71/159).
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): Before
giving the floor to those wishing to speak in explanation
of position, I would like to remind speakers that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Kiener (Switzerland): Switzerland would
like to thank the core group and the facilitator from
South Africa for their efforts to bring the negotiations
on resolution 71/159, “Global health and foreign
policy: health employment and economic growth”,
to completion.
While the Swiss delegation did not want to block
the consensus, we would like to take this opportunity
to dissociate ourselves from certain aspects of this
particular resolution. The global health and foreign
policy resolution is historically rooted in the Oslo
Ministerial Declaration and focuses each year on one
of its specific topics. This year’s resolution bears the
title “Health employment and economic growth”, based
on point 3 of the Oslo Declaration, entitled “Human
resources for health and foreign policy”. Yet we see a
lack of focus on health employment.
While the needs in this particular area of the
Oslo Declaration have certainly evolved since it was
formulated in 2007, and while new commissions, such
as the High-level Commission on Health Employment
and Economic Growth, have enhanced discussions of
the subject, it is essential to acknowledge that the extent
of a resolution’s scope contributes to the effectiveness
of its message. Switzerland particularly regrets two
structural issues in that regard.
First, the text includes a variety of subjects not
directly related to the topic of this year’s resolution.
Switzerland recognizes the importance of all of them.
However, we believe that they should be discussed in
appropriate forums. Indeed, the resolution’s resulting

16-4414923/26

A/71/PV.63

loss of focus has the consequence of weakening
the important message we could have otherwise
delivered. Some examples of such unrelated subjects
are antimicrobial resistance, tuberculosis, access to
medicines, sexual and reproductive health and rights
and HIV/AIDS, just to name a few.
Secondly, and most importantly, we regret the
definition of follow-up actions that by their nature
should rather be discussed in specialized forums
dedicated to their respective topics, which again are not
directly related to the topic of today’s resolution.
To sum up, Switzerland hopes that the resolution
we have just adopted will not create an undesirable
precedent that jeopardizes the roles and functions of
the existing specialized forums and hampers efficient
global coordination.
Ms. Bouillon Dégin (Canada): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Australia, Canada,
Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Sweden and the United Kingdom.
At the outset, we would like to thank the
co-facilitators and our colleagues for their hard work
in achieving consensus on resolution 71/159. While
we joined the consensus on the resolution, we believe
that stronger language around sexual and reproductive
health and rights would have contributed to a more
comprehensive document grounded in human rights.
We strongly support the inclusion of wording on
universal access to sexual and reproductive health
and reproductive rights and women’s and girls’ full
enjoyment of all human rights, as initially proposed
in the zero draft, and we are concerned about its
deliberate exclusion.
Member Governments, in their role as bearers
of primary responsibility, and in accordance with
the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) and the Beijing Declaration
and its Platform for Action, must, at the very least,
promote sexual and reproductive health and rights
aimed at protecting women and girls. Ensuring that
women, girls and adolescents particularly are aware
of and understand their right to realize their sexual
and reproductive health and rights is consistent with
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
specifically Sustainable Development Goal 5 and its
target 5.6. Those rights are inextricably linked to other
human rights that are already recognized in national
laws, international human rights instruments and
24/26

15/12/2016

United Nations consensus documents. In that regard,
we strongly support the ICPD Programme of Action,
which states in section 7.3 that
“the promotion of the responsible exercise of these
rights for all people should be the fundamental
basis for Government- and community-supported
policies and programmes in the area of sexual and
reproductive health and rights, including family
planning” [and reproductive health services].
Regarding operative paragraph 15, on technology
transfer, we read this paragraph as in compliance with
other international agreements, such as the World Trade
Organization’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights. The language in today’s
resolution does not create a precedent on technology
transfer, with language contained in the 2030 Agenda
and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda remaining the
most recent intergovernmental agreement on the issue.
Mr. Joshi (India): Global health is one of the
most pressing concerns on the international agenda.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development has
given a significant impetus to this urgent necessity by
encouraging broad-based and inclusive health goals
and targets. But despite earnest efforts to promote
and protect the right of every person to enjoy the
highest attainable standards of physical and mental
health, substantial gaps persist in the area of health
care. Essential medicines and health technologies for
preventing and treating diseases continue to remain
out of reach for millions worldwide, particularly in
developing countries. It is in that context that we
welcome today’s important resolution 71/159, which has
been brought forward by the delegations of South Africa
and the members of the core Oslo group. We worked
closely and constructively during the finalization of the
draft and have joined the consensus.
The resolution we have just adopted calls attention
to the importance of addressing the rising global
demand and need for health workers over the next
15 years, an issue that presents significant challenges.
We have noted that the recommendations in the report of
the High-level Commission on Health Employment and
Economic Growth aim to stimulate the creation of health
and social-sector jobs as a means to advance inclusive
economic growth, paying specific attention to the needs
of low-income and lower-middle-income countries.
Besides the chronic issues involved in the global
health challenges that Sustainable Development Goal
16-44149

15/12/2016

3 seeks to address, the international community has
also learned important lessons from the disastrous
pandemics that have affected various parts of the
world, including the recent Ebola and Zika health
crises. Earlier this year, the international community
deliberated on the HIV/AIDS issue, and in September,
at the start of the Assembly’s seventy-first session,
global attention was focused on the fast-spreading and
imminent challenge posed by antimicrobial resistance.
We also note that today’s resolution recognizes that
there is a close and interdependent relationship between
foreign policy and global health, and therefore that
global challenges require concerted and sustained effort
on the part of the international community and must
be addressed in their entirety. In that context, while
resolution 71/159 seeks to address several important
objectives, we were somewhat disappointed to note
attempts that were made during the discussion to dilute
the importance accorded the far-reaching and very
significant recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General’s High-level Commission
on Health Employment and Economic Growth in the
resolution’s twenty-sixth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 18.
The report is the outcome of a specific mandate
providing options and recommendations to discuss and
address the policy incoherence and glaring imbalance
between human rights, intellectual property rights
and public health objectives in the context of health
technologies. It also addresses issues such as new
incentives for research and development, including the
de-linking of its costs from prices and the full utilization
of flexibilities based on the World Trade Organization’s
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (WTO TRIPS), as well as governance,
accountability and transparency. We therefore do not
subscribe to some delegations’ view that the resolution
has included subjects that are unrelated to its topic. We
look forward to continued engagement and dialogue in
all the relevant United Nations agencies, including the
General Assembly and the World Health Organization,
on the report of the Secretary-General’s High-level
Panel on Access to Medicines. In that regard, we
welcome the ongoing discussions of the report at the
WTO TRIPS Council.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
India’s long-standing commitment and record in
promoting the cause of global health, including through
South-South cooperation. The Indian pharmaceutical

A/71/PV.63

industry continues to be acknowledged globally as a
source of affordable, safe, effective and high-quality
generic medicines for vulnerable people, especially in
developing countries. We have always remained open to
sharing our technical expertise and experience with our
fellow developing country partners. Through its national
rural health mission, India has also continued to strive
to strengthen its public-health infrastructure, including
through the appointment of hundreds of thousands of
health-care providers and community workers.
At this juncture, making a reality of our global
political commitment to realize the vision of healthy
lives for all people, at every age, is an international
imperative, and India is committed to working with the
international community to achieve it.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 127.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to draw the attention of members to the date of recess
of the current session. Members will recall that at its
51st plenary meeting, on 5 December 2016, the General
Assembly agreed to postpone the date of recess of the
seventy-first session to Monday, 19 December 2016.
In the light of the work still to be completed in
the Fifth Committee, I would like to propose to the
Assembly that the date of recess of the current session
now be further postponed to Friday, 23 December. If
there is no objection, may I take it that the Assembly
agrees to further postpone the date of recess of the
seventy-first session to Friday, 23 December 2016?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I should
also like to consult members regarding an extension of
the work of the Fifth Committee. Members will recall
that at its 51st plenary meeting, on 5 December 2016,
the General Assembly agreed to extend the work of the
Fifth Committee to Friday, 16 December. However, I
have been informed by the Chair of the Fifth Committee
that the Committee requests an additional extension of
its work to Friday, 23 December, in view of the fact that
such an extension would facilitate reaching consensus
on the resolutions pending before it.

16-4414925/26

A/71/PV.63

May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until
Friday, 23 December 2016?

26/26

15/12/2016

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

16-44149
