S/2015/141*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 February 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 26 of Security Counci l
resolution 2173 (2014), in which the Council requested me to report every 90 days
on the implementation of the mandate of the African Union -United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The report provides an update and analysis of the
situation in Darfur and progress towards the achievement of the Operation’s
strategic priorities and benchmarks from the time of my previous report, dated
26 November 2014 (S/2014/852), until 12 February 2015.
2.
Under paragraph 7 of resolution 2173 (2014), the Security Council requested
that I conduct, in close cooperation with the African Union, and seeking
perspectives from all relevant parties, an analysis of the implementation of the
review of UNAMID, including specific achievements under the revised strategic
priorities, progress in addressing the challenges facing the mission, as identified by
the review, any significant developments in the situation in Darfur and their impact
on the mandate and tasks of the Operation and an analysis of those tasks that remain
relevant, and in the fulfilment of which the United Nations country team has a
comparative advantage, with a road map to transfer those tasks to the fullest extent
possible to the United Nations country team, taking into account contributions of
donors and other relevant actors. I am submitting a special report to the Council
containing my assessment in this regard and further recommendations for the future
mandate, composition, configuration and exit strategy for UNAMID, as well as for
its relationship with other United Nations actors in Darfur and in the Sudan.

II. Overview and analysis of the conflict dynamics, and
operating environment in Darfur
A.

Analysis of the current trends and conflict dynamics in Darfur
3.
The security situation in Darfur, which deteriorated during the period under
review, was defined by three main trends. First, since December, little progress has
been made in the direct negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and th e
* Reissued for technical reasons on 12 March 2015.

15-02340* (E) 120315

*1502340*

S/2015/141

armed groups. Preparations for the national dialogue have also stalled and tensions
have increased in anticipation of the upcoming national elections. Second, increased
political tensions have coincided with a marked escalation in the conflict in Darfur
between the Government and the armed movements with the redeployment of the
Rapid Support Forces in December. Third, the civilian population continued to be
affected by intercommunal conflict resulting from the economic situation and
conflicts over land and resources. The population is also affected by widespread
criminality owing to the severe disruption of traditional livelihoods and weakened
dispute-resolution and rule-of-law mechanisms.
Negotiations and other political developments
4.
Direct talks between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) and the Justice and Equality Movement -Gibril
Ibrahim (JEM/Gibril), two of the Darfur armed movements that are not signatories
to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, commenced under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel in Addis Ababa on 23 November.
Despite concerted efforts, the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW), also
a non-signatory to the Doha Document, decided not to take part in this round of
negotiations. During the talks, the Government reiterated its position that it would
not reopen the Doha Document for negotiations, while the armed movements
insisted that they were not bound by an agreement they had never signed. On
26 November 2015, the Implementation Panel proposed to the parties that security
arrangements, political issues, humanitarian issues, relations between the
negotiations and the national dialogue and method of work would be included as
agenda items for the talks. The Government rejected the proposal to include
humanitarian issues as a separate agenda item in the talks, which they argued could
be discussed within the context of security arrangements or political issues. The
armed movements, however, insisted on retaining humanitarian issues on the agenda
and also proposed the addition of items on reconstruction and development;
refugees and internally displaced persons; land, borders and nomad issues; justice,
accountability and reconciliation; and comprehensive compensation. Unable to
agree, the Implementation Panel adjourned the talks on 30 November to provide the
parties with an opportunity to consult with their constituencies on options to break
the impasse.
5.
Following this adjournment, on 3 December, in Addis Ababa, the political and
armed opposition in the Sudan, including the Darfur armed movements, adopted a
joint declaration entitled the “Sudan Call” pledging to end the wars and to create a
comprehensive solution, beginning with a cessation of hostilitie s, to the conflicts in
Darfur and in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States and to establish mechanisms
and committees aimed at achieving a popular uprising or a comprehensive political
solution leading to the dismantling of the one-party-regime in Khartoum. The
declaration further outlined the basic prerequisites for the holding of the national
dialogue, a comprehensive political solution, including a cessation of hostilities, the
release of all political detainees, the revocation of laws restricting freed oms and
human rights, the formation of a transitional government and the establishment of
an agreed administration to manage a dialogue process for a comprehensive peace
and democratic transformation. The signatories also pledged to boycott the
presidential and legislative election scheduled to take place in April 2015, calling it
a facade to legitimize the current regime. The stalemate in both the Darfur and Two

2/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

Areas mediation tracks and the adoption of the “Sudan Call” have contributed to a
significant rise in political tensions in the Sudan.
6.
Following these events, and upon their return to Khartoum from Addis Ababa,
on 6 December, the Government arrested the head of the opposition National
Consensus Forces, Farouk Abu Issa, and the civil society acti vist, Amin Maki Mali
Madani. The Government also confiscated copies of several editions of the
newspapers Akhir Lahza and Al-Midan and filed a request with the registrar of
political parties for the dissolution of Sudan’s largest opposition party, the National
Umma Party, on 14 January. On 20 January, 18 of the 21 political parties registered
in the Sudan announced the suspension of their participation in the national dialogue
based on the Government’s insistence on proceeding with elections. The opposition
political parties argued that the timing of elections should be an outcome of the
national dialogue, as agreed in the road map for the national dialogue.
7.
On 4 January, the Sudanese National Assembly, without the opposition parties,
adopted a series of constitutional amendments, including the appointment by the
President of the State Governors, who were hitherto elected, and the expansion of
the authority of the National Intelligence and Security Service to include direct
control over the Rapid Support Forces, which have been deployed to suppress the
rebellions in Darfur and the Two Areas. Simultaneously, at the end of January, the
Sudanese Parliament passed a freedom-of-information law to increase the right to
access public information.
8.
In Darfur, tensions grew between the leader of the Liberation and Justice
Movement (LJM) and Chairperson of the Darfur Regional Authority (DRA),
El Tigani Seisi, and the Secretary-General of LJM, Idriss Bahar Abu Garda, about
corruption, unilateral decision-making, tribal preference and lack of a unified
political ideology. Seisi was accused of intentionally delaying the transition of LJM
into a political party in order to remain in his current position for two more years. In
late December differences between the two men were reported over the
implementation of the security arrangements for the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. As a result, the principal LJM alliance of six disparate factions, five former
SLA factions and the United Revolutionary Forces Front began to u nravel along
ethnic lines, with the Fur, along with the Massalit and ethnic “Arab” clans
supporting Seisi and the Zaghawa, Tunjur and other ethnic “Arab” clans supporting
Abu Garda. On 16 January, Seisi dismissed Abu Garda from LJM. However, two
days later, the Chairperson of the LJM Revolutionary Liberation Council issued a
statement that Seisi had been removed as Chairperson of the movement. Both Abu
Garda and Seisi have registered two separate political parties under the name of the
Liberation and Justice Party. Both political parties have until 1 March 2015 to
finalize the party’s establishment and security arrangements or they will be excluded
from the election process.
Fighting between Government forces and rebel groups
9.
Following a similar pattern to the events in Darfur one year ago, the beginning
of the dry season coincided with the launching of offensive military action by the
Government of the Sudan and the armed movements. The reporting period
witnessed a marked increase in fighting between Government forces and the
SLA/MM in North Darfur and SLA/AW in Jebel Marra. On 23 December, while
addressing a graduation ceremony of the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) Command and

15-02340

3/19

S/2015/141

Staff College, President El-Bashir announced the resumption of “Operation Decisive
Summer”, with the aim of eliminating those armed movements in Darfur and the
Two Areas that did not heed the Government’s call for dialogue. The announcement
was followed by intensified fighting between Government forces and SLA/AW in
East Jebel Marra and with SLA/MM near Tawilla, North Darfur.
10. Two weeks before the announcement, on 9 December, SAF commenced a fourday siege of SLA/AW positions near Rofata, Central Darfur. On 10 December,
SLA/AW responded by attacking a SAF troop rotation convoy in R agabe Jamal,
Central Darfur. On 11 December, SLA/AW elements also attacked a SAF convoy
escorting the Commissioners of East and Central Darfur in Guldo, Central Darfur, in
which five people were killed and two SAF personnel injured. On 23 December, the
Government of the Sudan deployed Rapid Support Forces to Nertiti, Central Darfur,
and launched an attack on SLA/AW elements in the area of Rokero. The
strategically important settlement of Fanga Suk, West Darfur, which connects the
state capitals of Central and North Darfur and which was long held by SLA/AW, fell
to a joint SAF/Rapid Support Forces operation on 1 January following heavy
fighting. On 8 January, the Minister of Defence and the Director-General of the
National Intelligence and Security Service visited Fanga Suk and praised their
troops for the liberation of the area after 13 years. On 18 Januar y, SAF and Rapid
Support Forces launched another large-scale operation against SLA/AW in the Golo
area. On 24 and 25 January, fighting between SAF, Rapid Support Forces and
SLA/AW was reported in the Azra and Sarrong areas, to the north-east of Nertiti.
11. Despite bearing the brunt of the campaign led by the Rapid Support Forces in
early 2014, in November 2014, SLA/MM announced plans to retake its former
strongholds along the northern and southern sides of the central corridor: the
Thabit/Abu Zerega/Shangil Tobaya triangle in North Darfur as well as Khor Abeche,
Shearia, Labado and Muhajeria in South and East Darfur. On 31 December, violent
clashes between Government forces and SLA/MM erupted in the vicinity of Tawilla,
North Darfur, affecting the civilian population in 27 villages, including Tarabat,
Massala, Tombora, Sambile, Hajura, Dorma, Khaze, Timoa, Kurukutu, Tian, Duga
and Dababise. On 20 January, SLA/MM announced that 31 of its fighters, including
its operations commander, had been killed in an ambush by Government forces at
Orchi in the Um Baru locality, North Darfur, on 13 January. UNAMID was unable
to assess the impact of the defeat at Orchi on SLA/MM’s military plans or overall
structure as it could not gain access to the conflict area.
12. During the reporting period, no direct confrontations were reported between
the Government of the Sudan and the Justice and Equality Movement/Gibril
(JEM/Gibril). The Government of the Sudan continued to urge the Government of
South Sudan to cease support for Sudanese rebel movements, particularly
JEM/Gibril. During a visit to Nyala, South Darfur, on 12 December, the Director General of the National Intelligence and Security Service stated that any aggression
from the territory of South Sudan on the Sudan would be considered a hostile act
and would warrant a pursuit of JEM/Gibril into that country, as highlighted in my
report on the situation in South Sudan dated 17 February 2015 (S/2015/118,
para. 23).

4/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

Aerial bombardments
13. On 16 and 18 November, UNAMID received reports of aerial bombardment
taking place in Abu Leha, Kornoi and Rofata in North Darfur in support of the
Government’s ground offensive against SLA/MM. With the participation of the
United Nations Mine Action Service, UNAMID verified the presence of two bomb
craters in the area. No injuries were reported in these incidents. The mission also
received reports of aerial bombardment in the vicinity of Jurajeen near Um Baru,
North Darfur, on 16 November, and subsequently confirmed the presence of one
crater in the area. Aerial bombardment reportedly resumed in the Um Baru locality
on 7 January and continued until 13 January when SAF ground forces captured
Orchi from SLA/MM. On 9 January, the Government of the Sudan denied a
UNAMID verification patrol access to Um Baru because of ongoing military
operations in the area.
14. UNAMID confirmed aerial bombardment near Rofata, Kaya, Jawra, Kanuary
Fattah Kirma and Sullow villages in North Darfur on 11 December. On
13 December, additional bombardments took place in Sullow village, with two
confirmed deaths on the ground. UNAMID received further reports of aerial
bombardment in the Sabanga area of Central Darfur on 14 December, resulting in
the death of eight SLA/AW fighters. On 27 January, UNAMID received reports of
aerial bombardment in Arra, Kirro, Koron, Bar Arie, Tala and Noni villages north of
Golo in North Darfur. UNAMID was unable to gain access to these locations owing
to the ongoing conflict between Government forces and SLA/AW.
Threats and attacks against civilians
15. A total of 61 cases of violence and attacks against civilians, resulting in the
loss of 113 lives, were recorded by UNAMID during the reporting period. A total of
23 incidents occurred in North Darfur, with 60 fatalities; 16 incidents in South and
East Darfur, with 31 fatalities; and 22 incidents fatalities in West and Central
Darfur, with 22 fatalities. Arab militias were alleged to have perpetrated 18, the
forces of the Government of the Sudan 15 and unknown perpetrators 28 of the
recorded attacks.
16. Internally displaced persons were the victims of continuing attacks during the
reporting period. They expressed their concerns to the mission regarding the
deteriorating security situation, the presence of armed men, random shooting,
harassment and the destruction of farms, particularly in the Ardamata camp near
El Geneina in West Darfur and the Kalma and Al Salaam Camps in South Darfur.
UNAMID and humanitarian actors received frequent reports from internally
displaced persons and others affected by the deliberate destruction of crops by
Government forces and militias as part of the latest increase in violence. The worstaffected areas were Tawilla, El Fasher and Um Baru localities.
17. In North Darfur, on 2 January, a group of approximately 100 armed men on
camels and horses attacked internally displaced persons in Biery village near
Kutum, North Darfur, killing seven people. On 17 January, following a dispute over
land ownership, an undetermined number of armed militia in about 10 land cruisers
and 3 armoured personnel carriers attacked farmers in the Susuwa area near
Zamzam Camp in North Darfur, killing one civilian and abducting three others. On
28 January, elements of the Rapid Support Forces attacked the village of Musbat
near Um Baru, killing three civilians. On 30 January, Rapid Support Forces attacked

15-02340

5/19

S/2015/141

the villages of Hashaba, Um Sidir, Basheen and Mellit in North Darfur. One civilian
death was confirmed in the incident.
18. On 23 November, four unidentified men abducted four female internally
displaced persons in the vicinity of Labado, South Darfur, raped two of them and
physically assaulted and severely injured the two others. Upon their release, on the
same day, the victims received medical treatment at the UNAMID team site in
Labado. On 4 December, two female internally displaced persons were physically
attacked and one raped by two unidentified armed men in the Um Kudus area near
the internally displaced persons’ camp in Kalma in South Darfur. On 5 December,
two unidentified armed men fired on a group of internally displaced persons from
the Al Salam camp in the outskirts of Nyala, South Darfur. One internally displaced
person was killed in the incident.
Local violence and intercommunal conflicts
19. Intercommunal clashes over access to land, water, pastures and other resources
continued during the reporting period, although the level of intensity decreased. A
total of eight confrontations, with 40 fatalities, were recorded as compared to
11 confrontations and 377 confirmed deaths during the previous period. With the
beginning of the dry season, the risk of clashes between Arab nomads migrating
southward and sedentary communities harvesting their crops increased.
20. Disputes over cattle grazing or land use, in some cases involving internally
displaced persons, occurred in East and West Darfur. On 20 November, Abbala
tribesmen clashed with members of the Zaghawa internally displaced persons ’
community in Tabaldia, near Labado, East Darfur. The incident, which was
reportedly triggered by a cattle-grazing incident, resulted in the death of one Abbala
tribesman. Later the same day, a group of armed Abbala tribesmen aboard gunmounted vehicles set fire to a number of houses in Tabaldia and nearby Chawa
villages, reportedly resulting in the death of two members of the Zaghawa
community and the looting of cattle. In a separate incident involving Abbala and
Zaghawa internally displaced persons, a renewal of tensions resulted in attacks by
elements of both tribes on 19, 22 and 23 November in parts of Labado over delays
in blood money (diya) payments. In West Darfur, on 3 December, Abbala nomads
attacked Massalit farmers in the vicinity of Azerni village near El Geneina as a
result of a dispute over land use, resulting in the death of four farmers and burning
of 14 houses.
21. Another incident involving clashes between tribesmen and internall y displaced
persons occurred in Central Darfur on 3 December when approximately 50 armed
Bargo tribesmen (mainly from the Misseriya tribe) blocked all the routes leading
into the Hamidiya internally displaced persons’ camp. The incident related to an
attempted robbery against a Bargo tribesman on 2 December, allegedly perpetrated
by internally displaced persons from the Hamidiya camp (predominantly of the Fur
ethnicity). The Bargo tribesmen mobilized and attacked the camp on the same night,
killing two and injuring four internally displaced persons. The incident raised
tensions in the camp significantly.
22. In West Darfur, crop destruction and cattle grazing on cultivated land resulted
in an attack on 2 December on the Karya returnee village near Masteri by a group of
approximately 60 armed Arabs. The incident resulted in the killing of one villager,
looting of property and partial burning of the village. A similar pattern of attacks

6/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

was reported in Kadadol returnee village on 3 and 5 December, when armed Ar abs,
mainly from the Awlad Ziad and Najaa subtribes, attacked Deliba following disputes
between farmers and nomads.
23. Tensions remained high with respect to the conflict between the Ma ’alia and
the Southern Rizeigat in East Darfur. While no major incident occurred during the
period under review, the reported theft of 320 sheep belonging to the Southern
Rizeigat by the Ma’alia in Birghit on 13 January nearly triggered another round of
fighting. The incident resulted in the death of one member of the Southe rn Rizeigat
community and injury to seven others. With support from the Government of the
Sudan, leaders from both tribes intervened to stem tensions and facilitated an
agreement to avoid retaliatory attacks.
Criminality and banditry
24. Criminality remained a significant security concern for the population in
Darfur. A total of 208 crimes were recorded by UNAMID during the reporting
period in comparison to 284 cases during the previous period. The most common
crimes included robberies and theft (56 incidents), armed attacks (40 incidents),
murder (35 incidents), assault (18 incidents), carjackings (17 incidents), sexual and
gender-based violence crimes (14 incidents), abductions (11 incidents), cattlerustling (10 incidents), arson (3 incidents) and destruction of property (4 incidents).
A total of 68 incidents were recorded in North Darfur, 48 in West Darfur, 38 in
South Darfur, 27 in East Darfur and 27 in Central Darfur. Most of the suspected
perpetrators, which included members of militias and armed elements, were not
arrested or brought to justice due to the absence of Government security authorities
in some villages. The slow and inefficient justice system also continued to
contribute to a culture of impunity in Darfur.
25. On 3 February, unknown armed men aboard eight land cruisers attacked the
market in Mellit, North Darfur, and killed 10 civilians and injured 13 others in an
alleged robbery incident. On 13 January, in Abu Karinka, about 200 armed Ma ’alia
men aboard three vehicles attacked Rizeigat herders in Beg hit village, injuring
seven of them and stealing approximately 1,000 goats. On 5 February, unknown
armed men in a land cruiser shot at Zaghawa herders and robbed them of
approximately 600 goats in Disa village, North Darfur. Several of th e alleged
incidents occurred within the peripheries of internally displaced persons ’ camps,
targeting those communities. This included a number of sexual and gender-based
violence crimes perpetrated by armed men against internally displaced women and
children. On 15 January, for example, an unidentified man on a camel reportedly
raped a 12-year-old schoolgirl in Tina village, North Darfur.

B.

Humanitarian situation
26. The increase in hostilities between the forces of the Government of the Sudan
and the armed movements in several regions of Darfur resulted in the further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and the further displacement of tens of
thousands of civilians. Humanitarian partners confirmed that close to 39,000 people
have been displaced since December 2014. Reports of significant additional
displacement in Rokero locality, North Jebel Marra, could not be verified due to
long-standing access restrictions imposed by Government authorities.

15-02340

7/19

S/2015/141

27. The majority of the verified new internally displaced persons have moved into
established camps in close proximity to El Fasher, allowing for basic humanitarian
assistance to be provided from existing contingency stocks. Response to new needs
has, however, been more challenging in Tawilla and Nertiti and for the
approximately 4,500 internally displaced persons sheltering in the safe haven
established by UNAMID directly adjacent to its team site at Um Baru, a remote
location with a small pre-existing humanitarian presence. Nonetheless, by early
February, basic assistance was being provided in all areas understood to be hosting
newly internally displaced persons, apart from the largely inaccessible Rokero
locality. By 4 February, humanitarian partners had arranged four United Nations
Humanitarian Air Service flights to Um Baru, providing nutrition, water and
sanitation supplies and basic household items. Additional critically required food
and nutrition supplies are expected to arrive in the area shortly, at which point the
majority of the key needs of the high number of displaced persons residing at Um
Baru are expected to be largely covered.
28. The latest wave of displacement is part of a broader deterioration in the
humanitarian situation in Darfur. More than 450,000 people were newly displaced in
2014 — the highest level of displacement in a single year since 2004. Of this
number, at least 300,000 people have remained in displacement, pushing the overall
estimated number of internally displaced persons in Darfur above 2.5 million. The
volume of new arrivals in camps and other locations has greatly increased assistance
and protection needs, further stretching an already severely underresourced aid
operation. Just 55 per cent of funding requirements set out in the 2014 Sudan
strategic response plan were covered by the end of the year ($545 million of
$995 million).

C.

Operating environment
29. The operating environment in Darfur continued to present significant
challenges for the implementation of the mission’s mandate and for programme
delivery by humanitarian actors. The main challenges included attacks and threats
against personnel, the carjacking and theft of vehicles and movement restrictions
imposed by the Government of the Sudan and the armed movements.
30. UNAMID continued to experience attacks from armed groups, particularly in
the areas between Khor Abeche and Menawashei in South Darfur and Labado in
East Darfur. Four attacks on UNAMID personnel occurred during the reporting
period. On 12 December, a group of about 20 unidentified armed men attacked a
UNAMID patrol in Wadi Korno near Khor Abeche, South Darfur, resulting in
injuries to three peacekeepers and the theft of two vehicles, one weapon and other
equipment. On 19 December, a group of unidentified men attacked a UNAMID
patrol in Um Zeifa near Labado, East Darfur. Although the patrol members
successfully repelled the attack, two sustained gunshot wounds. On 6 January,
11 unidentified armed men attacked a UNAMID military patrol in Burumburum
near Khor Abeche. Two of the attackers were killed in an exchange of fire with the
patrol, while three were reported to have died subsequently as a result of their
injuries. On the same day, 15 unidentified armed men attacked a UNAMID patrol
while it was collecting water at a borehole in Habilla. T he attackers disarmed the
soldiers and seized two UNAMID vehicles, as well as weapons and other property.
The two vehicles were subsequently recovered with the assistance of SAF and

8/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

returned to UNAMID. UNAMID has conducted an investigation into the inciden t.
Appropriate actions will be taken with a view to ensuring that patrols are not
vulnerable to such attacks in the future.
31. On 29 January, seven unidentified armed men stopped a UNAMID bus in the
vicinity of the Zalingei supercamp and abducted two international contractual
workers, who remain in captivity.
32. UNAMID continued to face restrictions of movement by the Government of
the Sudan and the armed movements. During this period, UNAMID land movements
were restricted on 63 occasions, compared with 72 restrictions during the previous
reporting period. The Government imposed a total of 59 restrictions, while SLA/AW
imposed three and LJM one. Restrictions were highest in North Darfur, including
the Thabit area, as well as South and East Darfur. The mo st common reasons given
for the restrictions were alleged security concerns in the particular area. During the
reporting period, the Government of the Sudan refused clearance for 28 out of
3,665 planned UNAMID flights.
33. The vast majority of humanitarian access requests during the period under
review were cleared by the Government of the Sudan. Since mid -November 2014,
the Government approved 139 out of 150 requests. This is similar to the approval
rate during the previous reporting period. However, of the 139 humanitarian
missions for which access was granted, 12 were later cancelled, postponed or only
partially completed due to restrictions imposed at the local level. In addition, in
several cases where access was approved, restrictions were imposed on t he
participation of staff or personnel from certain sectors. Furthermore, the locations to
which access was denied have been largely cut off from international assistance for
several years, including parts of Jebel Marra, localities in Central Darfur and S harq
Jebel Marra in South Darfur.
34. On 21 December, armed elements of the SLA/AW surrounded the UNAMID
team site in Sortony, North Darfur, and demanded the handover of two contracted
vehicles that they claimed to belong to companies affiliated with the Government of
the Sudan. Following negotiations, UNAMID representatives declined to comply
with the armed element’s demands and they withdrew from the area, warning
UNAMID not to move outside its team site. UNAMID troops took a defensive
posture and after further negotiations with the SLA/AW leadership, UNAMID
patrols in Sortony resumed on 24 December.
35. A total of 46 criminal acts targeting United Nations and UNAMID personnel
occurred during the reporting period compared to 31 during the last reporting
period. Carjacking and the theft of United Nations and UNAMID vehicles remained
particularly common in El Fasher, North Darfur, and Nyala, South Darfur, due to the
continued presence of armed elements and criminal gangs in the area. A total of
14 successful and five attempted carjackings of UNAMID and United Nations
vehicles occurred during this period, with two vehicles recovered with the assistance
of the Government. In addition, two car thefts and 25 incidents of robbery and
break-ins were reported at United Nations and UNAMID premises. All cases were
placed under investigation by UNAMID and the Government of the Sudan. In one of
the cases involving the alleged theft of a UNAMID vehicle from the Zalingei
supercamp, eight of the mission’s national staff suspected of the crime were arrested
by the Sudanese police between 21 January and 9 February. The UNAMID Legal
Unit visited the detained staff members on 11 February and found them healthy and

15-02340

9/19

S/2015/141

well treated. All eight were released on bond by 14 February. In order to minimize
the risks of increased criminality, UNAMID restricted the movement of personnel in
El Fasher and Nyala. While addressing the security of personnel, these measures
significantly constrained outreach and programmatic aspects of the mission’s work.
36. During the reporting period, the Government of the Sudan issued 523 visas for
UNAMID personnel, including 12 civilians, 141 military, 236 police, 131 contractors
and three consultants. As at 26 January, 21 visa requests were pending for five
civilian personnel, seven military and nine contractors.

III. Achievements and impact of the mission
A.

Peace process
Direct negotiations with the armed movements
37. In collaboration with the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
UNAMID continued to engage the Government of the Sudan, the Darfur armed
movements and other relevant stakeholders on how to ensure the success of the
direct talks between the parties and thereby achieve a cessation of hostilities as a
basis for a credible and inclusive national dialogue. To enhance the capacity of the
armed movements to engage in direct talks with the Government of the Sudan,
UNAMID organized a workshop on: negotiation skills, ceasefire and the cessation
of hostilities in Addis Ababa from 17 to 20 November, with the participation of
30 field commanders and representatives of the JEM/Gibril and SLA/MM armed
movements.
38. The direct talks between the Government of the Sudan and JEM/Gibril and
SLA/MM, led by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, were held in
Addis Ababa from 23 to 30 November. The mediation was supported by UNAMID,
my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD).
39. From 20 to 24 January, the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
the Acting Joint Special Representative/Joint Chief Mediator (JSR/JCM) and my
Special Envoy resumed diplomatic shuttling to Doha, Ndjamena, Khartoum, and
Addis Ababa to brief regional leaders on the mediation work and to seek support
and consensus on the way forward in discussions on the cessation of hostilities.
They also met with representatives of the Darfur armed movements in Addis Ababa
on 29 January.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
40. The sixth session of the Darfur Council of the Darfur Regional Authority,
which was held in El Fasher from 8 to 23 December, highlighted the recent progress
made in the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. During the
reporting period, the Justice and Equality Movement-Sudan (JEM-Sudan) and the
Government of the Sudan continued to implement the power-sharing provisions of
the agreement. On 3 December, President Bashir appointed Sadiq Yousef Zakaria
and Mohammed Ahmad Hario, both of JEM-Sudan, as Minister of Agriculture and
Minister of Social Care, respectively, of the Darfur Regional Authority. Bahar
Abdelgadir was also appointed as Chairperson of the Darfur Nomad and Herder

10/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

Development Council and Nahar Osman Nahar as Chairperson of the Darfu r Social
Welfare Fund. Ten additional members of the movement were appointed to the
Darfur Council, with one given the post of Deputy Speaker.
41. From 2 to 20 November, in collaboration with the World Food Programme
(WFP), the United Nations Development Programme, the Ceasefire Commission
and other partners, UNAMID provided technical and logistics support to the Sudan
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Commission for the demobilization
of ex-combatants from JEM-Sudan and affiliated movements at the demobilization
site in Turbo, North Darfur. A total of 534 ex-combatants were demobilized,
including 287 from JEM-Sudan, 215 from the Sudan Liberation Army-Mustafa
Terab (SLA/Mustafa Terab), 28 from the Sudan Liberation Army-Mother
(SLA/Mother) and 4 from the Justice and Equality Movement-Peace (JEM/Peace).
On 22 December, as part of the final security arrangements on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, the Darfur Security Arrangements Implementation
Commission of the Darfur Regional Authority launched the integration of
combatants from LJM in South and East Darfur into SAF and the Sudanese police
forces. According to the Darfur Security Arrangements Implementation
Commission, some 4,664 LJM combatants voluntarily participated in the integrat ion
process. On 6 February, the integration of LJM into SAF began in West Darfur.
42. On 29 January, UNAMID was informed by JEM-Sudan that, to date, since
acceding to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, only 13 out of 21 of its
prisoners had been released. However, no progress was made on the release of the
remaining 35 prisoners. A further 17 members of JEM-Sudan abducted by JEMGibril remain in captivity in reportedly very difficult conditions.
43. As part of the first phase of a three-phased programme under the Darfur
Regional Development Fund, the Government of the Sudan and the Darfur Regional
Authority continued to finance strategic infrastructure projects, including the
reconstruction of roads between Nyala, El Fasher and Kutum, and the Abu Jabra
railway, as well as 315 other projects currently being implemented. In addition,
Darfur has been connected to the national power grid and the construction at the
airports in Zalingei and El Daein has been completed.
44. The ninth meeting of the Implementation Follow-up Commission of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur was convened in Nyala, South Darfur, on 12 January,
with Ahmed bin Abdullah Al Mahmoud, Deputy Prime Minister of Qatar, as
Chairperson, and including the participation of the signatories to the agreement, the
Government of the Sudan, LJM and JEM-Sudan and UNAMID, along with
representatives of other relevant stakeholders. While noting delays in the
implementation of the Doha Document, particularly with respect to the final security
arrangements, the participants reiterated their full commitment to it.
45. Following the provision by the Government of Qatar of seed -funding for the
Darfur internal dialogue and consultation process at the end of December, the
process was launched in El Fasher on 25 January, in Nyala on 27 January, in
El Geneina on 1 February, in Zalingei on 4 February and in El Daein on 8 February.
The process commenced with strong messages of support for dialogue,
reconciliation and compromise from federal and State government officials, as well
as members of civil society and community leaders. Depending on funding
availability, the process will involve community-based dialogues in the 64 localities
of Darfur, as well as in Khartoum, and among refugee and diaspora communities.

15-02340

11/19

S/2015/141

The process aims to consolidate peace, promote confidence -building and encourage
reconciliation, as outlined in the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

B.

Protection of civilians
Provision of physical protection
46. The mission continued to maintain a visible security presence in support of
humanitarian activities and in building confidence among civilians to engage in
socioeconomic activities. Protection activities continued to be conducted for
displaced populations in camps and in the vicinity of team sites, villages, towns,
markets and areas of return.
47. During the reporting period, UNAMID military personnel conducted
15,748 patrols, including 8,720 routine patrols, 2,980 night patrols, 2,353 logistical
and administrative escorts, 1,068 short-range patrols and 356 long-range patrols as
well as 271 humanitarian escorts. UNAMID police continued conducting patrols
with the support of formed police units and military components. Police patrols
placed greater emphasis on interaction with communities a nd assessments of the
security situation in internally displaced persons’ camps. In addition, a total of
8,145 police patrols, including 4,144 confidence-building patrols to internally
displaced persons’ camps, 3,454 patrols in villages, towns and markets,
178 firewood, grass or farming patrols and 15 commercial route patrols were
conducted. Of these patrols, 926 were medium range, 354 were long range and
6,865 were short range.
48. Following a rise in tensions in August 2014, as a result of a plan by the local
authorities to conduct a cordon and search operation within the Kalma internally
displaced persons’ camp in South Darfur, during the period under review UNAMID
enhanced physical protection measures for the internally displaced population
through the establishment of a temporary operating base in the area. In addition,
UNAMID continued to engage with the Government of the Sudan to uphold human
rights and humanitarian law while implementing security measures, which also
served to reduce tensions in the area.
49. On 12 December, fire engulfed the Labado internally displaced persons ’ camp,
resulting in the destruction of approximately 400 dwellings and the camp ’s market.
The quick response of UNAMID to extinguish the fire saved lives. Injured camp
residents were treated at the mission’s Labado team site level one clinic.
50. Following clashes on 2 January in Tawilla, North Darfur, UNAMID provided
initial support to newly displaced people, including the provision of water, food
rations and basic health care in the Argo internally displaced persons’ camp.
Humanitarian partners, including the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and international non-governmental organizations provided shelter, food
items and medical care.
51. On 14 January, internally displaced persons set-up camp around the Um Baru
team site, North Darfur, in search of safety and protection due to ongoing conflict in
the area. The numbers steadily grew over the subsequent weeks, and by early
February, approximately 4,500 people were estimated to be accommodated at the
site. UNAMID and humanitarian partners estimate that a further 20,000 persons in
the surrounding areas are in need of protection. UNAMID is working closely with

12/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

humanitarian actors in Um Baru to provide tents, water storage tanks, food, water
and medical services. UNAMID established a “gender desk” at the site to help
address the concerns of displaced women.
52. Also in North Darfur, on 20 January, approximately 150 civilians, mostly
women and children, sought refuge in an area close to the UNAMID Sortony team
site. The civilians expressed their fear of an imminent attack on their villages by the
forces of the Government of the Sudan. UNAMID provided the displaced persons
with tents and water and liaised with humanitarian partners in order to ensure the
provision of more durable assistance. On 21 January, the majority of displaced
persons were able to return to their villages.
53. UNAMID continued to address the threat posed by explosive hazards through
the clearance of suspected areas and ammunition safety management operations. A
total of 165 items of unexploded ordnance were recovered from 11 villages. Of the
more than three million pieces of expired small arms ammunition at the Zamzam
team site, 478,500 items were safely destroyed. More than 62,000 civilians were
directly provided with small arms safety and explosive ordnance risk education,
while radio plays conveyed safety messages to an (estimated) additional
200,000 civilians. The refurbishment of weapons and ammunition storage facilities
in El Fasher continued, with further assistance planned for the other states. In
addition, on 22 December, UNAMID defused two 60 mm mortar bombs near Angara
and “old” Labado, South Darfur, and conducted a complete sanitization of the area,
clearing it of unexploded ordnance.
Logistical and security support to humanitarian operations
54. In the light of the fragile security environment in North and Central Darfur,
UNAMID worked closely with humanitarian agencies to access r emote locations,
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance, provide escorts and logistical
support, carry out integrated joint missions and contribute to area security.
UNAMID provided 173 humanitarian escorts throughout Darfur and, together with
the United Nations country team, facilitated one medical evacuation for critically
injured internally displaced persons from the Hamidiya camp to Khartoum.
55. UNAMID also airlifted 1,381 kgs of essential medicine for the World Health
Organization (WHO) to Labado, Muhajeria and El Daein, East Darfur. On
19 January, UNAMID provided containers to UNHCR for non-food items for
eventual distribution to the Kalma internally displaced persons ’ camp, including
500 plastic sheeting materials, 1,000 blankets, 500 jerry cans and 500 kitchen sets.
The joint UNAMID-WFP logistics operation facilitated the transfer of 4,645 kgs of
food to areas in dire need throughout Darfur. Following the recent carjacking of
loaded WFP trucks conveying food, the mission provided escorts for 17 WFP
convoys and a total of 180 trucks.
Protective environment
56. During the reporting period, UNAMID documented 83 new incidents,
involving 191 victims (10 minors), of human rights violations and abuses compared
to 210 incidents involving 406 victims during the last reporting period. The mission
verified 45 cases of human rights violations and abuses, while the remaining
38 cases, though unconfirmed, were highly likely to have occurred based on
corroborated information from various sources. Of the 83 cases, 29 cases, involving

15-02340

13/19

S/2015/141

52 victims, were allegedly perpetrated by the Government of the Sudan and
affiliated entities (police, Rapid Support Forces, Popular Defence Force, Border
Guards and SAF). In the remaining 54 cases, victims described the perpetrators as
unidentified armed men or armed Arab men. Thirteen cases, involving 34 victims
(2 minors), were of violations of the right to life; 13 cases, involving 34 victims
(2 minors), were violations of the right to physical integrity, including 3 cases and
10 victims of abduction, while sexual and gender-based violence accounted for
12 cases involving 26 victims (6 minors). One incident of attempted rape involving
one victim was recorded.
57. During the reporting period, national law enforcement a uthorities did not
follow up on the majority of human rights violations brought to them, thus
undermining the protection environment in Darfur. Out of the 83 recorded incidents,
victims reported 46 to Government of the Sudan authorities. Investigations wer e
initiated in only 13 of the reported cases, resulting in 10 arrests. Out of the
10 arrests, four persons are currently awaiting trial. One suspect was released for
lack of evidence. Another suspect was released following a mediated settlement
with the victim. UNAMID has not been able to obtain information from the
Government on the two remaining cases. In the remaining 33 incidents, UNAMID
was informed by witnesses and/or victims that no action was taken by Government
authorities to investigate the cases. The reasons given for the absence of any
investigation include the non-existence of police stations, particularly in Kutum,
Tawilla, Korma and Saraf Omra, North Darfur, the lack of knowledge of the
perpetrators’ identity and lack of police and judicial capacity. Victims and their
families also cited a lack of willingness by law enforcement agencies to investigate
in other cases. As part of its work to engage the Government in improving the
criminal justice capacity in Darfur, UNAMID is supporting a two -month programme
in Khartoum to train 50 lawyers from Darfur as prosecutors.
58. The implementation of 25 community-based labour-intensive projects for atrisk youth, initiated in 2013-2014, has been completed. A total of 15 new projects,
which were approved for the 2014-2015 budget year, will provide vocational
training to 1,200 youth and improved access to health, education, livelihoods, water
and sanitation for 40,000 community members.
59. Two paralegal centres in the Abu Shouk internally displaced person s’ camp in
North Darfur and the Kalma internally displaced persons’ camp in South Darfur
were rehabilitated in order to provide suitable venues for community-related
activities, such as the provision of legal advice and referral (pathway) guidance for
camp residents. As part of the UNAMID strategy to stem intercommunal conflict, on
15 December, a road map to enhance the capacity and the skills of 80 rural court
judges in mediating land and resource-related conflicts was approved at a meeting
between the mission and the Sudanese Judiciary in Khartoum.
60. On 16 December 2014, the mission received the non-official English
translation of a summary of the report of the Attorney General appointed for a
special court on the allegations of mass rape in Thabit villa ge, North Darfur. It
concluded no victims, witnesses, documents or other evidence were found in Thabit
village to support a case for rape. UNAMID continues to face restrictions in its
effort to access Thabit village for further investigation.

14/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

C.

Local conflict mediation
61. The reporting period saw a number of examples of interventions by the
authorities and traditional community mediators, with the mission ’s facilitation, to
prevent or resolve violent intercommunal conflict. Two of the most significa nt
interventions related to the conflict between the Ma ’alia and the Southern Rizeigat
in East Darfur and the resolution of the situation between the Hamidiya internally
displaced persons’ camp and the Bargo in Central Darfur.
62. UNAMID continued to engage with government authorities at the federal and
state levels, the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission of the Darfur
Regional Authority in North and East Darfur, as well as in Khartoum, to energize
the reconciliation process between the Southern Rizeigat and the Ma’alia. On 29 and
30 November, the mission facilitated two preparatory workshops for the Ma ’alia in
Abu Karinka and the Southern Rizeigat in El Daein. These workshops were aimed at
facilitating dialogue, adopting unified positions and defusing lasting tensions
between the two tribes after the failure of the Al Fula reconciliation conference in
June 2014.
63. On 22 December, representatives of UNAMID, the Darfur Regional Authority
and the Kasha Centre for Peace and Security organized a pea ce forum, which was
attended by prominent personalities from Darfur, officials of the Darfur Regional
Authority, officials of the Government of the Sudan and representatives of the
Ma’alia and Southern Rizeigat. The communities reaffirmed their commitment to
the cessation of hostilities agreement reached in Al Taweisha, North Darfur, in
August 2013, and agreed to participate in a Government-proposed reconciliation
conference scheduled for early 2015.
64. Progress was made in Central Darfur in resolving a dispute between residents
of the Hamidiya internally displaced persons’ camp and the Bargo. On
19 December, UNAMID and the Peaceful Coexistence Committee organized and
facilitated a mediation meeting between internally displaced persons and
representatives of the Bargo to resolve the conflict. UNAMID immediately
increased patrols in the camp and surrounding areas and held a series of separate
meetings with the native administrations of both groups, the local Fur leader and the
Chairperson of the Peaceful Coexistence Committee on 3, 10, 15 and 16 December
2014 and 19 and 23 January 2015 to encourage peaceful resolution of the conflict.
Although the Committee recommended compensation for the injured internally
displaced persons as a goodwill gesture to peacefully resolve the conflict, the parties
have yet to agree upon this proposal.
65. In another mediation effort, on 18 and 19 November, UNAMID conducted a
field mission to Tawilla to engage with community members, internally displaced
persons and their leaders on the release of three Zaghawa hostages abducted on
11 November by Arab nomads from Umjalbakh near Kutum, North Darfur. On
27 December, in the Rehade El Berdi locality, South Darfur, the mission, together
with the Minister of Industry and a mediation committee, facilitated a breakthrough
in negotiations between the Ta’aisha and Salamat that enabled the latter group to
return to its place of origin.
66. On 26 November, in cooperation with the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) and the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission, UNAMID launched a Darfur-wide campaign entitled “No Child

15-02340

15/19

S/2015/141

Soldiers — Protect Darfur” in Miseriya, North Darfur. The Miseriya location was
chosen following a surge in inter- and intra-tribal clashes in North Darfur in which
children were used as fighters. Sheikh Musa Hilal, a prominent tribal leader in
North Darfur, and other community figures welcomed the initiative. On
17 December, Hilal issued an order prohibiting communities under his leadership
from using children in ethnic clashes. This was followed by the initiation of a
community-based strategic plan against violations, endorsed by individual leaders
from a number of tribes, including the Northern Rizeigat/Abbala, Beni Hussein, Fur,
Tama, Gimir and Awlad in various areas of North Darfur. The campaign was
subsequently launched in El Fasher on 9 December, with plans to spread it to other
parts of Darfur.
67. The mission maintained engagement with local stakeholders to encourage
peaceful coexistence between farming and pastoral communities during the
agricultural season and strengthened joint committees to promote intercommunal
dialogue on practical ways to share access to natural resources and avoid clashes. To
that end, 19 meetings were held in all states of Darfur and eight deep-field missions
were conducted to meet with community leaders in hotspot areas in all the states.
Discussions focused on the progress of the agricultural season and the promotion of
peaceful coexistence between farmers and nomads. As a follow-up, UNAMID and a
local non-governmental organization conducted a meeting to promote peaceful
coexistence between farmers and nomads in Fata Borno, North Darfur, on
23 November, which focused on improving inter-tribal relations and protecting
farmers during the agricultural season.
68. In December 2014, as part of its efforts to provide continued support to reduce
conflicts between farmers and pastoralists emanating from limited water resources,
UNAMID commenced the implementation of the Darfur Capacity and
Peacebuilding project, funded by the Government of Japan and implemented by the
Nomadic Development Council. The project includes the excavation and
rehabilitation of 100 natural water sources, nine of which have been completed. The
project will increase access to and availability of water for pastoral communities
and potentially reduce conflict between farmers and nomads resulting from a lack
thereof.

IV. Financial aspects
69. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/261, appropriated the amount of
$1,153,611,300 for the maintenance of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur for the period from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015.
70. As at 10 February 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNAMID
Special Account amounted to $353.3 million, and the total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations amounted to $2,735.2 million. As at
the same date, reimbursement to contributing Governments for troop and formed
police costs and for contingent-owned equipment costs has been made for the period
up to 31 August 2014 and 30 September 2014, in accordance with the quarterly
payment schedule.

16/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

V. Observations and recommendations
71. The launching by the Government of “Operation Decisive Summer” against
non-signatory rebel movements and offensive operations by those movements has
had a decidedly negative effect on the security situation, particularly in North and
Central Darfur. The homes, villages and livelihoods of innocent civilians have been
destroyed.
72. I call on the Government and non-signatory movements to engage in
negotiations for the cessation of hostilities, without preconditions, and to address
their political differences peacefully at the negotiation table. They must stop the
violence for the sake of the innocent civilians affected.
73. While there have been some positive developments in community-level
reconciliation processes in North, East and South Darfur, I am concerned that
ongoing military operations are undermining social cohesion a nd that, with weapons
so readily available, communities will continue to resort to violence to ensure access
to natural resources.
74. I call on the Government, in particular, to exercise its sovereign
responsibilities in ensuring the protection of the citizens of the Sudan. UNAMID
and the United Nations country team stand ready to provide assistance in building
the capacity of the Government and local communities to fight impunity, ensure
accountability for attacks and human rights abuses and to assist the Government and
local communities to address the root causes of violence.
75. The stalemate in the peace talks between the Government of the Sudan and the
armed movements is regrettable. It is essential that all parties dedicate themselves to
achieving a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The armed movements must focus on
achieving gains on substantive issues rather than seeking a new platform or peace
process. I call on the parties to exercise flexibility and goodwill in resuming
negotiations aimed at achieving a comprehensive and sustainable peace.
76. Civilians in Darfur continue to suffer human rights violations, including
through the destruction of homes and property, displacements and sexual and
gender-based violence. The range of violations illustrates both the volatility of the
situation in Darfur and the persistence and prominence of perpetrators within the
forces of the Government and the armed movements.
77. I am deeply concerned about the continued threats and attacks on UNAMID
and on humanitarian and contracted personnel. In particular, I condemn the four
armed attacks on the mission’s peacekeepers during the reporting period, the
numerous carjacking incidents in El Fasher and Nyala and the kidnapping of two of
the mission’s contracted personnel, who remain in captivity. I call upon the
Government of the Sudan to swiftly investigate and bring those responsible for these
actions to justice.
78. UNAMID continues to encounter restrictions of movement, mostly in North
and South Darfur, in most cases imposed by Government security agencies, but also
by the armed movements. I would like to reiterate my appeal to the Government and
the armed movements to allow unrestricted access to UNAMID and humanitarian
partners to enable them to effectively implement their mandated tasks. In this
regard, I deeply regret that UNAMID has not been able to regain access to Thabit to

15-02340

17/19

S/2015/141

continue to investigate persistent allegations that a mass rape occurred in the
village.
79. I commend the parties to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur for the
progress made in implementing the provisions of the agreement, despite significant
delays. I encourage the parties to take further concerted and concrete steps to
provide the people of Darfur with the peace dividends they expected when the Doha
Document was signed in 2011. I welcome the support of the Government of Qatar
for the conduct of the Darfur internal dialogue and consultation process, which
provides a good opportunity for engagement in a dialogue process that can address
the root causes of conflict. The process must therefore be embraced by all Darfuris.
I call upon other donors and the international community more generally to fulfil
their pledges and to contribute financially towards the successful implementation of
the process.
80. In conclusion, I would like to thank the Acting Joint Special
Representative/Joint Chief Mediator, Abiodun Bashua, and all the women and men
of UNAMID, the United Nations and the non-governmental organizations, who, in
the face of considerable adversity, continue their relentless efforts to improve the
lives of the people of Darfur. I also commend my Special Envoy for the Sudan and
South Sudan, Haile Menkerios, and Presidents Thabo Mbeki and Abdulsalami
Abubakar of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel for their efforts to
resolve the Darfur conflict.

18/19

15-02340

S/2015/141

15-02340

19/19
