A /68/PV.63

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

63rd plenary meeting

Monday, 9 December 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beck (Solomon
Islands), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/68/71 and
A/68/71/Add.1)
Report on the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole (A/68/82)
Report on the work of the United Nations Openended Informal Consultative Process (A/68/159)
Letter from the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Openended Informal Working Group to the President
of the General Assembly (A/68/399)
(b) Sustainable fisheries, including through the
1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating
to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks, and related instruments
Draft resolution (A/68/L.19)
Ms. Tan (Singapore): My delegation would first
like to thank the Secretary-General for his reports on
agenda item 76, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea”. We would also like to thank Ambassador Eden

Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell
of New Zealand for their excellent work in coordinating
the informal consultations on the draft resolution on
oceans and the law of the sea (A/68/L.18) and the
draft resolution on sustainable fisheries (A/68/L.19),
respectively. We also wish to thank the Director and
staff of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law
of the Sea for her unstinting support of the work of
Member States in relation to the two draft resolutions.
We note that two more countries have ratified
or acceded to the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), bringing the number of
States parties to 166. While much of the Convention
reflects customary international law, my delegation
welcomes the latest additions, as they bring us a
step closer to the goal of universal participation in
UNCLOS, which the Assembly has set for itself in
paragraph 3 of draft resolution A/68/L.18. Why is
the goal of universal participation in the Convention
important? For Singapore, it is the Convention’s place
in the international legal order that makes that goal an
important one, and we should all strive to achieve it.
The draft resolution recognizes that UNCLOS is
“the legal framework within which all activities in the
oceans and seas must be carried out”. When it was
signed 31 years ago, it created a new global order for the
world’s oceans and seas. It established the principles
that underpin the actions of all users of the oceans and
seas. Those principles created a framework of rights
and duties, which has enabled a balance to be achieved
between the various competing uses of the oceans and
seas, while striving to ensure the protection of the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-60748 (E)

*1360748*

A/68/PV.63

marine environment. Thirty-one years later, UNCLOS
remains the overarching framework for governing the
world’s oceans and seas. It is for that reason that the
goal of universal participation is so crucial.
Today, with developments in science and
technology, more uses of the world’s oceans and seas
are emerging. The world is gearing up to move towards
the exploitation of the mineral resources of the deep
seabed. Exploratory work on ocean fertilization and the
use of the oceans and seas for capturing and storing
carbon has commenced. At the same time, the world’s
oceans and seas and the biodiversity within them are
facing challenges as they struggle to cope with issues
such as the acidification of oceans and marine debris.
Indeed, a process has been established within the
General Assembly for work to be undertaken on the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity beyond national jurisdiction, with a view
to deciding on the development of an international
instrument under UNCLOS before the end of the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly.
In considering the issue of the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity in areas
beyond national jurisdiction, it is crucial that we
do not lose sight of the principles, rights and duties
enshrined in the Convention. That also holds true in
seeking to deal with other emerging issues, such as the
acidification of oceans and the possible incorporation
of oceans into the sustainable development goals. In the
face of such issues, it has become more imperative than
ever to maintain the overarching framework established
by UNCLOS. While some of those issues may not
have been specifically dealt with in UNCLOS, it is the
Convention that holds the key to the way forward.
The principles, rights and duties enshrined in
UNCLOS will allow us to address those issues in
a holistic manner that maintains the balance that
UNCLOS has achieved between the various uses of the
oceans and seas. The balance that has been achieved
in the Convention has been primarily responsible for
the peaceful order that we have seen in the use of the
oceans since 1982. That balance was a hard-fought one,
and we must strive to maintain it so as not to upset the
peaceful order that has reigned in our world’s oceans
and seas since the inception of the Convention.
To that end, the Assembly has recognized the
unified character of UNCLOS and the vital importance
of preserving its integrity. Therefore, the application of
the principles and provisions of the Convention cannot be
2/23

09/12/2013

undertaken in a selective manner, emphasizing certain
aspects while underplaying other aspects. In recent
years, there has been a tendency within some forums to
examine technical, scientific or environmental aspects
to the exclusion of other principles, rights or duties
enshrined in UNCLOS. While the focus on technical,
scientific or environmental aspects is laudable, it
should not come at the expense of other aspects of
the Convention. Such an approach risks undermining
the balance that has been achieved within UNCLOS.
Rather, the Convention must be looked at as a whole.
Singapore maintains a strong and firm commitment
to the Convention. We are a small island nation with
major maritime interests. Trade is our economic life
blood. It is worth noting that 90 per cent of the world’s
trade is carried by sea and half of that passes through
the Straits of Malacca and Singapore. Therefore, we all
share a common interest in ensuring that trade continues
to flow smoothly. Adherence to the principles, rights
and duties enshrined in UNCLOS, in particular those
related to navigation and passage, are crucial for the
smooth flow of goods.
In dealing with the emerging issues confronting
the world’s oceans and seas, Singapore is committed
to ensuring the continued maintenance of the
peaceful order in the world’s oceans and seas through
the application of the principles, rights and duties
enshrined in UNCLOS. It is our firm belief that it is
only by respecting the Convention that we will continue
to enjoy peace in the governance of the world’s oceans
and seas.
Mr. Pham Quang Hieu (Viet Nam): Our delegation
commends the outstanding improvement in the
management and utilization of the oceans and seas in
various parts of the world under the legal framework
established by the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). We fully acknowledge the
critical role of the oceans and seas in providing global
food security and sustaining the economic prosperity
and well-being of many nations in the world.
Viet Nam supports the General Assembly
continuing to give due attention to promoting the
sustainable use and development of the oceans and
seas and their resources. We would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for the
comprehensive reports contained in documents
A/68/71 and A/68/71/Add.1, which provide the General
Assembly with a review of developments relating to

13-60748

09/12/2013

ocean affairs and the law of the sea over the past year
for discussion under this agenda item.
My delegation appreciates the outcomes of the hard
work carried out over the past year by mechanisms
established by the General Assembly. In that respect,
we encourage the General Assembly to consider
and endorse the recommendations made by the two
intersessional workshops on biodiversity and the
meetings of the Ad Hoc Open Ended Informal Working
Group, which have sought to study issues relating to the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biological
diversity in the areas beyond national jurisdiction; the
fourteenth meeting of the United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of
the Sea; and the fourth meeting of the Ad Hoc Working
Group of the Whole on the Regular Process for Global
Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine
Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects. We
also note with appreciation the achievement of bodies
established by UNCLOS, including the International
Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea and the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf.
The Convention embodies the aspiration of
the international community to a just international
legal order for the oceans, and it has received almost
universal acceptance. It sets out a comprehensive legal
framework within which all activities on the oceans and
seas must be carried out, and it constitutes a peaceable
basis for the maintenance of peace and stability. The
promotion of maritime economic development and
the rational exploitation and conservation of marine
natural resources and the environment in all marine
areas within or beyond national jurisdictions rely on
the provisions of UNCLOS and related State practices.
In June 2012, Viet Nam passed its own law of the
sea as a significant legislative effort to harmonize
the provisions of UNCLOS with our national laws,
which has contributed to improving the national legal
framework concerning the seas and islands of Viet Nam.
Our law of the sea provides us with a fundamental legal
framework for the use, management and protection
of marine areas and resources, including cooperative
activities with other countries for marine economic
development, as well as foreign entities and individuals
operating in marine areas under Viet Nam’s jurisdiction.
Various regulations and administrative measures have
been established in order to implement the law.

A/68/PV.63

As a country with a long coastline on the South China
Sea — or, as Vietnamese call it, the Eastern Sea — Viet
Nam is entitled to develop its maritime economy. We
greatly value maritime peace and stability, including
maritime security, and the promotion of prosperity and
friendly cooperation in accordance with international
law, particularly as embodied in UNCLOS. In order
to achieve those goals, Viet Nam calls for the full and
effective implementation of the Declaration on the
Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, and for the
adoption of a code of conduct for the South China Sea.
Viet Nam supports the shared view of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) on the need for
a code of conduct that regulates the behaviour of the
parties concerned in order to ensure peace, maritime
security and safety and provide an environment
conducive to managing and resolving disputes by
peaceful means, on the basis of international law and
UNCLOS. In that regard, my delegation commends the
outcome of the sixth ASEAN-China Senior Officials
Meeting and the ninth meeting of the ASEAN-China
Joint Working Group on the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties, held in China
in September. At those meetings, ASEAN and China
consulted on the formulation of a code of conduct.
Viet Nam stands ready to work towards the speedy
establishment of a code of conduct for the South China
Sea, with a view to further promoting peace, stability
and cooperation in the region.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): I would like to begin by
thanking the President for convening today’s meeting
on oceans and the law of the sea, a subject of significant
interest to the whole world. The outcome document
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development held in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012,
entitled “The future we want” (resolution 66/288,
annex), recognizes the oceans and seas as an integral
and essential component of the Earth’s ecosystem;
they are of crucial value and must be sustained. The
role of oceans in supporting life on Earth is of vital
importance.
We note, however, that our oceans face terrific
challenges, including the deterioration of the marine
environment, the loss of biodiversity, and climate
change, as well as issues relating to maritime safety and
security, including acts of piracy and armed robbery at
sea and illegal fishing practices. Safe navigation and
the smooth transportation of goods by sea are crucial to
international trade and development, and acts of piracy

13-607483/23

A/68/PV.63

and armed robbery at sea are therefore a grave threat to
maritime trade and the security of maritime shipping.
Piracy endangers the lives of seafarers, affects national
security and territorial integrity and hampers nations’
economic development.
We greatly appreciate the work of the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia in containing piracy
through international cooperation and coordination.
India participates actively in international efforts
to combat piracy and armed robbery at sea. We are
gratified that those efforts have yielded significant
results, since in the past year and a half there have
been no successful hijackings off the coast of Somalia.
We would, however, like to express our deep concern
about the incidents of piracy and armed robbery at
sea in the Gulf of Guinea. Although the States in the
region play the primary role in countering the threat of
piracy, we urge the whole international community to
cooperate and continue its efforts to help put an end to
that menace.
In terms of international legal mechanisms, the
1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
is the key international instrument governing ocean
affairs. It sets out the legal framework for all activities
on the oceans and seas and enjoys wide acceptance by
what is now 166 parties. The Niger was the latest State
to accede to the Convention, on 7 August.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/68/71 and A/68/71/Add.1) on the issues concerning
oceans and the law of the sea. We also welcome the report
of the co-Chairs of the fourteenth meeting of the United
Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process
on Oceans and the Law of the Sea (A/68/159), which
discussed, inter alia, the impact of ocean acidification
on the marine environment. Broad scientific thinking
and studies reveal that ocean acidification has
serious effects on marine ecosystems. The changes in
temperature resulting from ocean acidification may
alter the rate and pattern of ocean productivity. In that
light, we need more comprehensive study of ocean
acidification and work on capacity-building, including
by filling knowledge gaps and promoting the transfer
of technology.
We also welcome the report of the co-Chairs of the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Whole
on the Regular Process for Global Reporting and
Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment,
including Socioeconomic Aspects (A/68/82). We
commend the efforts being made to produce the first
4/23

09/12/2013

global integrated assessment of the state of the marine
environment and look forward to its completion by
2014.
We also welcome the report of the co-Chairs of the
meeting of the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal Working
Group to study issues relating to the conservation and
sustainable use of marine biological diversity beyond
areas of national jurisdiction (A/68/399). The Working
Group took note of the deliberations of the experts in the
intersessional workshops held in May. The workshops
provided valuable scientific and technical information
on conservation and management tools, environmental
impact assessments and marine genetic resources, and
also considered issues relating to intellectual property
rights, capacity-building and the transfer of marine
technology. We support the efforts of the Working
Group to address the urgent issue of the conservation
and sustainable use of the marine biodiversity of areas
beyond national jurisdiction, including through the
development of a legal framework.
The smooth functioning of the institutions
established under the Convention — the International
Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea and the Commission on the Limits of
the Continental Shelf — holds the key to the proper
implementation of the Convention’s provisions and the
achievement of the benefits desired through the use
of the seas. We therefore support all efforts towards
ensuring their smooth functioning and note with
satisfaction the progress made by those institutions in
their respective areas.
Being a country with a vast coastline and numerous
islands, India has a traditional and abiding interest
in maritime and ocean affairs and assures its full
cooperation in efforts towards ensuring the proper
management and sustainable use of the oceans and seas
as a responsible partner of the international community.
Finally, we thank both coordinators for having
successfully conducted the consultations on the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/68/L.18)
and on sustainable fisheries (A/68/L.19), and we support
their adoption.
Mr. Strickland (United States of America): My
delegation has the honour to co-sponsor the draft
resolutions on oceans and the law of the sea (A/68/L.18)
and on sustainable fisheries (A/68/L.19).
The annual draft resolutions on oceans and fisheries,
which we are debating today, serve as an important
13-60748

09/12/2013

A/68/PV.63

opportunity for the global community to identify key
marine-related issues and develop constructive ways
forward in order to address such matters. The United
States attaches great importance to the issues of oceans
and fisheries, and we value the platform that the General
Assembly provides us to raise those issues.

some fisheries activities. The call for work in that
area underscores the importance for the international
community of continuing to work collaboratively so
as to eliminate illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, including activities associated with its threat to
global food security.

We would like to highlight two aspects of this
year’s draft resolution on oceans.

Secondly, the draft resolution emphasizes the
importance of enhancing the resilience of marine
ecosystems to minimize the wide range of impacts
of ocean acidification and its threat to the protein
supply chain. In 1991, the General Assembly called
for a moratorium on large-scale drift nets on the high
seas, given the non-discriminatory nature of that
fishing method and the deleterious effect that it has on
non-target species.

First, we are very pleased that the draft resolution
reflects important developments with regard to ocean
acidification. This year’s United Nations Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the
Law of the Sea focused on the topic of the impacts of
ocean acidification on the marine environment and
provided a very useful opportunity for Member States
to consider the issue. We are pleased that the draft
resolution on oceans contains several new paragraphs
on ocean acidification, including on the importance of
making significant efforts to tackle the causes of ocean
acidification, study and minimize its impacts and build
resilience in marine ecosystems. We look forward to the
General Assembly’s continued attention to that pressing
matter. We were also very pleased by the selection of
the topic of the role of seafood in global food security
for next year’s meeting of the Informal Consultative
Process. We look forward to fruitful exchanges on that
important topic.
The second aspect of this year’s draft resolution
on oceans that we would like to highlight relates to
the continued progress towards the highly anticipated
publication of the first global integrated marine
assessment, known as the World Ocean Assessment,
under the Regular Process for Global Reporting and
Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment,
including the Socioeconomic Aspects. We recognize
and appreciate the hard work and dedication of the
Group of Experts of the Regular Process and of the
many experts contributing to the drafting of the first
global integrated marine assessment. We look forward
to the eventual publication of that ground-breaking
work.
We would also like to highlight three key aspects of
this year’s draft resolution on sustainable fisheries that
focus on protecting food security.
First, we are pleased that the draft resolution
reflects the recognition by the General Assembly of
the need for a better understanding of the issues of
human trafficking and forced labour associated with

In that light, the final aspect that we would like to
highlight in this year’s draft resolution is the recognition
of 20 years of the successful implementation of the call
by the North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission
and the resulting reduction in the occurrence of such
nets on the high seas of the North Pacific Ocean. We
believe that that illustrates the importance of the draft
resolution and the work of the General Assembly in
positively influencing sustainable fisheries within the
international community. Thus, the United States is
pleased to once again co-sponsor the draft resolution.
The United States would like to thank Director
Gabriele Goettsche-Wanli and the staff of the
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
for their expertise and support in the drafting of
both draft resolutions. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago for
his coordination of the draft resolution on oceans, and
Ms. Alice Revell of New Zealand for her coordination
of the draft resolution on sustainable fisheries. Both
coordinators did an outstanding job.
Finally, I would like to conclude by expressing
appreciation for delegations’ hard work and cooperation
in crafting both draft resolutions. It is our hope that that
same spirit of cooperation will characterize our efforts
to address the numerous and complex issues that lie
ahead in the new year.
Mr. Korman (Palau): Oceans and seas cover two
thirds of the world’s surface and connect 90 per cent
of its population. It is estimated that oceans provide
more than 350 million jobs globally. A billion people
in developing countries are dependent on ocean fish.

13-607485/23

A/68/PV.63

09/12/2013

Pa1au’s own culture, environment and economy are
inextricably linked to the ocean and its resources.

stocks. That is undoubtedly a step towards greater
overall sustainability.

For those reasons, we are pleased to associate
ourselves with the statement made on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum earlier today (see A/68/PV.62)
and to add Palau’s perspective to today’s debate.

By insisting on urgent management measures,
this year’s draft resolution confirms that business as
usual, which has led to a staggering loss of 90 per cent
of shark stocks, is unacceptable. All States must take
urgent action to manage sharks. In that vein, Palau is
encouraged by the growing consensus to stop sharkfinning. Countries around the world, developing and
developed alike, those that fish for sharks and those
that have guaranteed their protection, are uniting
behind the idea that no shark should be caught and
finned with the carcass dumped overboard. To do
so is wasteful, destructive and, as we heard earlier,
unethical. Although we were unable to make progress
on finning this year, we are confident that the very few
States holding out will soon join the overwhelming
majority to end shark-finning by requiring that sharks
be landed with their fins naturally attached or through
other equally effective and enforceable measures.

Palau has espoused three basic principles that
should govern oceans and fisheries.
First, global fisheries should be fair. If distant
water vessels want to access fish that traverse Palau’s
waters, they should respect our laws. They should fish
within our limits and share the benefits of our natural
resources equitably.
Secondly, global fisheries should be accountable.
Countries have given great responsibilities to regional
fisheries management organizations (RFMOs) to
conserve and manage global fish stocks, but those
stocks continue their depressing decline. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations reports
that the vast majority of global fish stocks are now
fully or overexploited. Those organizations should be
more responsive to the realities of overfishing, and the
General Assembly can guide them to do better.
Thirdly, the use of ocean resources should be
sustainable. Reckless and illegal practices that harm
our fisheries, deprive us of our resources and threaten
our marine environment should stop. The ecosystem
approach should be applied more consistently. Palau
is pleased to see that those principles are increasingly
being reflected in the General Assembly’s resolutions
on oceans and fisheries.
This year’s draft resolution on sustainable fisheries
(A/68/L.19), for example, includes important new calls
for more sustainable conservation and management
of sharks. Sharks are majestic creatures and a natural
barometer of a healthy ocean ecosystem. A recent study
found that a living shark is worth up to $2 million to
Palau’s tourism sector over the course of its lifetime.
Shark conservation has helped drive our economic
development. Unfortunately, sharks are being
overfished, especially through the wasteful practice
of shark-finning. Palau is therefore encouraged to
see new language in the draft resolution on fisheries
calling on States, including through regional fisheries
management organizations, to promote and establish
management measures and ensure the long-term
conservation, management and sustainable use of shark

6/23

Through the draft resolution on oceans and the law
of the sea (A/68/L.18), the General Assembly would
agree to discuss food security and its relationship to
oceans at the upcoming meeting of the Open-ended
Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law
of the Sea. That is a timely decision, although it is
perhaps a bit narrow in scope. In future, we want to
see the international community’s road map towards
sustainability. World leaders stress the importance of
conservation and the sustainable use of oceans for all
facets of sustainable development. They emphasize
the contribution of oceans to poverty eradication,
sustained economic growth, food security, the creation
of sustainable livelihoods and decent work, as well as
the protection of biodiversity in the marine environment
and the need to address the impacts of climate change.
Their message is that we must have healthy, productive
and resilient oceans to deliver on the promise of a more
sustainable future.
That is why Palau and the other Pacific small
island developing States are championing a stand-alone
sustainable development goal on oceans and seas. Palau
looks forward to having a more extensive discussion
on the imperative need for healthy oceans in order to
ensure poverty eradication, food security and economic
opportunity. We particularly highlight this February’s
meeting of the General Assembly’s Open Working
Group on Sustainable Development Goals, the 2014
Pacific Islands Forum, which Palau is very pleased

13-60748

09/12/2013

to host, as well as the third Global Conference on the
Sustainable Development of Small Island States, to be
held in Apia, Samoa, next year.
For a second year in a row, it remains for Palau to
conclude our remarks by noting the immense damage
caused by typhoons and by extending our heartfelt
condolences to our neighbours in the Philippines. Last
year it was Typhoon Bopha. This year it is Haiyan, or
Yolanda. The world saw vividly Haiyan’s destruction
in the Philippines and the effects it continues to have.
But Haiyan also decimated Palau’s northern island state
of Kayangel, laying waste to every home and building
and displacing the entire population. The consequences
for Palau, had Haiyan hit our main islands, are
unimaginable. Bopha and Haiyan are terrible reminders
of the fragility of our relationship with the oceans.
In addition to the tremendous damage caused by
the increased frequency and intensity of storms, Palau
has had to deal with the slower-onset effects of climate
change, namely, ocean warming, ocean acidification and
sea level rise. Palau is still in the process of recovering
from the 1998 bleaching of approximately 70 per cent
of its corals. With regard to ocean acidification and
sea-level rise, the concern is more than just the loss of
territory. In a real sense, it is a matter of sustaining life.
Increased salinization of freshwater lenses damages
crops in taro patches and renders water from wells even
harder to use.
The very essence of life in Palau is slowly and
irreparably being damaged. That was the crux of the
argument put forth by Palau and other small islands
for loss and damage reparations at the recent Climate
Change Conference in Warsaw. We therefore voice our
great disappointment at the reluctance of other nations
to accept those facts; they argued instead that the
impact of climate change could be addressed through
adaptation alone.
In conclusion, we want to reiterate that the
protection of oceans and seas is an issue of sovereignty
for Palau that goes beyond our boundaries. The ocean
connects us to our Pacific neighbours and provides all
that we need for life, cultural heritage, food and leisure.
It is the primary means for our economic development.
Palau therefore again calls for a stand-alone goal in the
sustainable development goals agenda to fully address
the sustainability of oceans and seas. We further urge
all States to act now to reduce the emissions that are
causing climate change.

A/68/PV.63

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Last
year, at the solemn commemoration of the thirtieth
anniversary of the opening for signature of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas (UNCLOS),
we reviewed the journey made by UNCLOS and the
evolution of international maritime affairs over the past
30 years. Since then, ocean affairs and the law of the sea
have received greater attention from the international
community. Various regimes under the Convention
have developed steadily and are being implemented in
depth. Cooperation and interaction among countries on
maritime affairs are intensifying.
Together with other countries, China is willing
to continue to promote the existence of a harmonious
ocean, working on the basis of international law,
including the Convention, towards peace, safety and an
open ocean and seeking a balance between scientific
protection and the rational utilization of the oceans,
so as to achieve common development and mutually
beneficial results for all members of the international
community.
The Chinese delegation actively participated in
consultations on the draft resolutions on oceans and the
law of the sea (A/68/L.18) and on sustainable fisheries
(A/68/L.19). I wish to thank Ambassador Eden Charles
of Trinidad and Tobago and Ms. Alice Revell of New
Zealand for their contributions as the facilitators of
the draft resolutions. I wish to take this opportunity to
state the position and views of my delegation on various
issues relating to oceans and the law of the sea.
First, China very much appreciates the positive
contribution made by the Commission on the Limits
of the Continental Shelf in attempting to maintain a
balance between the legitimate rights and interests of
coastal States and the overall interests of the entire
international community. It commends the hard work
of the members of the Commission and the results that
they have achieved. China supports the Commission in
its efforts to carry out its mandate strictly in accordance
with the Convention and its rules of procedure,
especially by rigorously abiding by the provision
contained in annex I to its rules of procedure, which
states that, in cases where a land or maritime dispute
exists, the Commission shall not consider and qualify
a submission by any of the States concerned in the
dispute, so as to ensure the quality and professionalism
of its consideration of the submission.
At the same time, the Chinese delegation holds the
view that, with the marked increase in the Commission’s

13-607487/23

A/68/PV.63

workload, effective measures should be taken to further
improve the working conditions of the Commission,
including finding appropriate solutions to the issue of
medical insurance for its members. This year, China
donated another $20,000 to the voluntary trust fund to
finance the participation of members from developing
countries in the Commission’s meetings.
Secondly, the Chinese delegation congratulates the
International Seabed Authority for its achievements
over the past year, in particular, its adoption of the
amended Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration
for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area and its approval of
two applications for the exploration of mineral resources
on the international seabed. That demonstrates the
continuous improvement of the international seabed
regime and the immense vitality of international seabed
activities. The Chinese delegation believes that the
formulation of the rules governing the exploitation of
mineral resources in international seabeds should take
into account technological and industrial developments,
and progress in a gradual manner, so as to achieve
the proper balance between seabed exploitation and
environmental protection and between the interests
of developers and those of the entire international
community. The decision should therefore be made
prudently, based on in-depth studies and the wide range
of views of various parties.
The Chinese Government has always actively
supported the work of the International Seabed
Authority and works hard to promote the effective and
all-round participation in international seabed affairs
by developing countries. This year, China once again
donated $20,000 to the Authority through the voluntary
trust fund to finance the participation of members
from developing countries in meetings of the Legal and
Technical Commission and the Finance Committee of
the International Seabed Authority.
In April next year, Chinese academic institutions
in the field will host, in the city of Xiamen, the fourth
International Symposium on Scientific and Legal
Aspects of the Regimes of the Continental Shelf and
the Area. We wish to welcome all relevant parties to
participate.
Thirdly, my delegation has noticed that, as the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea handles
more and more cases that touch upon ever wider areas,
the Tribunal is enjoying growing influence and has
entered a new phase of comprehensively fulfilling its
mandate under the Convention. The Chinese delegation
8/23

09/12/2013

supports the Tribunal as it continues to play an important
role in the peaceful settlement of maritime disputes, the
maintenance of international maritime order and the
dissemination of the law of the sea. We appreciate the
active role played by the Tribunal in helping developing
countries with capacity-building.
At the same time, we believe that neither UNCLOS
nor the Tribunal’s statute confirm advisory competence
upon the full Bench of the Tribunal. We hope that the
Tribunal will take into full consideration the concerns
of the various parties and deal carefully with Case No.
21, Request for an advisory opinion submitted by the
Sub-Regional Fisheries Commission (SRFC), in order
to ensure the legitimacy and authority of its work.
Fourthly, the Chinese delegation supports the
adoption by the General Assembly of the programme
of work proposed by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Informal
Working Group on marine biodiversity beyond areas of
national jurisdiction. My delegation believes that, since
the high seas and the international seabed are part of
the concerns and interests of the entire international
community, properly handling of the issue of marine
biodiversity in those areas is of great importance to
the maintenance of a just and rational international
maritime order. The relevant work should proceed in a
gradual manner, while maintaining the central status of
the General Assembly and fully respecting the leading
role of Member States. The need of countries, especially
developing countries, for rational utilization of marine
biological resources should also be fully taken into
consideration.
Fifthly, the Chinese delegation is pleased to note
that an institutional framework for the United Nations
World Ocean Assessment: Regular Process for Global
Reporting and Assessment of the State of the Marine
Environment, including Socioeconomic Aspects has
been put in place and that work in that area, including
the drafting of reports, is proceeding smoothly. China
believes that it is very important that the Regular
Process operate successfully and play a role in which
it supports further capacity-building by the Division
for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, serving
as the secretariat for the Regular Process. China has
recommended experts to participate in the preparation
of the first World Ocean Assessment report and is ready
to further contribute to work in that area.
Sixthly, as a responsible major country involved in
fisheries, China has taken an active part in the work
of the relevant international fisheries organizations and
13-60748

09/12/2013

is committed to strengthening the conservation and
the management of fish resources. China is willing to
continue to work together with the countries concerned
to promote the development and improvement of the
international fisheries regime, sensibly regulate the
conduct of fisheries and explore how to further improve
ways and means to combat illegal fishing. In so doing,
we hope to contribute to the sustainable utilization
of marine bioresources, the maintenance of marine
ecological balance and the enjoyment by all countries
of the benefits of fisheries.
The oceans provide an important basis for
human development and progress. Members of the
international community should further strengthen
cooperation and, in a spirit of solidarity and mutual
assistance, collectively tackle challenges, enjoy the
opportunities and wealth offered by the oceans and
seek the sustainable development of the oceans so that
they can bring long-term benefits to humankind.
China is ready to work with other countries and do
its part for a harmonious ocean.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): Cuba
attaches fundamental importance to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea for the maintenance
and strengthening of peace, order and the sustainable
development of oceans and seas. The Convention, a
landmark in the codification of the international law of
the sea, has been ratified by the overwhelming majority
of Member States. It establishes the appropriate and
universally recognized legal framework for all activities
concerning the oceans and seas.
It is important that we uphold the integrity of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and
the implementation of its provisions as a whole. Matters
concerning oceans and the law of the sea must come
under the supervision of the General Assembly in
order to ensure greater coherence and consistency in
the management of such matters for the benefit of all
Member States.
Cuba will continue to undertake significant efforts
in the implementation of our national strategies aimed
at the sustainable development and protection of the
marine environment, with the aim of ensuring the
coherent, progressive and effective implementation of
the provisions of the Convention.
The State of Cuba has solid institutions and national
legislation in the field of the law of the sea. The Cuban
Government has adopted all of the measures at its

A/68/PV.63

disposal to successfully tackle the crimes that occur
on the seas, such as illicit trafficking in narcotics and
psychotropic substances, illegal trafficking in persons
and piracy.
Cuba reiterates the importance of strengthening
international cooperation when it comes to the
management of marine resources and in caring for
the oceans and their biodiversity, in keeping with the
principles of international law, thus upholding due
respect for the jurisdiction of sovereign States over their
territorial seas and the management of their resources
in their exclusive economic zones and the continental
shelf.
We resolutely support the commendable work
of the Commission on the Limits of the Continental
Shelf and urge all Member States to lend their support
to ensure that the Commission is equipped with all
the necessary resources for its work. It is crucial that
the Commission be able to undertake its work in an
expeditious and effective manner, thereby complying
with the legal requirements that have been established
for that purpose.
The ongoing sea-level rise threatens the territorial
integrity of many States, in particular small island
States, a number of which are doomed to vanish unless
immediate measures are adopted. The interconnectivity
of ocean systems and their close relationship with the
dramatic process of climate change affecting humankind
compel us to urgently uphold the commitments that we
have shouldered in those two areas.
We would like to conclude by expressing our
gratitude for the work accomplished by the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea. We also thank
the coordinators for the two draft resolutions under
consideration (A/68/L.18 and A/68/L.19), which Cuba
will support.
Mr. Van Den Bogaard (The Netherlands): The
Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the observer of the European Union
(see A/68/PV.62).
At the outset, I would like to thank our dear friends,
Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad and Tobago and
Ms. Alice Revell of New Zealand, for their hard work in
coordinating the omnibus draft resolution on oceans and
the law of the sea (A/68/L.18) and the draft resolution
on sustainable fisheries (A/68/L.19), respectively. We
also wish to express our gratitude to the Director and

13-607489/23

A/68/PV.63

09/12/2013

staff of the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of
the Sea for their tireless efforts in that regard.

provide for the situation in which a defendant failed to
act”.

This year marks the centennial anniversary of the
Peace Palace in The Hague. Since its inauguration,
the Peace Palace has been a worldwide icon of peace
and justice. As part of the celebrations on 28 August,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon opened the Ministerial
Conference on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes. The
Foreign Minister of the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
Mr. Franciscus Timmermans, presided over the
Conference, which was aimed at strengthening existing
institutions and methods for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, such as judicial proceedings and arbitration.
Participants included ministers and deputy ministers
from Italy, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, the Russian
Federation, Slovakia and Uganda. The participants
issued a joint statement on the peaceful settlement of
disputes, reiterating their commitment to Article 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations and underlining their
continued commitment to the promotion of measures
for the peaceful settlement of disputes.

That notion is reflected in article 287 of the
Convention. In fact, the availability of a default
mechanism through the Convention is one of its gems.
A dispute settlement procedure is therefore always
available. By becoming a party to the Convention, a
State explicitly accept its regime for the compulsory
peaceful settlement of disputes. That also implies
accepting and implementing the decisions of the
institutions responsible for the settlement of disputes
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, including the International Tribunal for the
Law of the Sea, the International Court of Justice and
arbitration tribunals established under the Convention.
We consider the establishment of that elaborate system
of compulsory dispute settlement to be one of the
truly important innovations that the Convention has
established. The Netherlands is proud of its contribution
to the elaboration of what was to become article 287 of
the Convention.

The Netherlands has always called upon States
to settle their conflicts and disputes peacefully, and
recognizes, in that connection, the important role of
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in
the interpretation and application of the law of the
sea. We are the host State to the International Court
of Justice and the Permanent Court of Arbitration, two
international institutions that play a major role in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, including in the field
of law of the sea. The pursuit of peace and justice is
not just a matter of bricks and mortar; it requires
active participation and commitment by States for its
achievement.

The Netherlands has full confidence in the quality
of the dispute settlement mechanisms under the
Convention and considers it imperative that States abide
by the decisions taken through those mechanisms. In a
world where the use of the oceans is changing and where
conflicting ambitions may lead to different views on
the use of the oceans, we need to uphold the Convention
and actively settle such disputes peacefully.

The Netherlands has demonstrated its commitment
over the years to the conduct of international relations
under the rule of law. In that respect, we would recall
with a sense of pride that it was Netherlands legal adviser
Willem Riphagen who laid the foundation for what is
now article 287 of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea. That provision, known as the Montreux
compromise, provides a crucial and unique system for
the settlement of disputes. The essence of the Montreux
compromise is that each party to the Convention may
select the method of dispute settlement it prefers,
and, if a party does not choose, the Convention refers
to arbitration as a default procedure. Mr. Riphagen
considered it important that “the Convention would

10/23

Mr. Corrales (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Honduras would like to express
its gratitude to the Division for Ocean Affairs and
the Law of the Sea and its new Director, Gabriele
Goettsche-Wanli, for the support provided throughout
the negotiations on the draft resolutions on oceans
and the law of the sea (A/68/L.18) and on sustainable
fisheries (A/68/L.19). We would also like to thank the
coordinators, Ambassador Eden Charles of Trinidad
and Tobago and Alice Revell of New Zealand, for their
excellent work.
Honduras attaches particular importance to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as
we believe that it makes a significant contribution to
international peace and security by establishing a legal
framework for the appropriate use and exploration
of the oceans. We believe that all States must strive,
in a coordinated manner, to ensure the sustainability
and preservation of the oceans and the use of ocean
resources for the common good.
13-60748

09/12/2013

In that connection, it is essential that such
cooperation between States be applied to the issue of
the Gulf of Fonseca. There are clear rules governing
the Gulf of Fonseca that are based on co-sovereignty
and take into account its status as historic waters. The
interior waters of the Gulf of Fonseca, where there is a
tripartite presence by the coastal States, are crucial for
all three States concerned, and there should not be any
obstacle to their fraternal cooperation. My delegation
believes that there is a pressing need for the tripartite
committee established by the Heads of State and
Government to meet without delay in order to consider
the pending negotiations on implementing the ruling of
the International Court of Justice.
We must be aware of the fragility of the existing
ecosystem within the Gulf and act in a coordinated
manner in order to establish instruments for fraternal
cooperation and sustainable development within the
Gulf and the adjacent marine waters, in keeping with
the standards and principles of international law. A
mechanism for such cooperation should take into
account fundamental principles such as the freedom
of navigation and the safety and security of people
and their assets; the need to combat organized crime,
terrorism and piracy; port infrastructure development
and the maintenance of navigation waterways; the
development of tourism, mineral resources and
fisheries; and in general a comprehensive framework
for the development of the Gulf. Above all, it must be
based on the principle of strengthening the authority of
the International Court of Justice and recognition of its
rulings.
More than 21 years have passed since the
International Court of Justice handed down its judgment
of 11 September 1992 in the case of Land, Island and
Maritime Frontier Dispute (El Salvador/Honduras:
Nicaragua intervening). Unfortunately, there has as
yet been no implementation of the ruling establishing
the right of access for all three coastal States on the
Gulf of Fonseca to the territorial sea and the exclusive
economic area off the Gulf.
Furthermore, it is crucial that the United Nations,
friendly States and other international organizations
that are concerned by climate change and the impact it
has on the global environment support the sustainable
development of the Gulf of Fonseca, including free
trade and the facilitation of international maritime
traffic. Scientific, technical and financial contributions
to that end are required, in order to be able to ensure

A/68/PV.63

that the Gulf of Fonseca truly becomes an area of peace,
development and security.
Mrs. Baaro (Kiribati): I bring to this session
of the General Assembly warm greetings from the
Government and people of the Republic of Kiribati.
My delegation joins previous speakers in
thanking the Secretary-General and welcoming his
report on oceans and the law of the sea (A/68/71 and
A/68/71/Add.1). We also thank the facilitators of the
draft resolutions we have before us on oceans and the
law of the sea (A/68/L.18) and on sustainable fisheries
(A/68/L.19).
My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic of
the Marshall Islands on behalf of the members of the
Pacific Islands Forum (see A/68/PV.62), as well as with
those made by earlier speakers from the Pacific region,
namely, New Zealand, Nauru and Palau.
For a small, low-lying island nation such as
my country, one of the major security and survival
challenges that we face stems from the adverse impacts
of climate change, including rising sea levels, coastal
erosion, coral bleaching, ocean acidification and the
effect that those phenomena have on food security,
water supplies and, indeed, the ability to sustain life
on our islands. Yet our only hope for sustainable
development and survival as a large-ocean State lies
in our oceans and marine resources. For us in Kiribati,
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) brings hope. It gave formal international
recognition to our age-old role as custodians of one
of the largest oceans. For us, as one of the owners of
the resources of one of the major oceans, the entry into
force of the Convention meant that we could negotiate
fisheries licences with those wishing to fish in our
expansive waters. Indeed, we have depended heavily
on our distant-water fishing partners to harvest and add
value to the tuna extracted from our waters.
However, we in Kiribati have always strongly
advocated for the importance of increasing the
domestication of the fisheries industry as an ultimate
goal as we progressively reduce our reliance on revenue
from access fees. But where are we, 30 years down the
line after UNCLOS? Although the total landed value
of the tuna caught in our waters is estimated at some
$4 billion, we as resource owners receive an insignificant
5 to 10 per cent of that amount. In September, my
President, His Excellency Mr. Anote Tong, raised the

13-6074811/23

A/68/PV.63

question about that valuation of our resource (see A/68/
PV.9). Where is the equity and fairness in that? The
structure of the relationship between marine resource
owners and our partners from distant-water fishing
nations must change. In order to be durable, genuine
and sustainable, the partnership must be guided by the
principles we all share as a family of nations — the
principles of justice and fairness.
For that to happen, our partners must first
acknowledge our goal, which is to maximize returns
from our resources. We have made a start on that by
establishing fish-processing plants in a partnership
between the public and private sectors. Secondly, our
partners must engage more thoroughly in the new
arrangements, which will enable us, the resource
owners, to meet our goal. We invite them to join us in
that endeavour. If development partners are genuine
in their desire to assist vulnerable least developed
countries and small island developing States like mine,
then, given the right support from those partners and
the access to markets, we are convinced that we can
achieve sustainable development by utilizing the
available resources of our vast exclusive economic
zone. We also believe that through such an approach
we can reduce our reliance on development assistance
and better tackle the security and survival challenges
posed by climate change. Indeed, we are convinced
that we will even be able to do away with development
assistance altogether if we are provided with the right
support from our partners so that we can develop
our capacity to harvest and process our own marine
resources.
We are custodians of those marine resources, and
our region has developed some of the most advanced
conservation mechanisms through our Pacific Islands
Forum, the Forum’s Fisheries Agency, the South Pacific
Regional Environment Programme, the parties to the
Nauru Agreement and the Tuna Commission.
At the national level, our region has the largest
marine protected conservation areas. In my own
country, we have declared 11 per cent of our total ocean
area to be a marine protected area, commonly called
the Pacific Islands Protected Area (PIPA), a UNESCO
World Heritage Site that is our contribution to
humankind. Our Protected Area is a living laboratory
for scientists studying low-lying coral atoll formations
in their pristine environment, and represents our
contribution to the issue of adaptation to climate
change, to a better understanding of the dynamics of

12/23

09/12/2013

climate change in those vulnerable ecosystems, how
those dynamics affect low-lying coral atolls and how
those atolls can recover on their own.
PIPA is also a major conservation site, since it is
a major spawning ground for regional fisheries and
highly migratory species. It is an innovative economic
undertaking, and we have established a trust fund
for PIPA, to which those who believe in what we are
doing for future generations can contribute through
what is increasingly known as reverse fishing licence
arrangements. The PIPA conservation mechanism also
provides an opportunity for future generations to enjoy
coral atolls in their pristine state, and it will encourage
ecotourism.
I would like to conclude my statement by
highlighting three issues.
First, the oceans and seas are a vital part of the
global survival mechanism. They are the lungs of the
planet and a source of food, not only for those of us who
have survived as ocean nations, peoples and cultures
for hundreds of years, but also for the entire global
community. The importance of the oceans and seas
means that they should have a prominent part in the
post-2015 development dialogue and that they should
constitute a stand-alone sustainable development goal.
Secondly, the structure of partnerships in the
marine resource industries, including fisheries, must
be reconfigured now, in the context of the post-2015
development dialogue. Underpinned by the principles
of justice, equity, decency, accountability and respect,
that would go a long way towards addressing the
vulnerabilities of small island developing States like
mine, including the vulnerabilities that are the result of
climate change.
The third area I would like to highlight is that
we, as a family of nations, should now be asking
difficult questions — questions about the implications
of climate change and sea-level rise, particularly for
countries like mine. What are the implications, not only
for the Convention, but for the definition of the terms
“security”, “refugees” and “human rights”? Under
UNCLOS, what happens when whole countries are
submerged? Do they still have an exclusive economic
zone? I certainly hope so.
In Kiribati the environment is harsh and life is
difficult. As a matter of principle, we teach our children
important life skills, including how to survive in the
ocean, an ocean that can be both friend and foe. We
13-60748

09/12/2013

teach our children how to respect the ocean, how to fish
for sustenance, so that they can survive in the ocean
environment, even when their parents have passed on.
I believe that all parents pass on that principle to their
children.
If we, as a family of nations, were to apply that
principle in our dialogue, in our South-South dialogue
and in the dialogue with our development partners, we
would achieve much more. Development partnership
and development dialogue would shift to a whole new
level.
Now is the time to do that. As we begin discussing
the post-2015 development agenda and as we prepare
for the third International Conference on Small Island
Developing States, to be held in Samoa in 2014, the
challenge for all of us is to think outside the box.
The Acting President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 51/204, of 17 December 1996, I
now call on His Excellency Mr. Shunji Yanai, President
of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea.
Mr. Yanai (International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea) (spoke in French): It is an honour and privilege
for me, speaking on behalf of the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, to address the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session on the occasion of
its consideration of agenda item 76, entitled “Oceans
and the law of the sea.”
I extend my warmest congratulations to the President
of the General Assembly on his election and wish him
every success in the discharge of his responsibilities in
the Assembly. I also take this opportunity to welcome
Timor-Leste and the Niger, which became parties to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea this
year.
I would like to underscore the importance of
respect for the compulsory procedures set out in
section 2, Part XV, of the Convention. It is clear
that a dispute mechanism that functions effectively
contributes to the appropriate application of the law of
the sea, as established by the Convention. Through its
jurisprudence, the Tribunal has played an important
role in that regard. I should like to add that the
obligation under article 33 of the Tribunal’s statute,
which imposes on all parties to a dispute the need to
abide by the Tribunal’s decisions, is a sine qua non for
the implementation of the dispute mechanism.

A/68/PV.63

After those introductory remarks, I would now
like to report to the Assembly on the judicial activities
of the Tribunal since my last statement to the General
Assembly, on 11 December 2012 (see A/67/PV.51).
The Tribunal has had a very busy year, having had
to exercise its judicial functions in four cases. During
the period under review, the Tribunal delivered a
judgment on the merits and two orders on requests for
provisional measures. It also received a request for an
advisory opinion under article 138 of its rules. All of
that demonstrates an increase in the Tribunal’s judicial
work.
On 14 November 2012, Argentina filed a request
with the Tribunal for the prescription of provisional
measures under article 290, paragraph 5, of the
Convention in a dispute concerning the detention by
Ghana of the warship, ARA Libertad. The request for
provisional measures was submitted to the Tribunal
pending the constitution of an arbitral tribunal, further
to the introduction by Argentina, on 30 October
2012, of arbitral proceedings under annex VII to the
Convention.
In its request for provisional measures, Argentina
asked the Tribunal to prescribe that Ghana allow the
ARA Libertad to leave the port and the jurisdictional
waters of Ghana and to be resupplied to that end. On
15 December 2012, the Tribunal delivered its unanimous
order in the case, calling on Ghana immediately and
unconditionally to release the ARA Libertad and take
action to ensure that the ARA Libertad, its commander
and crew be able to leave the port and the maritime
waters under the jurisdiction of Ghana. I am pleased to
report that the order of the Tribunal was complied with.
As prescribed by the Tribunal, the ARA Libertad was
released and, on 19 December 2012, the vessel left the
maritime waters under the jurisdiction of Ghana.
I shall now turn to the M/V Louisa Case (Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines v. Kingdom of Spain).
The vessel, flying the flag of Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, was boarded, searched and detained by
Spanish authorities on 1 February 2006. According to
Spain, the vessel was seized and detained in connection
with criminal proceedings for the commission of the
crime of introducing or possessing weapons of war
and the crime of damaging Spanish historical national
heritage. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines maintained
that the M/V Louisa was conducting surveys of the sea
floor with a view to locating oil and gas deposits. In
the criminal proceedings, four persons were arrested

13-6074813/23

A/68/PV.63

and imprisoned in Spain. In the decision of 28 May
2013, the Tribunal noted that the case had two aspects,
one relating to the detention of a vessel and persons on
board, the other relating to the treatment shown those
persons.
The first aspect had to do with the request initially
made by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines based on
articles 73, 87, 226, 227 and 303 of the Convention.
After a careful examination of all of the provisions
invoked, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that none
of them could serve as the basis for the claim submitted
by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in respect of the
detention of the M/V Louisa and its crew.
With regard to the second aspect of the case,
concerning the treatment of persons aboard the M/V
Louisa, the Tribunal observed that that matter had been
introduced by Saint Vincent and the Grenadines only
after the closure of the written proceedings. It noted,
in that respect, that the matter had been addressed
during the oral hearing on the basis of article 300 of
the Convention, concerning good faith and abuse of
rights, and had been included on that basis in the final
submission of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The
Tribunal then deemed that reliance on article 300 of the
Convention generated a new claim in comparison with
the claims presented in the application.
In the view of the Tribunal and in line with the
jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice, it is
a legal requirement that any new claim must, in order to
be admitted, arise directly out of the application, or be
implicit in it. Accordingly, the Tribunal considered that
it could not allow a dispute that had been brought before
it by an application to be transformed, in the course of
the proceedings, into another dispute, one different in
character. For that reason, the Tribunal was of the view
that article 300 of the Convention could not serve as a
basis for the claims submitted by Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines.
The Tribunal concluded that no dispute concerning
the interpretation or implementation of the Convention
existed between the parties at the time when the
application was filed, and it therefore found, by
19 votes to 2, that it had no ratione materiae jurisdiction
to hear the case.
(spoke in English)
I will next address the case of the M/V Arctic Sunrise
(Kingdom of the Netherlands v. Russian Federation),
another urgent proceeding that was submitted recently
14/23

09/12/2013

to the Tribunal. The case relates to a dispute between the
Netherlands and the Russian Federation concerning the
arrest and detention of the vessel M/V Arctic Sunrise,
its crew and other persons on board by the authorities of
the Russian Federation. According to the Netherlands,
the vessel M/V Arctic Sunrise, flying the flag of the
Netherlands, was boarded on 19 September 2013 in
the exclusive economic zone of the Russian Federation
by Russian authorities, who detained the vessel and
the 30 persons on board. The vessel was subsequently
towed to the port of Murmansk. On 4 October, the
Netherlands instituted arbitration proceedings, under
annex VII of the Convention, against the Russian
Federation. After the expiry of the time limit of two
weeks, as provided for in article 290, paragraph 5, of
the Convention, the Netherlands submitted a request for
provisional measures to the Tribunal on 21 October.
In a note verbale dated 22 October 2013, the
Embassy of the Russian Federation in Berlin informed
the Tribunal that the Russian Federation did not intend to
participate in the proceedings. In that note verbale, the
Russian Federation invoked the declaration that it had
made upon ratifying the Convention, on 26 February
1997, stating that it
“does not accept the procedures provided for in
section 2 of Part XV of the Convention, entailing
binding decisions with respect to disputes
concerning law-enforcement activities in regard to
the exercise of sovereign rights or jurisdiction”.
On 22 November, the Tribunal adopted its order
on the request for provisional measures. In relation to
the declaration made by the Russian Federation with
respect to law-enforcement activities under article 298,
paragraph 1, subparagraph (b), of the Convention, the
Tribunal considered that that declaration, prima facie,
applied only to disputes excluded from the jurisdiction
of a court or tribunal under article 297, paragraphs 2
and 3, of the Convention, concerning marine scientific
research and fisheries.
Concerning the non-appearance of the Russian
Federation, the Tribunal considered that the absence of
a party or the failure of a party to defend its case did not
constitute a bar to the proceedings and did not preclude
the Tribunal from prescribing provisional measures,
provided that the parties had been given the opportunity
to present their observations on the subject.
In its order, adopted by 19 votes to 2 votes, the
Tribunal prescribed that the Russian Federation shall

13-60748

09/12/2013

immediately release the vessel M/V Arctic Sunrise and
all persons who had been detained, upon the posting of
a bond or other financial security by the Netherlands,
which shall be in the amount of €3,600,000, to be
posted with the Russian Federation in the form of
a bank guarantee. It also prescribed that, upon the
posting of that bond or other financial security, the
Russian Federation shall ensure that the vessel M/V
Arctic Sunrise and all persons who had been detained
be allowed to leave the territory and maritime areas
under the jurisdiction of the Russian Federation.
The Tribunal will also have a busy judicial agenda
during 2014. The Tribunal is currently deliberating on the
merits of the M/V “Virginia G” Case (Panama/GuineaBissau). That case, which was submitted to the Tribunal
on 4 July 2011, relates to the arrest on 21 August 2009
of an oil tanker, the M/V Virginia G, by the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau in the exclusive economic zone of
Guinea-Bissau. The vessel was arrested while carrying
out refuelling activities. The M/V Virginia G, which
was sailing under the flag of Panama, was released on
22 October 2010. Panama is seeking reparations for
the damage suffered. The hearing in the case was held
from 2 to 6 September 2013. I wish to inform members
that the Tribunal intends to deliver its judgment in the
spring of 2014.
Furthermore, I am glad to report that the Tribunal
received a new case in early 2013. On 28 March, the
Subregional Fisheries Commission, an organization
whose membership comprises seven West African
States, requested the Tribunal to render an advisory
opinion under article 138 of the rules of the Tribunal.
By its order dated 24 May 2013, the Tribunal
invited the States parties to the Convention, the
Subregional Fisheries Commission and a number of
intergovernmental organizations identified by the
Tribunal to submit written statements relating to the
case by 29 November. Statements were submitted by
that date by 18 States parties and six intergovernmental
organizations. The time limit for presenting written
statements has been extended to 19 December.
I would like to draw attention to the capacitybuilding programmes on the subject of the peaceful
settlement of disputes under the Convention that are
offered by the Tribunal. The Tribunal, in cooperation
with the Government of Mexico, organized a workshop
on the role of the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea in the settlement of disputes relating to the law
of the sea in the Caribbean region. The workshop took

A/68/PV.63

place in Mexico City on 5 and 6 June and was attended
by participants from 16 States. I take this opportunity
to extend our sincere thanks to the Government of
Mexico for the invaluable support that it provided for
the organization of that event.
A further aspect of the Tribunal’s capacity-building
activities is its internship programme, which annually
gives 20 interns from around the world an opportunity
to gain a deeper understanding of the work and
functions of the Tribunal. Special trust funds have been
established, with assistance from the Korea Maritime
Institute and the China Institute of International
Studies, to provide financial support to applicants from
developing countries. Furthermore, a capacity-building
and training programme on dispute settlement under
the Convention, organized in cooperation with the
Nippon Foundation, has been offered since 2007 for the
benefit of young Government officials and researchers.
For the 2012-2013 session, eight participants from
the following countries received fellowships from
the Nippon Foundation: Brazil, the Comoros, Haiti,
Indonesia, Lebanon, the Philippines, Tanzania and
Tunisia.
I would like to add that the seventh Summer
Academy of the International Foundation for the Law
of the Sea was held at the Tribunal this year. This year’s
topic was “Uses and protection of the sea — legal,
economic and natural science perspectives”. Thirty-six
participants from 33 countries attended lectures and
workshops dealing with the law of the sea and maritime
law. I would like to express my deep gratitude to the
institutions I just mentioned for their support.
I would like to conclude by voicing my appreciation
to the President of the General Assembly and to Member
States for the opportunity given to me to address today’s
meeting. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the new Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel de
Serpa Soares, and the new Director of the Division for
Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, Ms. Gabriele
Goettsche-Wanli, on their recent appointments. I am
sure that under their leadership, relations between
the Tribunal and the United Nations Office of Legal
Affairs will be excellent, as they have been under their
predecessors. I thank the Assembly for its interest in
the Tribunal and its work.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 51/6, of 24 October 1996, I now have the
honour to call on His Excellency Mr. Nii Allotey

13-6074815/23

A/68/PV.63

Odunton, Secretary-General
Seabed Authority.

09/12/2013

of

the

International

Mr. Odunton (International Seabed Authority):
Allow me, first of all, to congratulate Mr. John William
Ashe on his election to the presidency of the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session.
I wish to refer to the two draft resolutions before
the General Assembly (A/68/L.18 and A/68/L.19) and
express my appreciation to Member States for their
references to the work of the International Seabed
Authority, in particular in parts V and VI of draft
resolution A/68/L.18, on oceans and the law of the sea.
I also express my appreciation for the comprehensive
report of the Secretary-General (A/68/71 and
A/68/71/Add.1), which provides detailed background
material for our consideration. I wish also to commend
the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea,
as well as its new Director, for its continued outstanding
efforts in the preparation of the report.
As noted in paragraph 48 of draft resolution
A/68/L.18, during the nineteenth session of the
Authority, the Council of the Authority approved the
first two applications for plans of work for exploration
for cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts in the Area.
The applications were sponsored by China and
Japan, respectively. I offer my congratulations to the
applicants on that significant new development in the
work of the Authority and look forward to the signature
of exploration contracts early in 2014.
During the same session, four other new
applications were also considered by the Legal and
Technical Commission, and it is expected that they
will be submitted to the Council for approval at its next
session. That will bring the total number of approved
plans of work in the Area to 23, covering a total area
in excess of 1.5 million square kilometres. Since the
nineteenth session, several more Member States have
indicated their intention to submit applications for
plans of work for exploration, suggesting that the pace
of activity is not likely to diminish in the foreseeable
future.
Alongside the dramatic increase in activity in the
Area, the year 2014 marks a significant event in the life
of the Authority. November 2014 marks 20 years since
the establishment of the Authority upon the date of entry
into force of the Convention. As noted in paragraph 57
of the draft resolution on oceans and the law of the sea,
a commemorative session will take place during the

16/23

twentieth session of the Authority, from 7 to 25 July
2014. I wish to take this opportunity to urge all members
of the Authority to make special efforts to attend that
important and momentous event and to participate fully
in the twentieth session. I wish to recall, in that regard,
that other important issues to be considered during the
twentieth session include the election of one half of
the membership of the Council, as well as a discussion
of the rules, regulations and procedures, including
financial terms, for the exploitation of polymetallic
nodules in the Area.
As the Authority moves into its third decade
of existence, three issues have assumed particular
urgency, the first of which concerns the ongoing
financing of the Authority. While I am pleased to report
that contributions to the 2013 budget have been paid
in full by most Member States, I am also grateful that
paragraph 54 of draft resolution A/68/L.18 contains a
reminder to those States parties in arrears to pay their
assessed contributions and fulfil their obligations
without delay.
As the pace of activity in the Authority continues to
increase, it is inevitable that the budget will also have
to change to reflect the increased level of activity. It is
therefore important to find ways to make the budget of
the Authority sustainable in the long term. Paragraph 55
of the draft resolution makes reference to the decision
adopted by the Council during the nineteenth session on
overhead charges for the administration and supervision
of exploration contracts. That decision, which requires
contractors to pay a fixed overhead charge of $47,000
per year, is in the spirit of the relevant provisions of
the Convention and the 1994 Agreement relating to
the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which deals with
seabed mining, and is intended not only to facilitate
the smooth operation of the Authority, but also to
relieve in part the financial burden on Member States
for the operations of the Authority. As requested by the
Council, I am in the process of consulting with existing
and potential contractors on the implementation of that
decision at the earliest possible opportunity. I look
forward to the understanding and cooperation of all
current applicants and contractors in that respect.
The second major issue is that the first group of
contracts for exploration approved by the Authority are
due to expire in the next three years. According to the
Convention and the 1994 Implementation Agreement,
that means that the contractors must either apply for

13-60748

09/12/2013

a plan of work for exploitation or seek an extension
of their plan of work for exploration. It is critical that
the Authority be prepared for both eventualities. In
addition, under the Regulations on Prospecting and
Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area, in
particular annex 4, section 11, sub-paragraph (b) of
paragraph 11.2, upon expiration or termination of the
contract, the contractor, if it has not already done so,
shall submit, inter alia,
“the estimation of mineable areas, when such areas
have been identified, which shall include details
of the grade and quantity of the proven, probable
and possible polymetallic nodule reserves and the
anticipated mining conditions”.
That information is the outcome of years of exploratory
work, combined with the development of technology
for mining and processing the relevant ores.
With regard to exploitation, the Council has
given the Legal and Technical Commission the task
of developing the draft regulations for exploitation of
polymetallic nodules in the Area. Perhaps the most
important element of that task, from the point of view
of this new industry, is to establish an appropriate
fiscal framework for mining that is fair to industry,
investors and to the member States of the Authority,
who are intended to be the ultimate beneficiaries
of seabed mining. That is an enormous task. A
preliminary discussion of the parameters of the draft
regulations was held during the nineteenth session, and
as a result the secretariat has started work on a study of
comparable extractive industry fiscal regimes to assist
the Commission at its next meeting.
In the light of the urgency of the matter, the
Commission also decided to devote as much time as
possible to consideration of the exploitation code at
its next meeting, in February 2014. I hope that that
will provide substantive information for the Council’s
consideration at the twentieth session.
In the event that some contractors may seek to
extend their exploration contracts, the Commission and
the Council will also need to consider the establishment
of uniform and nondiscriminatory criteria on the
implementation of the provisions of the regulations
relating to extensions of plans of work for exploration.
With regard to the resource assessment work that
I mentioned earlier, no clear guidelines have been
provided to contractors on its completion. While it

A/68/PV.63

will require contractors to undertake some form of test
mining, much of the required data and information has
been acquired during what amounts to the 13 years of
their contract, in terms of those whose contracts will
expire. The Authority will need to convene a workshop
to address the required guidelines for the Legal and
Technical Commission’s consideration.
The third major issue, which is also reflected in
paragraphs 45 and 51 of draft resolution A/68/L.18,
relates to the importance of protecting the marine
environment. As noted in paragraph 51, the Authority
adopted, in 2012, an environmental management
plan for the Clarion-Clipperton Zone, which included
the provisional designation of a network of areas of
particular environmental interest, covering 1.6 million
square kilometres of sea floor. As rightly noted in the
draft resolution, it is envisaged that the implementation
of the plan will be reviewed in the light of new data
provided by contractors and others. It is hoped that
such a review can be carried out in 2014, subject to the
availability of resources for that purpose.
At the sixty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
I reported on a major task that had been initiated by the
Authority. It was to develop a standardized taxonomy
for fauna associated with the three mineral resources
for which the Authority has adopted rules, regulations
and procedures for prospecting and exploration,
namely, polymetallic nodules, polymetallic sulphides
and cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts.
I am pleased to report that the first of three
workshops with contractors, on megafauna associated
with polymetallic nodules, was completed. The
next workshop will deal with standardization of the
taxonomy of macrofauna associated with the same
mineral — polymetallic nodules. I expect that to
occur next year. The information and data that will
be generated by those workshops will contribute
immensely to the environmental management plan for
the Clarion-Clipperton Zone and for other regions in
the Area known to contain similar ores.
As also noted in the draft resolution, given
the increased interest in marine minerals in other
regions, including the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, it
is appropriate to consider the development of similar
environmental management plans for other regions
of interest for exploration. That is another matter the
Legal and Technical Commission will need to consider.

13-6074817/23

A/68/PV.63

09/12/2013

In conclusion, allow me to express once again my
appreciation to Member States for their support for the
Authority and for their commitment to enabling it to
carry out its mandate. I look forward to the participation
of all Member States in the twentieth anniversary
session of the International Seabed Authority in July
2014.

IUCN believes that on matters of common concern
and global interest, such as marine biodiversity beyond
national jurisdiction, non-public meetings should be
the exception. As the high seas and the seabed Area
comprise nearly 50 per cent of the planet, it is critical
that civil society have a voice in ensuring that the
interests of both State and non-State actors are heard.

The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 54/195, of 17 December 1999, I now give
the floor to the observer of the International Union for
Conservation of Nature.

The IUCN recalls that, in subparagraph 76 (h) of
the Rio+20 outcome document, it was agreed to

Ms. Powers (International Union for Conservation
of Nature): The International Union for Conservation of
Nature (IUCN) welcomes the draft resolution on oceans
and the law of the sea (A/68/L.18), which reaffirms the
commitment to paragraph 162 of the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20)
outcome document, entitled “The future we want”
(resolution 66/288, annex). The IUCN also welcomes
the progress made in urgently addressing the issue of the
conservation and sustainable use of marine biodiversity
in areas beyond national jurisdiction, including a
decision on the development of an international
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
In that connection, the IUCN further welcomes
the process established within the Ad Hoc Open-ended
Informal Working Group to prepare for a decision to
be taken at or before the sixty-ninth session of the
General Assembly, including exchanging views on the
scope, parameters and feasibility of an international
instrument under the Convention.
We are deeply concerned, however, about the retreat
from transparency and open debate reflected in the
exclusion of civil society from significant discussions
during the most recent meetings of the Working Group,
contrary to the spirit of rule 60 of the rules of procedure
of the General Assembly, which provides that:
“The meetings of the General Assembly and
its Main Committees shall be held in public unless
the organ concerned decides that exceptional
circumstances require that the meeting be held in
private.”
While recognizing the prerogative of Member States
to define what is meant by “exceptional circumstances”
and appreciating the value of the occasional closed
meeting for facilitating a meeting of the minds, the

18/23

“[e]nhance the participation and effective
engagement of civil society and other relevant
stakeholders in the relevant international fora and
in this regard promote transparency and broad
public participation and partnerships to implement
sustainable development”.
If the circulation of States’ views is restricted, as
foreseen under paragraph 201 of the draft resolution, or if
intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental
organizations are excluded from significant portions of
future meetings of the Working Group, the ability of civil
society and other stakeholders to effectively prepare
for and engage in the Working Group process will be
hindered. That would set an unfortunate precedent
for future meetings on ocean affairs and have broader
ramifications for the participation of intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations in future meetings
within the United Nations system. It would also run
counter to a shared view on the part of Governments for
greater inclusion and participation by civil society, as
most recently voiced in the Rio+20 outcome document.
As is recalled in paragraph 195 of the draft resolution
on oceans and the law of the sea, the Working Group has
benefited from the technical expertise and substantive
input provided by civil society at the intersessional
workshops held in May 2013 and throughout the work
of the Working Group. In addition, many Governments
also benefit from, rely on and welcome the technical
expertise and varied points of view provided by civil
society.
The IUCN therefore urges Member States to
recognize the importance of involving civil society
in the substantive discussions of the Working Group
in order to ensure that civil society has timely access
to the information needed, so as to be able to provide
substantive input and represent those not present
who care deeply about the health, productivity and
resilience of the global ocean and its contribution to

13-60748

09/12/2013

A/68/PV.63

sustainable development for the benefit of present and
future generations.

marine resources, and that must respect the processes
and cycles of nature.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate under agenda item 76 and its
sub-items (a) and (b).

Venezuela has fulfilled its international obligations
under the law of the sea. It has advocated for the
comprehensive development of the law of the sea with
a view to ensuring justice and has emphasized that all
negotiations related to that law should reflect criteria
and principles relating to sustainable development and
the preservation and sustainable use of the marine
environment and its resources for future generations.
In that spirit, my delegation has cooperated with efforts
to promote coordination on matters pertaining to the
oceans and the law of the sea, in accordance with
international law, and it has participated constructively
in consultations on the draft resolution.

The Assembly will now consider draft resolutions
A/68/L.18 and A/68/L.19.
I shall first give the floor to the representative
who wishes to speak in explanation of vote before the
voting. May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Ms. Cabello de Daboin (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes
to address the draft resolution contained in document
A/68/L.18, on oceans and the law of the sea, under
sub-item (a) of agenda item 76, which is bef. We would
like to express our gratitude to the facilitator of the
draft resolution, Ambassador Eden Charles, as well as
to the Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea.
I take this opportunity to recall once again
that Venezuela is not a party to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). For
that reason, the norms mentioned in that instrument,
including those that could be characterized as
customary law, are not applicable, except for those that
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has recognized
expressly. We reiterate that Venezuela is not a party to
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
since it cannot contravene fundamental principles and
basic rights to which it adheres and that remain valid
and relevant to this day.
Venezuela would like to stress the priority that our
State policy accords to the matter of the oceans and
the law of the sea, as reflected in a broad spectrum of
domestic legislation and in our 2013-2019 national plan,
whose status is legally binding as per its amendment
entitled Contributing to the Preservation of Life on
Earth and the Salvation of the Human Race. The
amendment calls for the construction and promotion of
an eco-socialist model of economic production based
on a harmonious relationship between humankind and
nature that ensures the rational, optimal and sustainable
use and exploitation of natural resources, among them

My delegation therefore reaffirms its historical
position on the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, which it has expressed in various
international forums, namely, that that instrument
should not be considered the sole legal framework
governing all activities related to oceans and seas, and
that it cannot be characterized as universal. For those
reasons, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes
that, although the text before us contains elements that
we are able to endorse, it also contains elements that
have also led my country to withhold support from the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) (resolution
66/288, annex), including matters relating to marine
biodiversity that are reflected in section X, particularly
in paragraphs 197 and 198, of the draft resolution.
In that regard, my country attaches the highest
importance to the sustainable exploitation of
biodiversity-sensitive resources beyond national
jurisdiction, which should be governed by a specific,
distinct international instrument separate from
UNCLOS and the Convention on Biological Diversity,
one in which a sense of caution and the desire to
safeguard the rights of humankind as a whole prevails.
My delegation expresses the hope that future decisions
on the subject, including the negotiation of a multilateral
instrument, will be guided by a spirit of inclusion.
Finally, the lack of consensus on various issues
addressed in the draft resolution, not to mention
practices that run counter to established jurisprudence,
highlights the need for review in a future updating of
the terms of the Convention, including a review of the
matters that prevent that instrument from being truly

13-6074819/23

A/68/PV.63

universal. There are new situations for the Convention
to address. The forced extension of the principles,
norms, criteria and procedures of UNCLOS to those
new situations has proved, at the very least, to be
insufficient, if not counterproductive. That has affected
the development of a regime that should address the
most important contemporary issues relating to the
oceans and seas in a balanced, equitable and inclusive
manner.
In view of the foregoing, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela will abstain in the voting.
The Acting President: We turn first to draft
resolution A/68/L.18, entitled “Oceans and the law of
the sea”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I would like to announce that,
since the submission of the draft resolution, in addition
to those delegations listed in document A/68/L.18, the
following countries have become sponsors: Australia,
Bahamas, Barbados, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, Costa
Rica, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Finland, Greece,
Guatemala, Indonesia, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Maldives, Mexico, Micronesia, Montenegro, Nauru,
Palau, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Slovenia, Sweden,
Tonga, Ukraine and the United States of America.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain, Belgium, Bhutan,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Netherlands,

20/23

09/12/2013

New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
Turkey
Abstaining:
Colombia, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Draft resolution A/68/L.18 was adopted by 115 votes
in favour, 1 against and 2 abstentions (resolution
68/70).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Mauritius
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.19,
entitled “Sustainable fisheries, including through
the 1995 Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks, and related
instruments.”
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/68/L.19, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Barbados, Chile, Costa
Rica, Denmark, Maldives, Micronesia, Montenegro,
Nauru, Palau, Samoa, Slovenia, Tonga and Ukraine.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.19 without a vote?

13-60748

09/12/2013

Draft resolution A/68/L.19 was adopted (resolution
68/71).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position or vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Cabello de Daboin (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela wishes to refer
to resolution 68/71, entitled “Sustainable fisheries,
including through the 1995 Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December
1982, relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and related instruments,” which has just
been adopted. Once again, we would like to express
our gratitude to the representative of New Zealand,
Ms. Alice Revell, in her capacity as facilitator on the
resolution.
For my delegation, the fisheries and aquaculture
sector is a priority in our national development plans.
It is reflected in our national plan for 2013-2019, which
was adopted by our Parliament as a law of our country,
thereby making it binding. Its objectives are to promote
fisheries development through the modernization
of our fleet of vessels and the marine and riverine
fisheries infrastructure, begin the construction of
14 fisheries processing sites on our national territory
and a shipyard, and establish a centre for the genetic
improvement of shrimp.
To supplement that plan, a broad range of norms and
standards has been established by the public authorities
through programmes aimed at the conservation,
protection and management of hydrobiological resources
and at promoting the responsible and sustainable use of
those resources. That is done by addressing, inter alia,
biological and economic aspects, in addition to those
pertaining to food security, society, cultural issues,
environmental issues and the relevant trade factors.
The Venezuelan law on fisheries prohibits trawler
fishing and establishes a regime of sanctions to be
applied in the event of non-compliance with conservation
and management measures. Moreover, measures also
include the control of vessels that fly the national flag
and engage in fisheries activities, including through a
system of inspection and control of operations on the

A/68/PV.63

high seas and by transmitting relevant information
to the fisheries management entity. That provides the
exact geographic location where the fishing is being
undertaken, which helps to ensure compliance with
the norms established by law for the management of
resources.
On the international level, our country has expressed
its commitment to sustainable fisheries through the
implementation of the principles contained in the Food
and Agricultural Organization’s Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries and chapter 17 of Agenda
21, which was adopted by the 1992 United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development. We
have also participated actively in regional cooperation
organizations.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is also party
to various international instruments that seek to insure
the preservation and organization of fisheries. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not, however, party
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, nor to the 1995 Agreement on the Implementation
of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish
Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks. Nor are the
standards of those international instruments applicable
under customary international law, with the exception
of those that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
recognized or will recognize in the future through
the adoption of those provisions into our domestic
legislation. However, for the sake of consensus my
delegation has not impeded progress on resolution
68/71, on sustainable fisheries.
Nevertheless, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms its historical position with regard to the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and
its related instruments, which has led us to express a
reservation with regard to the contents of the resolution.
Ms. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Our explanation of Argentina’s position refers to
resolution 68/71, on sustainable fisheries, which was
just adopted. Argentina joined with the consensus
regarding the adoption of the resolution. However,
once again, we would like to indicate that none of the
recommendations contained in the resolution can be
interpreted as meaning that the provisions contained in
the Agreement on the Implementation of the Provisions
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the

13-6074821/23

A/68/PV.63

Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation
and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks, adopted in New York in 1995,
can be deemed to be binding on those States that have
not expressly agreed to be bound by that Agreement.
The resolution that we have just adopted
contains paragraphs on the implementation of the
recommendations issued on the aforementioned
instrument at the 2006 Review Conference of the Fish
Stocks Agreement. Argentina reiterates that the those
recommendations cannot be considered applicable, not
even as guidelines, for those States that are not parties
to the Agreement.
That is particularly relevant in the case of those
States that have dissociated themselves from these
recommendations, as would be the case of Argentina.
As in previous sessions, Argentina has dissociated
itself from the consensus in the Assembly regarding
those paragraphs of the resolution relating to the 1995
New York Agreement and the recommendations issued
by the 2006 Review Conference on that instrument.
At the same time, Argentina recalls that existing
international law does not authorize regional fisheries
management organizations, arrangements or their
member States to take any action with respect to vessels
that fly the flag of States that are not members of such
organizations or arrangements or have not explicitly
consented to be subject to such measures. Nothing in
the resolutions of the General Assembly, including the
one just adopted, should be interpreted in a manner
contrary to that conclusion.
At the same time, I wish once again to recall that
the implementation of conservation measures and the
conduct of scientific research or any other activity
recommended in resolutions of the General Assembly,
in particular resolution 61/105 and concordant
resolutions, inevitably take as their legal foundation
the international law of the sea in force as reflected in
the Convention, including its article 77 and part XIII.
Therefore, the implementation of those resolutions
cannot be claimed as a sort of justification for denying
or ignoring the rights established under the Convention,
and nothing in resolution 61/105 or in other resolutions
of the General Assembly can affect either the sovereign
rights of coastal States over their continental shelf or
the exercise of jurisdiction by coastal States with regard
to their continental shelf under international law.

22/23

09/12/2013

Paragraph 143 of the resolution just adopted
contains a very relevant reminder of that concept,
which is already reflected in resolution 64/72 and in
subsequent resolutions. In that same vein and as was
done in previous resolutions, paragraph 144 recognizes
the adoption by coastal States, including Argentina, of
measures to address the impacts of bottom fishing on
vulnerable marine ecosystems throughout their entire
continental shelf, as well as their efforts to ensure
compliance with those measures. That consideration is
particularly relevant when it comes to the preservation
of vulnerable marine ecosystems related to sedentary
resources located on the continental shelf.
Finally, we would like to reiterate that the increasing
differences of opinion with respect to the contents of the
resolution on sustainable fisheries seriously threaten
the likelihood of such resolutions being adopted by
consensus at future sessions.
Mr. Özöktem (Turkey): Turkey voted against
resolution 68/70, entitled “Oceans and the law of the
sea”. I would like to recall that the reasons that have
prevented Turkey from being a party to the United
Nations Convention on Law of the Sea remain valid.
Turkey supports international efforts to establish
a regime for the sea that is based on the principle of
equity and is acceptable to all States. However, in our
opinion, the Convention does not provide sufficient
safeguards for special geographical situations and,
as a consequence, does not take into consideration
conflicting interests and sensitivities stemming from
special circumstances. Furthermore, the Convention
does not allow States to register reservations to its
articles.
Although we agree with the Convention in its
general intent and with most of its provisions, we are
unable to become a party to it, owing to those prominent
shortcomings. That being the case, we cannot support
a resolution that calls upon States to become parties
to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea and harmonize their national legislation with its
provisions.
With regard to resolution 68/71, on sustainable
fisheries, I would like to state that Turkey is fully
committed to the conservation, management and
sustainable use of marine living resources and attaches
great importance to regional cooperation to that end.
In that context, Turkey supported resolution 68/71.
However, Turkey disassociates itself from references

13-60748

09/12/2013

made in the resolution to international instruments to
which it is not a party. Those references should therefore
not be interpreted as a change in the legal position of
Turkey with regard to those instruments.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position.

A/68/PV.63

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-items (a)
and (b) of agenda item 76 and of agenda item 76 as a
whole?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

13-6074823/23
