S/PRST/2012/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 December 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6895th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 December 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Central African
region”, the President of the Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council strongly condemns the ongoing attacks and
atrocities carried out by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) and their
continued violations of international humanitarian law and abuses of human
rights, which pose a significant threat to the civilian population, in particular
women and children, and have serious humanitarian and human rights
consequences, including the displacement of 443,000 people across LRAaffected areas. The Council condemns further the recruitment and use of
children, killing and maiming, rape, sexual slavery and other sexual violence,
and abductions. The Council demands an immediate end to all attacks by the
LRA, particularly those on civilians, urges LRA leaders to release all those
abducted, and insists that all LRA elements put an end to such practices, and
disarm and demobilise.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the United Nations
Regional Strategy to Address the Threat and Impact of the Activities of the
LRA and urges swift implementation of the five strategic areas of intervention
identified in the strategy. The Council urges the United Nations Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), the United Nations political and peacekeeping
missions in the region and other relevant United Nations presences to
coordinate their efforts in support of the implementation of the strategy, as
appropriate and within the limits of their mandates and capacities, and calls on
the international community to provide assistance as possible to advance these
strategic goals. The Council further urges UNOCA to continue to play a key
role in the coordination of these activities. The Council requests that the
Secretary-General present to the Council a prioritised and sequenced
implementation plan to support the UN Regional Strategy no later than 28
February 2013, based on a clear division of labour between all parts of the
international system as well as UN organisations. The Council further requests
that this implementation plan identify key projects that support the priority
activities of the strategy.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the African Union
Regional Cooperation Initiative against the LRA (AU RCI-LRA), and urges
further progress toward its operationalisation and implementation. The
12-65814 (E) 191212

*1265814*

S/PRST/2012/28

Security Council urges all regional governments to fulfil their commitments
under the AU-RCI, and encourages neighbouring states to cooperate with the
AU-RCI. The Council further encourages all states in the region to take
measures to ensure that the LRA is not able to operate with impunity in their
territory. The Security Council also urges swift agreement on the Concept of
Operations for the AU-RTF. The Council also calls on the AU, the LRAaffected States, and the international community to work together to secure the
necessary resources for successful implementation. The Council underlines the
need for all military action against the LRA to be conducted in compliance
with applicable international law, including international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, and to minimize the risk of harm to civilians in those
areas. The Council further encourages all governments in the region, working
through this Initiative, to continue to strengthen their efforts and collaboration
to end the LRA threat.
“The Council acknowledges and commends the important ongoing efforts
being undertaken by MONUSCO in the fight against LRA including through
training and capacity building of FARDC, support to the Joint information
Operations Centre (JIOC), and implementation of the DDRRR programme to
encourage and facilitate further LRA defections.
“The Security Council welcomes the strong collaboration between the
United Nations and the AU in addressing the LRA threat, and encourages its
continuation. The Council encourages the African Union (AU)’s Special
Envoy, Francisco Madeira, and the Secretary-General’s Special Representative
for Central Africa and Head of UNOCA, Abou Moussa, to continue to work
together with the governments of the region, including through convening a
High-Level Meeting of the affected states to strengthen further their
cooperation.
“The Security Council underlines the primary responsibility of States in
the LRA-affected region to protect civilians. In this regard, the Council
commends the efforts so far undertaken by the Central African Republic
(CAR), the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the Republic of South
Sudan and Uganda to end the threat posed by the LRA, and urges further
efforts from these countries, as well from other countries in the region. The
Council notes the mandate of the UN Organization Stabilization Mission in the
DRC (MONUSCO) and the UN Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to help
protect civilians in LRA-affected areas in their respective countries, and urges
their continued efforts to implement this mandate, as well as the mandate of
the African Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA) to cooperate and share information related to the regional
threat of the LRA. The Council stresses the need for enhanced cross-border
coordination and information-sharing between these missions, as well as
among all other actors in the region, to better anticipate LRA movements and
imminent threats of attack. The Council welcomes efforts by local and
international actors to establish enhanced information-sharing networks
utilizing High Frequency radios and other communications technology to aid
protection efforts in one of the world’s most remote regions.

2

12-65814

S/PRST/2012/28

“The Security Council takes note of the growing concerns, cited in the
Secretary-General’s report, regarding the reported LRA presence in and around
the area of Kafia Kingi, which is disputed by both Sudan and South Sudan, on
the border with CAR.. The Council also expresses concern about the continued
reports of LRA attacks in CAR, as far as west as Bangassou, as well as in the
DRC. The Council calls on the UN missions in the region and AU-RTF to
work together to monitor these reports and to develop a common operating
picture of the LRA’s disposition in the region. The Council also calls on the
UN and AU to jointly investigate the LRA’s logistical networks and possible
sources of illicit financing, including alleged involvement in elephant
poaching and related illicit smuggling.
“The Security Council welcomes the significant increase in individuals
escaping or defecting from the LRA over recent months, and strongly supports
ongoing efforts to promote defections through the distribution of leaflets,
targeted radio broadcasts, and the establishment of safe reporting sites. The
Council calls on the remaining LRA fighters to leave the group’s ranks and
participate in the Disarmament, Demobilization, Repatriation, Resettlement
and Reintegration (DDRRR) process. The Council urges MONUSCO,
BINUCA, UNMISS, and other United Nations actors in the LRA-affected
region to continue to work with regional forces and non-governmental
organizations to promote defections and support the DDRRR efforts across the
LRA-affected area. The Council welcomes the High-Level Symposium on
DDRRR of the LRA that took place on 30 November 2012 in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia and urges the missions in the region to quickly implement the specific
standard operating procedures for the DDRRR of former LRA combatants.
Given the resource constraints, the Council especially encourages SRSG
Moussa and UNOCA to work with BINUCA to develop a plan to augment its
support for DDRRR efforts in CAR. The Council calls on international
partners to provide further strategic support as needed.
“The Security Council commends efforts by international donors to
provide humanitarian assistance to LRA-affected populations in CAR, DRC
and the Republic of South Sudan. The Council welcomes the steps taken to
deliver an enhanced, comprehensive, and more regional approach to the
humanitarian situation, including assistance to victims of sexual violence and
other attacks and urges further progress in this regard. The Council reaffirms
the requirement for all parties to promote and ensure safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian organizations to the civilian population, in accordance
with international law, including applicable international humanitarian law,
and guiding principles of humanitarian assistance. The Council expresses
concern about the lack of regular humanitarian access to many LRA-affected
communities in CAR and the DRC, principally because of poor infrastructure,
and encourages increased UN efforts and international donor support for
humanitarian access.
“The Security Council recalls that the International Criminal Court’s
arrest warrants for Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo, and Dominic Ongwen on
charges of, inter alia, war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
murder, rape and the enlistment of children through abduction have yet to be
enforced, and calls upon all States to cooperate with the Ugandan authorities

12-65814

3

S/PRST/2012/28

and the International Criminal Court in order to implement those warrants, and
to bring to justice those responsible for the atrocities.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General keep it
informed on the activities of UNOCA, the progress of implementation of the
Regional Strategy and the efforts being undertaken respectively by missions in
the region and other relevant United Nations agencies to that end, including
through a single report on UNOCA and the LRA to be submitted before
15 May 2013.”

4

12-65814
