lZ

General AHembly-Twenty-seeond Session

5. Approves the continuing sponsorshi_P by the
United Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket
Launching Station and recommends that Meml;~r. States
give consideration to the use of these fac1ltt1es for
appropriate space research activities;
6. Endorses the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to appoint a small group
of scientists to visit the sounding rocket station near
Mar del Plata, Argentina, when it is operative, in order
to advise the Committee on the station's eligibility for
United Nations sponsorship in accordance with t~e
basic principles endorsed by the General Assembly m
resolution 1802 (XVII) of 14 December 1962;
7. Notes with appreciation the report of the \Vorking Group of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space on a navigation services satellite system~
and endorses the suggestion that the International Civil
Aviation Organization and the Inter-Governmental
Maritime Consultative Organization, as well as other
specialized agencies and interested international governmental and non-governmental organizations, should
continue to study the requirements for potential applications for navigation services satellite systems in their
areas of competence and make their reports on this
subject available to the Committee on the Peaceful
Uses of Outer Space;
8. Expresses its appreciation of the work _of the
specialized agencies in the field of outer space, m particular the World Weather Watch programme of the
World Meteorological Organization and the progress
made by the International Telecommunication Un_ion
in the study of technical problems and the techmcal
assistance rendered by that agency during the planning
and testing of the Experimental Satellite Communications Earth Station at Ahmedabad, India, and invites
these organizations to make progress reports to the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in
1968;

9. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space, in the further progressive development
of the law of outer space, to continue with a sense of
urgency its work on the elaboration of an agreement
on liability for damage caused by the launching of objects into outer space and an agreement on assistance
to and return of astronauts and space vehicles, and to
pursue actively its work on questions relative to the
definition of outer space and the utilization of outer
space and celestial bodies, including the various implications of space communications ;
10. Urges the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to continue its activities aimed at increasing the exchange of information in matters relating
to outer space and calls upon all Member States to
co-operate fully in this endeavour ;
11. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to start at its next session the serious
consideration of the suggestions and views regarding
education and training in the field of the exploration
and peaceful uses of outer space expressed in the
General Assembly and in the Committee ;
12. Urges the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to consider further the question of the
applications of satellite technology which would create
benefits for mankind through their implementation on
an international basis ;
ft Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-serond
Session, Annexes, agenda item 32. document A/6804, annex IV.

13. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to study the technical feasibility of
communications hy direct broadcasts from satellites and
the current and foreseeable developments in this field,
as well as the implications of such developments ;
14. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work as set out in the
present resolution and in previous General Assembly
resolutions and to report to the Assembly at its twentythird session.
1594th plenary meeting,
3 November 1967.

2261 (XXII). United Nation& Conference on the
Exploration and Peaceful Uaee of Outer
Space6

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2221 (XXI) of 19 December
1966 and 2250 (S-V) of 23 May 1967, by which it
was decided to hold a United Nations Conference on
the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at
Vienna from 14 to 27 August 1968,
Recalling further its endorsement of the objectives
of the Conference, which shall be to examine the practical benefits of space programmes on the basis of
scientific and technical achieve: ,,ents, and the opportunities available to non-space }'owers for international
co-operation in space activitie;:,, with special reference
to the needs of the developing countries,
Reaffirming its belief that it is in the interest of all
countries, and of the developing countries in particular,
that knowledge and understanding of the achievements
of space science and technology should be more widely
disseminated and that the practical applications of space
technology should be actively promoted,
Believing that the success of the Conference will best
be ensured if there is effective pa-:-ticipation therein,
Believing further that the widest possible participation in the Conference by the developing countries is
highly desirable,
1. Expresses the hope, therefore, that all those invited to the United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer Space under
General Assembly resolution 2221 (XXI) will accept
the invitation ;
2. Calls upon all participating States to devote their
utmost efforts to ensuring the success of the Conference by the fullest possible achievement of its objectives as set forth in resolution 2221 (XXI) ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of the Chairman of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space and the panel of experts
within i'..s terms of reference 7 and in co-operation with
the iP'..erested specialized agencies, to continue to make
the '.1ecessary organizational and administrative arrangements for the Conference, within the ceiling of expenditure established for it, and to take appropriate
steps to secure the widest publicity for the Conference.
1594th plenary meeting,
3 N ovemher 1967.
6 See
7 See

also resolution 2345 (XXII).
Official Records of the General Assembly, Twe,sty-fi,-st
Session, Annexes, agenaa items 30, 89 and 91, document
A/6431, paras. 12 and 16.
