S/PRST/2003/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 July 2003
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4794th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 July 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Security Council
mission”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the recommendations made in the
reports of its mission to Central Africa from 7 to 16 June 2003 (S/2003/653)
and its mission to West Africa from 26 June to 5 July 2003 (S/2003/688).
“The Security Council endorses the recommendations of these two
missions which fall within its area of responsibility and wishes to see them
implemented. It has already taken the relevant recommendations into account
in preparing its resolution renewing and strengthening the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
“Where responsibility for implementation falls to others, the Council
looks forward to working in partnership with them, including United Nations
agencies and programmes; Governments in Central Africa and West Africa;
regional and subregional organizations, notably the Economic Community of
West African States; donor countries; non-governmental organizations; and
civil society. The Council invites them to keep it informed about their efforts at
implementation, so that the Council can support them and take any further
action necessary.
“The Security Council emphasizes the importance of a subregional
approach to issues such as small arms and light weapons, mercenaries, child
soldiers and humanitarian access. It stresses that follow-up activity by the
United Nations will require close cooperation and coordination throughout the
United Nations system. Action in these areas should also involve the
appropriate organizations, especially in West Africa.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to follow up those
recommendations which lie within his responsibility, and would be grateful for
a report on progress by 30 November 2003.

03-44188 (E)

250703

*
0
3
4
4
1
8
8
*

S/PRST/2003/12

“The Security Council recognizes that resources may be needed to
implement its recommendations. Therefore it will continue to encourage donor
countries in a position to do so to support such efforts, and to assist regional
and subregional organizations in this respect.
“The Security Council intends to review progress in implementing the
recommendations in December 2003.”

2
