S/PRST/2005/48

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 October 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5277th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 October 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its grave concern at recent reports of an
upsurge of violence in Darfur by all sides and insists that all parties strictly
abide by the demands and commitments made in the 8 April 2004 N’djamena
Ceasefire Agreement, the resolutions of the Council and the Abuja Protocols.
The Council strongly condemns the October 8 attack reportedly by the Sudan
Liberation Movement/Army on African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS)
personnel in Darfur, which killed four Nigerian peacekeepers and two civilian
contractors and wounded three others near Menawasha, and the October 9
attack reportedly by the Justice and Equality Movement in Tine in North
Darfur, which resulted in the ambush and detention of approximately 35 AMIS
personnel. The Council extends its deepest condolences to the families of
those killed.
“The Security Council also condemns the September 25 attack in
Modaina, Chad, by armed groups coming from the Sudan, which killed 75
people, the majority of them civilians. The Council joins with the African
Union in expressing particular outrage at the September 19 attack by Darfur
rebels against the town of Sheiara; the attack by Janjaweed militias on the
camp for displaced persons at Aro Sharow on September 28 during which 29
people were killed and many more wounded; and the attack on the village of
Tawilla by Sudanese government forces on September 29.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the humanitarian
impact that these developments cause and at the restrictions imposed on
humanitarian operations in Darfur. The Council insists that restrictions end
immediately and strongly urges all parties to ensure unhindered humanitarian
access in Darfur.
“The Security Council also expresses its concern that the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 19 September (S/2005/592) stated there had been ‘no
visible effort by the Government [of Sudan] to disarm the militia or hold them
to account in accordance with past agreements and Security Council
resolutions. The SLM/A [Sudan Liberation Movement/Army] and the Justice
and Equality Movement (JEM) are also failing to abide by the commitments
05-55279 (E)

131005

*0555279*

S/PRST/2005/48

made under past agreements and are doing far to little to control their men
under arms.’ The Council recalls the obligation undertaken by the Government
of Sudan to disarm and control militias. It demands the SLM/A, the JEM and
the Government of Sudan to immediately cease violence, comply with the
N’djamena Ceasefire Agreement, end impediments to the peace process and
cooperate fully with the African Union Mission. The Council again emphasizes
the need to bring to justice those who perpetrate violence.
“The Security Council recalls the provisions of resolution 1591 (2005)
concerning the Sudan. It urges the African Union to share the results of its
investigations into recent attacks with the Council for possible referral to the
Sudan Sanctions Committee in order to assist in the implementation of the
provisions of the Council’s relevant resolutions.
“The Security Council expresses its unequivocal support for the African
Union Mission, and recalls that the Sudanese Government and Darfur rebel
movements have to take the necessary steps to facilitate the deployment and
effectiveness of AMIS.
“The Security Council remains firmly committed to the cause of peace in
all of the Sudan, including through the Abuja talks and through full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. It encourages the
Government of National Unity and the Darfur rebels to engage in the search
for a solution to the Darfur conflict. It urges all parties to make rapid progress
at the Abuja talks to conclude a peace agreement without further delay.”

2
