A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/166
25 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (d)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.4)
53/166. Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/121 of 20 December 1993, in which it endorsed the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June
1993,1 as well as its subsequent resolutions on this matter, in particular resolution 52/148 of 12 December
1997,
Recalling also paragraph 100 of section II of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action
concerning the five-year review of progress made in the implementation of the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, including the need to pay special attention to assessing the progress towards the goal
of universal ratification of international human rights treaties and protocols adopted within the framework of
the United Nations system,
Recognizing that the five-year implementation review of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action, carried out on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,2
has provided an opportunity to strengthen the promotion and protection of human rights,
Reaffirming that human rights and fundamental freedoms are the birthright of all human beings, that
their promotion and protection is the first responsibility of Governments, and that all human rights are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,

1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

2

Resolution 217 A (III).

99-76993

/...

A/RES/53/166
Page 2

Convinced that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action has to be translated into effective
action by States, the competent United Nations organs and organizations and other organizations concerned,
including non-governmental organizations,
Welcoming the significant steps taken over the past five years at both national and international levels to
implement the recommendations made by the World Conference on Human Rights,
Deeply concerned, however, about the wide gap that continues to exist between the promise of human
rights and their promotion and protection worldwide, and deeply concerned also about denials and violations
of human rights — civil, cultural, economic, political and social — including the right to development,
Reaffirming the important role of non-governmental organizations in the promotion of all human rights
and in humanitarian activities at the national, regional and international levels, and appreciating their
contribution to increasing public awareness of human rights issues, to the conduct of education, training and
research in this field, and to the promotion and protection of all human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Noting that the Economic and Social Council devoted the coordination segment of its substantive
session of 1998 to the question of the coordinated follow-up to and implementation of the Vienna Declaration
and Programme of Action by the United Nations system,3
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights4 on the
implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action1 and the conclusions contained therein;
2. Solemnly declares its commitment to the fulfilment of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of
Action ;
3.

Welcomes agreed conclusions 1998/2 of the Economic and Social Council5 on the coordinated follow-

up to and implementation of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, and calls for their full implementation;
4. Reaffirms that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action continues to constitute a solid foundation for
further action and initiatives by States, the United Nations and other relevant intergovernmental bodies and
organizations, as well as concerned national institutions and non-governmental organizations;
5. Calls upon all States to take further action with a view to the full realization of all human rights for all in the
light of the recommendations of the World Conference on Human Rights;
6. Decides to continue its consideration of this question at its fifty-fourth session under the sub-item entitled
“Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action”.

85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998

3

See E/1998/SR.32, 33, 36-38 and 47. For the final text, see Official Records of the Economic and Social
Council, 1998, Plenary Meetings, 32nd, 33rd, 36th to 38th and 47th meetings.
4
5

A/53/372, annex.

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum (A/53/3
and Corr.1), chap. VI, para. 3.
