30

General Aalelllb17-Eleventh Seaion

of the Committee on South West Africa concerning
the tt'ansfer of "Native" administration to the Minister
of Native Affairs of the Union of South Africa and
concerning the rights and freedoms of the inhabitants
of the Territory of South West Africa.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1059 (XI). Solution of the question of South
West Africa
The General Assembly,
Considering that, of the Territories that were under
class B and class C Mandate of the League of Nations
at the time of the League's demise, the Territory of
South West Africa remains the only one that has not
been placed under the International Trusteeship System established by the Charter of the United Nations,
Considering it in the best interest of all parties concerned that a satisfactory solution of the question of
South West Africa should be reached as soon as
possible,
Having accepted, by its resolution 449 A (V) of 13
December 1950, the advisory opinionu of 11 July 1950
of the International Court of Justice on the question
of South West Africa,
B earing in mind the various resolutions of the General Assembly concerning the Territory of South West
Africa and the desire expressed by Member States that
ail possible efforts be made to bring this problem to a
satisfactory conclusion in the spirit of harmony that
prevails in the Udted Nations,
Expressing the hope that the Government of the
Union of South Africa will offer to the United Nations
its full co-operation,
1. Draws the attention of the Secretary-General to
the discussions in the Fourth Committee and in the
General Assembly in plenary meeting on the question
of South West Africa;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to explore ways
and means of solving satisfactorily the question of
South West Africa and to take whatever steps he shall
deem necessary with a view to finding such a solution
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report on this
matter to the General Assembly at his earliest convenience.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1060 (XI). Study of legal action to ensure the
fulfi.lment of the obligations aNumed by
the Mandatory Power under the Mandate
for South West Afr:ea
The General Assembly,
H aving regard to the provisions of the Mandate for
South West Africa, the Covenant of the League of
Nations, the Charter of the United Nations and the
resolutions of the General Assembly in regard to South
West Africa,
N oting that its resolutions endorsing and accepting
the advisory opinion 15 of 11 July 1950 of the International Court of Justice and urging the Union of

South Africa to place the Territory of South West
Africa under trusteeship have been of no avail,
1. Requests the Committee on South West Africa
to study the following question :
"What legal action is open to the organs of the
United Nations, or to the Members of the United
Nations, or to the former Members of the League of
Nations, acting either individually or jointly, to ensure that the Union of South Africa fulfils the obligations assumed by it under the Mandate, pending the
placing of the Territory of South West Africa under
the International Trusteeeship System?";
2. Further requests the Committee on South West
Africa to submit to the General Assembly at its twelfth
session a special report containing conclusions and
recommendations on the question.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

1061 (XI). Composition of the Committee on
South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by its resolution 749 A (VIII) of
28 November 1953, it established, until such time as
an agreement is reached between the United Nations
and the Union of South Africa concerning the question
of South West Africa, a Committee on South West
Africa consisting of seven Members.
Considering that the continuing absence of such an
agreement requires that the Committee on South West
Africa should remain in existence for the purposes set
forth in resolution 749 A (VIII),
Decides that:
(a) The composition of the Committee on South
West Africa shall be increased to nine members appointed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee;
( b) One-third of the membership of the Committee
shall be renewed by the same procedure annually.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.

*

*

*

At ils 661st ;lenary meeting on 26 Febrvary 1957, the Gmeral Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fourth Committee, appointed Ethio;ia and Finland as additional members
of the Committee on South West Afnca. The Commiltee i.s
theref ore com;osed as follows: BRAZ IL, ETHIOPIA, FINLAND,
MEXICO, PAKISTAN, SYRIA,
AMERICA and URUGUAY.

THAILAND,

UNITED

1062 (XI). Travel documents of
from Trust Territories

STATE$

OF

petitionen

The General Assembly,
Having received and granted several requests for
hearings from petitioners in the Trust Territories of
the Cameroons under British administration and the
Cameroons under French administration,111
H aving also received a memor.andum by the Secretary-General20 on this question,
,. Ibid., Eleventh Sessic,n, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/C.4/330 and Add.l to 26.
., Ibid., document A/C.4/333.

31

Reeolution.s adopted on the niports of Ille Foarth Commiltee

N oting that the petitioners are finding it difficult to
obtain travel documents,
Considering that the exercise of the right of oral
petition to the United Nations by the inhabitants of
Territories under the International Trusteeship System
should be facilitated,
Invites the Administering Members concerned to
grant the petitioners referred to in the present resolution travel documents to enable them to appear before
the proper organs of the United Nations for hearings,
when granted by such organs, and to return thereafter
to their places of residence.
661st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1063 (XI). Offere by States Mem.bere of the
United Nations of etudy and training facilitiee for inhabitante of Truel Territoriee

The General Assembly,
Noting from the report of the Trusteeship Council
the results of the programme of scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States to inhabitants
of Trust Territories pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 557 (VI) of 18 January 1952, 21
N oting that the major part of the scholarships offered by Member States remains unutilize<l,
Recalling that, in its resolution 753 (VIII) of 9
December 1953, the General Assembly recommended
that the Administering Authorities of the Trust Territories take all such measures as would ensure the greatest possible use by inhabitants of the Trust Territories
of the scholarships and training facilities offered by
Member States,
l. Requests the Member States administering Trust
Territories to take all the necessary measures to ensure
that scholarships and training facilities offered by
Member States be utilized by inhabitants of the Trust
Territories, and to render every assistance to those
persons who have been granted scholarships or fellowships;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to consider,
at its sessions in 1957, the question of the way in which
the scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States are being utilized by inhabitants of Trust
Territories and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twelfth session;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twelfth session a detailed
report on the actual use of scholarships and training
facilities offered by Member States for the education
of the inhabitants of Trust Territories.
661 st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1064 (XI). Attainment of self-government or
independence by Trust Territoriee

The General Assembly,
Taking into account that, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, one
of the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship
System is the progressive developm~nt ot the popula/bid., Eleventh Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/3170), part
I, chapter V, section 5.
11

tions of Trust Territories towards self-government or
independence,
Taking into account that, under General Assembly
resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949, the Trust
Territory of Somaliland under Italian administration
is to attain complete independence by 1960, and that,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1044
(XI) of 13 December 1956, the Trust Territory of
Togoland under British administration is to attain
independence in 1957 through union with an independent Gold Coast,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in its resolution 558 (VI) of 18 January 1952, invited the Administering Authority of each Trust Territory to determine the period of time in which it was expected that
the Trust Territory concerned should attain self-government or independence, and also taking into account
that this question has been repeatedly discussed at
subsequent sessions of the General Assembly,
N oting that the Trusteeship Council, in its report
to the eleventh session of the General Assembly, 22
drew the attention of the Assembly to the fact that
up to now the Administering Authorities have not
fixed such time-limits,
Attaching great importance to the fixing of definite
time-limits for the termination of trusteeship in Trust
Territories and for the granting of self-government or
independence to the peoples of these Territories,
1. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
take the necessary measures to ensure that the Trust
Territories of Tanganyika, the Cameroons under British administration, the Cameroons under French administration, Togoland under French administration
and Ruanda-Urundi achieve self-government or independence at an early date;
2. Invites the Administering Authorities to estimate
the period of time required for the attainment of selfgovernment or independence by ail Trust Territories,
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 558
(VI) of 18 J anuary 1952 and the present resolution;
3. Invites the Administering Authorities to submit
appropriate information to the Trusteeship Council at
its .nineteenth and twentieth sessions on the implementation of paragraphs 1 and 2 above;
4. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report to
the General Assembly at !ts twelfth session on the
progress made in implementing the present resolution.

661 st plenary meeting,
26 February 1957.
1065 (XI). The future of the Trust Territory
of Tanganyika

The General Assembly,
Having noted, during a hearing granted by theFourth
Com~ittee, the statements of Mr. Julius Nyerere,
President of the Tanganyika African National Union,
on the situation and the future of the Trust Territory
of Tanganyika, 23
H aving noted in particular the views expressed by
the petitioner to the effect that :
• Ibid., Supplement No. 4 (A/3170).
• Ibid., Eleventh Session, Fourth Committee, 579th and
582nd meetings.
