A /70/PV.96

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

96th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 7 June 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 35
Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70/879)

district, on the other side of the occupation line. He
was refused entry and was subsequently shot dead with
six bullets. This brutal murder is a sad reminder of the
human costs the Georgian IDPs endure. That is why we
are here today and why Georgia is submitting the draft
resolution. It is also why the Assembly’s engagement
and international involvement are important.

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I have the honour to
address the Assembly on behalf of my Government and
in the name of my fellow countrymen — hundreds of
thousands of them internally displaced persons (IDPs)
or refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region of Georgia — to solicit the Assembly’s support for
the draft resolution contained in document A/70/L.51,
under agenda item 35, “Protracted conflicts in the
GUAM area and their implications for international
peace, security and development”.

Giga was one of nearly 400,000 IDPs and refugees,
of all ethnicities and religions, who were uprooted
from the two Georgian regions of Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, due to the conflict and
several waves of displacement since the early 1990s.
In a country with a population of nearly 4 million,
hundreds of thousands remain displaced and are unable
to return to their homes because of circumstances
entirely beyond their control. That said, according to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in its Intentions Survey on Durable
Solutions: Voices of Internally Displaced Persons in
Georgia”, published in June 2015, the majority, 88.3 per
cent of the displaced Georgian population, said they are
willing to return voluntarily to their places of origin.

On 19 May, a 31-year-old Georgian man, Giga
Otkhozoria, an IDP from Abkhazia, was shot dead by
the so-called border guards on the occupation lines
between the Abkhazia region and the rest of Georgia. A
native of Gali, Giga had been forced to flee the conflictaffected area and lived with his family of four in a
rented apartment in the town of Zugdidi. Just before the
tragic event, he was trying to bring food to his relatives
and to attend the funeral of his late aunt in the Gali

For more than 16 years, from 1993 to 2009,
the Security Council in more than 40 resolutions,
presidential statements and communiqués unanimously
stressed the necessity to address “the need for a
dignified return of IDPs and refugees, including their
security and human rights concerns” (resolution 1666
(2006), para. 7). In one of its earliest resolutions on
Georgia, resolution 876 (1993), the Security Council
also expressed deep concern.

Draft resolution (A/70/L.51)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia to introduce draft resolution
A/70/L.51.

16-16123 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1616123*

A/70/PV.96

“at the human suffering caused by conflict in
the region, and at reports of ‘ethnic cleansing’
and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law” (resolution 876 (1993), fourth
preambular para.).
For eight consecutive years, the General Assembly
has been adopting a document like that before us
with an increasing number of positive votes and an
encouraging dynamic of support. Countries from all
regions of the world have voted in favour of the text
due to its human appeal and humanitarian values,
such as the right to return in safety and dignity, the
unacceptability of forced demographic change and the
need for unimpeded humanitarian access. It transcends
the case of a particular country and is universal in its
terms, because the right of return is a principle drawn
from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
As for the implementation of the main goals of the
draft resolution in practice, including the creation of
conditions conducive to voluntary, safe and dignified
return, the document shows its firm commitment to the
Geneva international discussions mandated by the sixpoint ceasefire agreement of 12 August 2008, which, as
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon also underlines,
“remain the only forum for relevant stakeholders to
meet and address the issues identified in [General
Assembly resolution 69/286]” (A/70/879, para. 13).
For that very reason, both resolution 69/286 and the
subsequent report of the Secretary-General (A/70/879)
serve as reference points in the Geneva international
discussions and complement the work on humanitarian
issues. Let me reiterate that my Government is
committed to the peace talks and will remain engaged
in the discussions in good faith to attain tangible results.
(spoke in French)
Restrictions and limitations on the freedom of
movement pose serious obstacles to the exercise of
the right of return. The razor-wire fences and other
artificial obstacles installed by the occupation forces rip
families and communities apart and violate their civil,
social, economic and cultural rights. Local residents
are prevented from cultivating their agricultural lands,
visiting cemeteries or religious sites, and reaching
emergency medical services. Locals continuously
endure intimidation, and risk their lives on a daily basis
when attempting to cross the occupation line in both
2/9

07/06/2016

directions. Moreover, the so-called integration treaties
signed by the Russian Federation with its occupation
regimes in Tskhinvali and Sukhumi, and the so-called
laws on the status of foreigners recently adopted by
authorities in control, have created official grounds
for the ethnic discrimination against native Georgians
and the violation of their rights to work and freedom
of movement and to other fundamental rights. All of
this represents an ongoing policy of occupation and
ethnic cleansing, and constitutes part of a strategy of
de facto annexation.
(spoke in English)
Pending their return, the Government of Georgia
makes every effort to alleviate the burden and ensure
decent conditions for the displaced population, in
accordance with the national strategy and its relevant
action plan. At the end of 2015, with the support
of UNHCR through its joint project via the Mutual
Recognition Agreement, the Livelihood Action Plan
of 2016-2017 was adopted, providing opportunities for
IDPs and their host communities to fulfil their potential
by gaining financial independence from the State and
becoming self-reliant. As concerns relations with our
compatriots living in the occupied territories, the ethnic
Abkhazians are an integral part of our common history
and future. Despite the current artificial barriers,
the full reintegration of all ethnicities into a vibrant
society where human rights and individual freedoms,
as well as cultural and linguistic diversity of different
communities, is the Georgian State’s top priorities.
While the Geneva international discussions address
the fulfilment of all provisions of the six-point ceasefire
agreement here at the General Assembly, with the draft
resolution before us we focus on the humanitarian
needs of the affected population by upholding and
enshrining their rights until return becomes safe and a
viable option. The Secretary-General also reiterates in
his report that
“the right of return and its exercise by an internally
displaced person cannot therefore be directly linked
to political questions or the conclusion of peace
agreements. It is essential to recognize return as
both a human right and a humanitarian issue that
must be addressed irrespective of any solution to an
underlying conflict” (A/70/879, para. 49).
This year, Member States embarked on
implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), having pledged that no
16-16123

07/06/2016

one would be left behind. At the World Humanitarian
Summit, held in May in Istanbul, the international
community reaffirmed all five core responsibilities
outlined in the Secretary-General’s Agenda for
Humanity (A/70/709, annex), which places people first
and underlines the importance of securing their safety,
upholding their dignity and providing opportunities for
a better future.
The rights of the displaced should be acknowledged,
reaffirmed and protected, regardless of political
processes and negotiations. The draft resolution
represents the case of a single country, but the issue
itself is a part of the greater humanitarian crisis.
Therefore, each and every Member State concerned
with the current humanitarian catastrophe in the world
must take a responsible decision in support of this
particular humanitarian cause. We, the United Nations,
have a moral responsibility to do so. Once again, voting
in favour of the present draft resolution is not about
taking sides between the parties, but about making the
right choice by saying “yes” to the basic human rights
and fundamental humanitarian values, based on the
principles of humanity and international law. In that
light, I urge the Assembly once again to show solidarity,
support the fundamental principle of the right of return
and to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development-GUAM and its member States:
Georgia, Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and my
own country, Azerbaijan.
This year once again, the GUAM member States are
presenting a joint position in support of draft resolution
A/70/L.51, entitled “Status of internally displaced
persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and
the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia”. We
call upon the Member States to vote in favour of
the document.
The draft resolution before us addresses the
issue of protracted displacement in the GUAM area,
specifically in Georgia, where hundreds of thousands
of men, women and children from the Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali regions have remained forcibly displaced as
a result of conflict and violence since the early 1990s.
As a non-political draft resolution, the text focuses
solely on the humanitarian aspects of the displacement,
and calls for respect of the right to return, property

A/70/PV.96

rights and humanitarian access to the affected regions
of Georgia.
Given its exclusively humane goals, the document
has steadily gained international support from the States
Members of the United Nations since 2008. The GUAM
countries thank the Secretary-General for his report,
entitled “Status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia” (A/70/879). We regret
that despite the calls of the international community,
the conditions for organized return in safety and
dignity have not yet been fulfilled. Furthermore,
since the last adoption of the document on 3 June 2015
(resolution 69/286), the humanitarian situation on the
ground has seriously deteriorated due to the additional
impediments imposed by the authorities in control of
Georgia’s Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions.
Those new discriminatory regulations on the
legal status of foreigners target the ethnic Georgian
population living in the occupied territories and impose
new restrictions on the freedom of movement, the
right to property, labour rights and the right to receive
education in one’s native language. They endanger the
livelihoods of the remaining Georgian population in the
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions and could potentially
trigger a fresh wave of forced displacement.
In that context, we find it particularly alarming and
unacceptable that the authorities in control have voiced
their intention to conduct a so-called referendum in
the Tshkinvali region “on accession to the Russian
Federation”. The situation in Georgia’s occupied regions
illustrates the urgency of international engagement.
However, being encircled by 60 kilometres of razorwire fences, other artificial obstacles and the so-called
border signs, the Abkhazian and Tskhinvali regions
remain inaccessible to the international community
to this day. In that light, voting in favour of the draft
resolution strengthens our joint call for unimpeded
access by humanitarian actors to the displaced
population and those living in the conflict-affected
areas.
GUAM reiterates its firm support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia within
its internationally recognized borders. We believe that
the General international discussions are an important
platform for addressing the security and humanitarian
challenges in the aftermath of the August 2008 armed
conflict. We appreciate the role of the United Nations

16-161233/9

A/70/PV.96

as one of the co-Chairs of the Geneva international
discussions and stress the relevance of the annual
reporting by the Secretary-General, pursuant to the
General Assembly’s resolutions, as a viable instrument
for maintaining the international community’s focus on
the issue of the displaced. In that regard, we view the
present draft resolution as an important tool to further
encourage the participants in Geneva to redouble their
efforts to ensure respect for human rights and address
the issues within their respective mandate, including
the creation of conditions conducive to a voluntary
return in safety and dignity.
Forced displacement has led to a range of serious
challenges in the GUAM countries. Over 60 million
people in our nations have become affected by armed
conflicts. We believe that the humanitarian concerns of
the affected population, including internally displaced
persons, should be a priority, and that the issue has to
be addressed regardless of the lack of progress in the
conflict-resolution process.
We also believe that the United Nations, as a
universal international organization, is best placed to
seek a lasting solution, while addressing the long-term
needs of internally displaced persons (IDPs), such as
securing their right to return. Two weeks ago, for the
first time in 70 years of the history of the United Nations,
the World Humanitarian Summit took place in Istanbul
to address all relevant humanitarian issues and to renew
our commitments to the principles of international
humanitarian law. We believe that those principles
should be upheld in every case and situation involving
displaced populations. In that regard, the present
draft resolution is an opportunity for United Nations
Members to reconfirm our commitment and express
support for the right of a safe and dignified return for
the IDPs and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia. Therefore,
the GUAM member States once again urge members to
vote in favour of the draft resolution.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I am honoured
to speak on behalf of the Baltic and Nordic States:
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Norway,
Sweden and my own country, Lithuania. Poland and
Bulgaria associate themselves with this statement.
Today the world faces the worst levels of
displacement since the end of the Second World War.
Over 60 million people have been forced to leave their
homes as a result of armed conflict, violence and human
4/9

07/06/2016

rights violations. Within Europe, forced displacement
has affected significant numbers of people, hundreds of
thousands of them in Georgia. Since the beginning of
the conflict in Georgia, residents of the conflict-affected
areas have been deprived of their basic human rights.
Unfortunately, as highlighted by the SecretaryGeneral’s report in document A/70/879, there have
been no major changes with regard to refugees or
internally displaced persons exercising their right to a
safe, voluntary and dignified return. Regardless of the
international community’s efforts, authorities in control
of the occupied regions continue to deny the right of
internally displaced persons and create additional
impediments to the exercise of their rights. The
problem has been further compounded by the continued
implementation of so-called borderization measures,
as well as by the introduction of new restrictions,
including for local staff of international organizations
in crossing the administrative boundary line.
We share the Secretary-General’s call for
unimpeded access for all United Nations agencies
and international non-governmental organizations
to the occupied regions of Georgia. Any additional
obstruction of humanitarian access exacerbates their
already difficult situation for the conflict-affected
population and is contrary to the obligations under
international humanitarian and human rights law.
The humanitarian nature of draft resolution
A/70/L.51 commits us all to continue working with
the international community to ensure that those who
have been forcibly displaced are able to exercise their
fundamental rights and freedoms, while welcoming
the resumption of the Joint Incident Prevention and
Response Mechanism under United Nations auspices in
Gali. We would like to encourage all participants in the
Geneva format of talks to continue their efforts and agree
on additional steps to further strengthen the security
situation and meet the humanitarian needs of conflictaffected populations, especially internally displaced
persons. We take this opportunity to reiterate our firm
support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders.
In conclusion, this is already the ninth year that
we are taking action on a draft resolution on the
status of internally displaced persons and refugees
from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia, Georgia, and we welcome the growing
support for this humanitarian cause. We believe that
16-16123

07/06/2016

the General Assembly is best placed to send a powerful
signal of support to the displaced population and to the
participants in the Geneva international discussions
to redouble their efforts to facilitate the return
process. Respecting our long-standing commitment
to fundamental human rights and humanitarian
principles, including the right to return, property rights
and humanitarian access, this year again we will vote in
favour of the draft resolution, and call on others to join
us in supporting it.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement just delivered by the representative
of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development-GUAM and its
member States, Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and the
Republic of Moldova. I would also like to make several
remarks in my national capacity.
There is no doubt that the refugee and displacement
crisis is one of the most important issues on the agenda
of the General Assembly. It has also been a longstanding one in the GUAM region. Regrettably, since
2014 this challenge has been very relevant to Ukraine.
Russian aggression against my country has created
about 1.7 million internally displaced persons (IDPs). It
continues to destroy families and peoples’ lives. Many
citizens of Ukraine have been displaced twice, first
from Crimea and then again from certain regions of
Eastern Ukraine.
Hundreds of thousands of IDPs have been living in
limbo in Georgia since the early 1990s. The Georgian
Government has taken unprecedented steps to improve
IDP conditions, but a lot of work remains to be done. IDPs
in Georgia continue to require international assistance
and attention. We stand together with Georgians in
solidarity and urge all United Nations Member States to
lend their full support to the document just presented,
which has purely humanitarian goals.
Draft resolution A/70/L.51 is aimed at addressing
the issues IDPs from Georgia face every day, and it
will help them to live the life they deserve. The draft
resolution is clearly of a humanitarian nature, despite
many attempts to politicize its content. It recognizes
the right of safe and dignified return of all internally
displaced persons and refugees and their descendants,
regardless of ethnicity, to their homes in Abkhazia
and the Tskhinvali region of Georgia, and stresses the
need to respect their property rights. Let us put aside
all political differences and prove our commitment to

A/70/PV.96

the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law.
We firmly believe that the humanitarian concerns of
the affected population, including internally displaced
persons, should be a priority in the present situation.
I would like to reiterate Ukraine’s full support for the
draft resolution as well as for Georgia’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. Ukraine will vote in favour,
and I urge all those States that did not support the
resolution last year to reconsider their position. It will
be the best proof of the General Assembly’s support for
humanitarian principles.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/70/L.51. Before giving the floor to speakers in
explanation of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Our delegation is convinced that the
initiative being considered today is counterproductive
and politically motivated and that it will not facilitate
solving the problems that are addressed in it. Its main
goal is not to improve the situation of those who have
been forcibly displaced. The experience of adopting
similar resolutions in previous years reaffirms that it
has not led to any practical results in this area. We have
no doubt that behind this initiative lies the desire to
divert attention from the tasks of the real work in the
region and to use the rostrum of the General Assembly
to advance unilateral approaches and assessments, as
well as the traditional anti-Russian rhetoric.
The consideration at the United Nations of the issue
addressed in draft resolution A/70/L.51 would make
sense and have a real outcome if Abkhazia and South
Ossetia were involved in it. While the representatives
of Tskhinvali and Sukhumi have many times asked to
come to the United Nations and lay out their positions
to delegations of Member States, it is clear that we
should not expect this to happen in the near future. The
intention of the Georgian delegation is understandable.
In the absence of representatives of the Abkhaz and
South Ossetian parties, it is easy to lay out their own
version of the sources and reasons of the situation,
covering up the many harmful attempts by Tbilisi to
resolve the issue by force, including the armed attack
on non-combatants in Tskhinvali in August 2008.

16-161235/9

A/70/PV.96

In these conditions, the Abkhaz and South Ossetian
parties have no other option but to attempt to bring to the
international community, via the Russian Federation,
information on the situation in the territories of the
Republics and the reasons behind it. In particular, we
have articulated this position in General Assembly
documents, in the form of appeals by the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to
States members of leading international organizations.
We hope that the contents of these documents will
be taken into account by delegations when they are
formulating their position on the draft resolution
under consideration.
The sponsors of the draft resolution are not
troubled by the consequences for the currently frozen
discussion of refugee problems in the working group
on humanitarian issues of the Geneva international
discussions on security and stability in the Caucasus
region, where a targeted discussion really could be
taking place. Once again, they are merely trying to
make a place for their approach regarding the status
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. This unfortunately
reaffirms that Tbilisi is still not prepared to undertake
a constructive dialogue with its neighbours about the
long-term settlement of the situation in the region,
including the problems of refugees and internally
displaced persons.
Without this, unfortunately, it is difficult to discuss
Georgia’s stubborn unwillingness not only to conclude
a legally binding agreement with Georgia and South
Ossetia in support of lasting peace and stability in the
region, but even to adopt a short-term joint statement
about this under the Geneva international discussions.
It is the Georgian party that has for years blocked this
initiative in Geneva, although the initiative supported
by most participants in the discussion, including the
co-Chairs. Moreover, we cannot fail to notice the
strengthening of the offensive capacity of the Georgian
Army and the increased number of military exercises,
which in no way promote efforts to stabilize the
situation in the region.
The draft resolution before us does not reflect the
current realities in the region and will in no way help
to resolve humanitarian issues or improve the overall
situation. We propose that the Georgian delegation reject
this approach and focus its efforts on the consistent
reduction of tensions, restoring trust and supporting
security, which would lead to an improvement of the
living conditions on both sides of the border.
6/9

07/06/2016

Taking all this into account, the delegation of the
Russian Federation asks for a recorded vote on draft
resolution A/70/L.51, and calls on members to vote
against it. We will vote against it, and we ask other
Member States to not support this politicized initiative.
Mr. Grant (Canada): Canada is pleased to
once again support the draft resolution on the status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia (A/70/L.51). We are encouraged by
Georgia’s continued efforts in promoting, immediate,
full, sustained and unimpeded access for humanitarian
activities to internally displaced persons and refugees
in all conflict-affected areas in Georgia. Canada
calls on all participants in the Geneva discussions to
intensify their efforts to establish a durable peace,
commit to enhance confidence-building measures and
create favourable security conditions for the voluntary,
safe and unhindered return of all internally displaced
persons and refugees to their homes.
Canada unreservedly supports Georgia’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty within its internationally
recognized borders. We view the so-called partnership
treaties signed between the Georgian regions of
Abhkazia and South Ossetia with the Russian
Federation as both illegal and illegitimate, and we call
on the Russian Federation to end its interference in the
region and to fully respect its Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe commitments, in particular
the 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement and its
implementing measures of 8 September 2008. Canada
believes that sustainable solutions to conflicts must
include respect for the human rights of all individuals,
regardless of ethnic descent, faith or sexual orientation.
Canada invites all Member States to prioritize
efforts to alleviate the suffering of all people affected
by conflicts worldwide and to unite to intensify efforts
to establish sustainable peace. Supporting the draft
resolution under consideration this morning will be a
valuable first step towards achieving that goal.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom will vote in favour of draft resolution
A/70/L.51 today. The draft resolution seeks to reaffirm
the inalienable right of internationally displaced
persons (IDPs) and refugees to return to their homes in
a safe and dignified manner, regardless of their ethnic
origin. Let me be clear — this is a humanitarian and
16-16123

07/06/2016

human rights issue and should not be linked to wider
political processes.
There are over a quarter of a million registered
IDPs in Georgia. Too many of them live in difficult and
vulnerable conditions. We will and we must continue
to call for their return home. With every year that goes
by, the call must only become stronger. It is vital that
the General Assembly show that it has not forgotten
these people — individuals like Giga Otkhozoria, who
was shot, unarmed, near a crossing point last month,
as we heard earlier in the debate today. Giga was but
one tragic example of the continuing human cost of
this unresolved conflict. It is vital that the incident be
investigated fully and that those responsible for his
death be held accountable under Georgian law.
Until their return is secured, it is clear that more
needs to be done to improve the lives of the men,
women and children who remain internally displaced
in Georgia. We hope that all sides will use the Geneva
international discussions to make much needed progress
on those humanitarian issues. The United Kingdom
welcomes the Government of Georgia’s efforts to date.
Such efforts could be further improved by effectively
implementing national and international legislation
to help and protect the lives of IDPs. Like others, the
United Kingdom calls on Russia to stop the continued
borderization of the administrative boundary lines with
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which directly impedes
the return of Georgians to their homes.
In closing, we hope to see the momentum and
constructive approach by all sides sustained. We
look forward to future meetings of the Joint Incident
Prevention and Response Mechanism, which are
scheduled to begin next month.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/70/L.51, entitled “Status
of internally displaced persons and refugees from
Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia, Georgia”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria,
Canada, Central African Republic, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,

A/70/PV.96

Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kiribati, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Micronesia
(Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Palau, Panama, Poland,
Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Spain, Sweden, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Vanuatu
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Nauru, Nicaragua, Russian
Federation, South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab
Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Argentina, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Chile, China,
Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lebanon, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia,
Myanmar, Namibia, Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Serbia, Singapore, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Zambia
Draft resolution A/70/L.51 was adopted by 76 votes
to 15, with 64 abstentions (resolution 70/265).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bahrain and
Senegal informed the Secretariat that they had
intened to abstain]
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are

16-161237/9

A/70/PV.96

limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Roet (Israel): Israel welcomes the steps that
the Government of Georgia has taken to improve the
livelihood and socioeconomic status of internally
displaced persons, which is highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/70/879). Israel is encouraged
by the substantial progress made by the Georgian
Government in the areas of developing irrigation and
drinking water, roads, education, agriculture, shelter,
heating and especially the provision of gas to villages.
Israel also views positively Georgia’s programme of
engagement through cooperation that aims to build
trust and confidence among divided communities.
Israel supports the spirit of reconciliation through
direct dialogue promoted by the Georgian Government.
Israel would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate its support for and recognition of Georgia’s
territorial integrity. We reiterate our well-established
position that the way to resolve long-standing conflict
is through a negotiated, mutually agreed approach, not
through unilateral actions.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): As
in past years, Chile abstained in the voting on resolution
70/265, because we believe that it could prejudice or
influence the consideration of unresolved issues under
negotiation in Geneva. Chile supports the search for a
peaceful and consensual solution, either through the
Geneva international discussions or in another forum,
that would ensure the impartiality of the process, above
all by avoiding the politicization of an exclusively
humanitarian situation and the establishment of a
multilateral context for the consideration of items
currently under mediation.
Mrs. Della Gatta (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay firmly promotes, protects and defends human
rights and international humanitarian law at the national
and international levels. The defence of international
law and the principles of peaceful coexistence and
territorial integrity have been priorities of our foreign
policy. In that regard, we reiterate our support for all
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and to the principles of international law
expressed in resolution 70/265.
We note with concern the further deterioration in
the human rights situation in the regions of Abkhazia
and South Ossetia, and we are concerned by the increase
in the number of refugees and internally displaced
8/9

07/06/2016

persons. We therefore believe it critical to step up our
efforts to arrive at solutions that will enable displaced
persons to return to their homes. We believe that it is
vital to facilitate the conditions necessary for the United
Nations system, in particular the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Human
Rights of Internally Displaced Persons, to travel to
the regions in emergency situations. That is essential
in order to arrive at long-term solutions, especially for
internally displaced persons.
It is also vital to ensure the safe and unimpeded
access of humanitarian personnel to the region, taking
into account in particular the situation affecting women
and children. We believe that all involved parties in all
situations must impartially and consistently protect,
strengthen and respect the norms of international
humanitarian law, which are the very basis for the
protection civilians.
Uruguay believes that the Geneva international
discussions must continue in order to find a solution
to security and stability issues and to the humanitarian
situation of internally displaced persons and refugees
in the region. We hope that those negotiations will
conclude as soon as possible with a positive outcome for
the people involved, creating conditions conducive to
their voluntary return to their homes while respecting
their human rights without discrimination on ethnic
grounds. Uruguay accords the utmost priority to those
negotiations and urges the parties involved to make
every effort to ensure their success.
My delegation therefore abstained in the voting on
resolution 70/265.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Brazil recognizes
the territorial integrity of Georgia and expects that the
dispute between Georgia and the Russian Federation
can achieve a peaceful resolution in the shortest term.
We express our solidarity with all victims of forced
displacement in Georgia and reiterate our conviction
that overcoming the challenges faced by refugees and
internally displaced persons depends above all on the
creation of favourable political conditions for their
return and on dispelling fears of conflict resumption.
Nevertheless, Brazil, as in previous years, abstained
in the voting on resolution 70/265, which has just been
adopted, as from our perspective it can prejudge or
influence the consideration of sensitive issues that
should be addressed by the negotiations currently
16-16123

07/06/2016

taking place in Geneva. In this regard, we believe
that confidence-building measures and initiatives to
foster cooperation should be pursued by all parties,
particularly in the framework of the Geneva process.
We also urge all actors to seek lasting solutions for the
situation of internally displaced persons and refugees,
bearing in mind their right of return.
Finally, Brazil deplores the recent death of a
Georgian citizen on the Georgian-Abkhaz contact line.
It is our sincere hope that the resumption of the Joint
Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism can
prevent the recurrence of other tragic incidents.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Georgia.

A/70/PV.96

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I just wanted to thank all
the delegations that voted for the principle and voted for
the humanity. I deliberately do not want to engage in
responding to the Russian delegation with regard to the
accusations made. In that regard, I already circulated
my letter some time ago and that is sufficient. I thank all
representatives again who voted in favour of resolution
70/265 and in favour of humanity.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 35?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.55 a.m.

16-161239/9
