S/PV.6966

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6966th meeting

Tuesday, 14 May 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Menan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Togo)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 May 2013 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2013/263)

13-33222 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1333222*

S/PV.6966

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

following the tragic wars of the 1990s. But we must
also recognize that the job is not yet done and that our
engagement remains essential if we are to safeguard
the progress made thus far and build on it to reach our
common goal.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 3 May 2013 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2013/263)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia to participate in this
meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas MayrHarting, Head of the Delegation of the European Union
to the United Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/263, which contains the text of a
letter dated 3 May 2013 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting the forty-third report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: Allow me to begin by thanking the
members of the Security Council for their continuing
support and attention to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The question of Bosnia and Herzegovina does not,
fortunately, have the immediate security dimensions
of the other issues that the Security Council is dealing
with. But I am sure that the Council will agree with me
that what happens to Bosnia and Herzegovina matters
far beyond its borders. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
country that in so many ways has come to symbolize
our shared commitment and quest for an integrated
European continent rooted in lasting peace, stability,
prosperity and tolerance. As we strive to achieve that
vision, we should, of course, take pride in the progress
that has been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina

2

I regret to inform the Council that in the six
months since my previous report (S/2012/813), Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s political leaders have continued
to fail the citizens of the country and fell short of
the very limited expectations of the international
community. As a result, the country has fallen further
behind its neighbours as a region. Serbia and Kosovo
are normalizing relations following a historic deal
negotiated by the European Union’s (EU) foreign policy
chief, Baroness Ashton, and Serbia appears poised to
open accession talks with the European Union.
Croatia is now just seven weeks away from full
membership, having served as a shining example to
others in the region of what can be achieved if change
is delivered through reform. Montenegro’s progress
is also impressive. The region is moving on, and, in
seven weeks, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have 1,000
kilometres of common borders with the European
Union.
Meanwhile, regrettably, Bosnia and Herzegovina
is stagnating. Year after year it is let down by its
political leaders, who continue to fail to reach the
healthy compromises that are necessary to meet the
requirements of Euro-Atlantic integration and to
tackle the very serious economic and social challenges
facing the country - all this despite the very generous,
progressive and reinforced engagement of the EU on the
ground. I should to like mention in particular the tireless
efforts of European Union Special Representative Peter
Sørensen.
The sad reality of Bosnia’s politics was brought
home again in April, when the country’s leaders failed
to reach agreement on the implementation of a key
ruling from the European Court of Human Rights
that would unlock the next stage in the EU integration
process. In that regard, I should like to ask the political
leaders: what should have been easier to solve — the
implementation of the Sejdić-Finci human rights ruling,
or the historic issue of Serbia and Kosovo?
A similar dynamic has played out over the past two
years with regard to the country’s NATO aspirations,
where little concrete progress has been reached to
register military property in the name of the State,

13-33222

S/PV.6966

the requirement to unlock the country’s entry into the
Alliance’s membership action plan. Both tasks are
simple and straightforward, involve little or no material
cost and could be achieved within days with a minimum
of political courage and an understanding that reaching
healthy compromises through political dialogue is a
win-win situation for all involved. Yet the zero-sum
approach to politics continues unabated year after year.

situation in the Federation. The ruling coalition in
Republika Srpska elected a new Prime Minister and
replaced a number of ministers, seemingly in response
to a worsening economic situation, which included
public sector strikes. In contrast with the Federation
Government, the Republika Srpska Government has
continued to meet regularly as it seeks to tackle the
many economic and social challenges it is facing.

That approach must change, and it must change now
if the next 16 months are not to be lost to unproductive
election campaigning.

However, from the point of view of the mandate
given to me under the Dayton Peace Agreement and
reflected in successive Security Council resolutions,
I remain deeply concerned about fundamental
challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina coming from
some representatives of Republika Srpska, including
entity President Dodik. Six months ago, I signaled that
the issue of growing advocacy for the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by Republika Srpska officials
deserved the special attention of the international
community. My assessment in this regard has not
changed. Statements made and actions taken during the
reporting period, which are catalogued in my report,
have in my view represented a continuation of this
worrisome policy.

Before reviewing the main political developments
of the last six months from the perspective of my
mandate, I want to make clear in no uncertain terms
that the fundamental reason for the country continuing
to lag behind its neighbours is the fact that elected
officials and political parties continue to put their own
narrow personal and party political interests before the
interests of the citizens and the country at large.
The fact that the pull of Euro-Atlantic integration
processes has so far not proved strong enough to
overcome this should be of concern to all of us and
cause for serious reflection on the elements of our
united strategy moving forward.
Turning now to the political developments of
the last six months, it is the deepening political and
constitutional crisis in the Federation, linked to a new
parliamentary majority being formed in this entity,
that has dominated events. Despite its majority, the
new coalition, which has a clear and legitimate right
to seek to reshuffle the Government, has not been able
to remove the existing Government, as some parties
have used constitutional blocking mechanisms that are
actually designed to protect the rights of constituent
peoples to block the adoption of a no-confidence vote.
The crisis is further complicated by the fact that the
institution responsible for resolving the blockage — the
so-called Vital National Interest Panel of the Federal
Constitutional Court — does not function due the fourand-a-half year failure of the competent authorities to
appoint missing judges to the Panel.
As if these developments were not a serious
enough distraction from the pressing difficulties facing
the authorities in the Federation, the President of the
Federation was arrested on 26 April and remains in
detention.
The smooth reshuffling of the Republika Srpska
Government in March stands in sharp contrast to the

Just last month and again a few days ago, the
Republika Srpska President said that Bosnia and
Herzegovina “has absolutely no possibility to survive”
and described Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
“sufferer on its last breath, into whom the
international community is still throwing capsules
of oxygen claiming that it has to survive”.
This is just one of many such statements cited in
my report, and they have continued since this reporting
period ended. Also symbolic of the retrograde politics
that continues to prevail, statements denying that
genocide was committed in Srebrenica have also
continued.
In sharp contrast, Serbia’s President Tomislav
Nikolić, Prime Minister Dačić and Deputy Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vučić, expressing the sentiments
of the Belgrade authorities, have in recent weeks
shown the kind of political leadership that is worthy
of the highest praise. When President Nikolić explicitly
apologized for Srebrenica and other war crimes
committed by individuals in the name of the Serbian
State or people, he took a courageous step towards
regional reconciliation that, if followed up, could open

13-332223

S/PV.6966

the way to further improvements in relations between
Sarajevo and Belgrade.
It is also worth noting that, upon the initiative of
Turkey, a meeting is taking place today between the
Presidents of Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Turkey. Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu came
personally to Sarajevo last week to prepare that historic
meeting. These efforts are extremely important not
only to regional cooperation, but also to regional
reconciliation. Of course, they enjoy my full support.
In general, I also remain concerned about a pattern
of disregard for the rule of law that has emerged over
the past couple of years, not least in the Federation. For
this reason, I submitted a special report to the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council on the rule
of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The ongoing failure
of local institutions to implement the November 2010
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court decision
on Mostar’s electoral system is a case in point and
represents a violation of the Peace Agreement, which
states that decisions of the Court shall be final and
binding. As a result, residents of Mostar were unable
to vote in the 2012 local elections. The two largest
parties in Mostar bear most responsibility for the
failure to reach an agreement, and I expect these two
parties to start compromising. Perhaps not surprisingly,
given the overall climate, the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities again failed to make concrete progress on
the outstanding objectives set by the Steering Board of
the Peace implementation Council as prerequisites for
closure of the Office of the High Representative.
Not all the news has been bad. I have already
mentioned some positive aspects coming out of
Republika Srpska. Additionally, the State-level Council
of Ministers, which underwent a party reshuffle in
November, has met regularly. The State budget for 2013
was adopted on time, for the first time in two years.
In general, however, the State-level coalitions have so
far been unable to deliver much needed progress on the
legislative front.
A stable security situation is the starting point for
everything else, and through their continued presence
the European Union and NATO military missions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have both continued to reassure
citizens that the country remains safe and secure, despite
the difficult political situation and at a time when senior
politicians have repeatedly and openly called the future
of the country into question. In advance of the Security
Council’s deliberations in November, I would like to
4

take this opportunity to express my strong belief that
the presence of the European Union military mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina under its existing mandate is
essential to support ongoing international community
efforts and my ability to fulfil my civilian mandate.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political leaders and
the parties they represent are faced with a choice that
is growing increasingly stark with each passing day.
There can be no more excuses and there is no place
for them to hide from their responsibilities. The choice
is simple. They can succeed together or they can fail
together. I know them all. I know that they can do much
better, and I call on them from this most distinguished
of stages to show the courage to finally reach the healthy
compromises that will enable the country to progress.
For our part we must continue to assist those
in Bosnia and Herzegovina who want the country to
progress, while also standing firm against all those
who seek to reopen the wounds of the past. Bosnia and
Herzegovina can go forward only if it looks forward and
not backwards. Accordingly, I hope that when I report
to the Council in six months that we can look forward
to a 2014 full of progress and not of deepening crisis.
For Bosnia and Herzegovina, we need not only the
continuous attention of the international community,
but also patience and a long-term approach. New
generations are arising and ready to commit themselves
to that wonderful country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Inzko
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I am
especially pleased to be first on the list of speakers on
the subject of today’s debate, and all the more so because
I spent several years in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I saw
the people of that country suffer. I saw them regain
hope and confidence. And, immediately following the
trauma of war and the destruction that it produced, I
saw a country imbued with promise and tolerance and
willing to put aside the past and hope for a better life.
I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
introducing his semi-annual report on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/263, annex). The
overall impression one comes away with from the
report is one of political stalemate and an entrenchment
of positions on the part of Federation partners. That has
13-33222

S/PV.6966

resulted in a deterioration of the situation and creates
the danger of the disintegration of the institutions put
in place by the Dayton Agreement. The Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to experience
a constitutional and political crisis at the federal and
cantonal levels. That is undermining the cohesion
and sovereignty of the country while endangering
its territorial integrity and delaying its Euro-Atlantic
integration.
On the political front, the report refers to the
political power struggle that has characterized political
life in Bosnia and Herzegovina and led to paralysis
in the functioning of the Federation’s institutions, in
particular its Constitutional Court, which is so crucial
for ensuring respect for the rule of law. The nationalist
rhetoric and provocative statements with regard to
Bosnia’s institutions, as well as unilateral actions, are
weakening the very foundations of the Federation and
jeopardizing 17 years of painstaking achievements in
building on the arrangements produced by the Dayton
Agreement. At the same time, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been unable to make progress in meeting the five
objectives and two conditions required in order to
proceed to close the Office of the High Representative,
in particular when it comes to the issue of property and
the Brcko district.
Those negative trends have a direct impact on
people’s daily lives, as well as on improving their
social and living conditions. Far from serving the longterm interests of any constituent part of the Federation,
this situation is damaging to all communities in that
it serves to emphasize differences, pit the various
interests against one another and erode the prospects
for much-desired national reconciliation.
Given that scenario, which is worrying in
many ways, the holding of regular sessions of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the adoption
of several budgetary and defence policy decisions,
the holding of regular Council of Ministers meetings,
the implementation of the results of local elections of
October 2012, and the symbolic election of the first
non-Bosniak mayor of Sarajevo are all reasons for hope.
Those developments show that the path of compromise
is viable, so long as there is political will and the rule
of law is respected.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country that
emerged from a long and painful conflict that struck
the conscience of the international community and
permanently marked the people of this friendly country.

The Dayton Agreement, which was the outcome of
a historic compromise, needs to be preserved and
strengthened, not weakened or made to fail. We hope
that all members of the Federation can resist the
temptation of, and attempts at, unilateralism. We also
hope that they will relaunch a responsible political
dialogue in order to continue to build today and to
construct a common future. Clearly, that is in the
interests of all communities that make up Bosnia and
Herzegovina, just as it is in the interest of the stability
of the entire region.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also take note of the
presentation of his report (S/2013/263, annex), which we
listened to with concern owing to the lack of progress
reported in the period under consideration. We wouldl
like to make five comments with regard to the report.
First, we reiterate our support for the Dayton
Agreement and for the protection and preservation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that it is crucially important
for the political leaders and the international presence
to continue to focus on observing the balance created by
that Agreement and the follow-on political structures.
Secondly, with regard to my previous point,
we continue to be disturbed by the pitch and level
of negative rhetoric on the part of certain leaders
against the Dayton Agreement and the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are especially concerned because those words are
accomopanied by efforts to undermine, and in certain
cases even to disrupt, the functioning of the Federation
and its institutions. In spite of the Constitutional crisisi
and the stalemate in the current situation, we welcome
the fact that the 2013 State budget has been adopted.
We also view positively the fact that the State Council
of Ministers has been able to meet regularly. Moreover,
we emphasize the need to resume dialogue among
political parties, especially in order to make progress
on the legislative front.
Thirdly, we are concerned at the ongoing situation
in Mostar, where it has not been possible to hold
elections for local authorities as was done in the rest
of the country on 7 October 2012, owing to the failure
to implement the ruling of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
Constitutional Court. We hope that the multiparty
facilitation process will lead to resolving the situation
and mitigating tensions. In that regard, we also hope

13-332225

S/PV.6966

that that important step will be the basis for tangible
progress and the transformation into a stable and
democratic country.
Fourthly, it is unfortunate that, during the period
covered by the report, the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina were unable to make any concrete
progress with regard to the pending objectives set by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council as
prerequisites for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We look forward with interest to the
outcome of the Board’s upcoming meetings, on 22 and
23 May. We hope that the Board will be able to come up
with specific recommendations on the way ahead.
Fifthly, we recall the implementation of the ruling
against Bosnia and Herzegovina of the European
Court of Human Rights in the Sejdić-Finci case. We
underscore the importance of protecting the rights of
ethnic minorities, and hence the implementation of this
important ruling.
The report illustrates that, however good the
intentions and support of the international community,
they alone will not lead to progress. In that regard,
we agree with High Representative Inzko that respect
for the Dayton Agreement — and in particular for the
constitutional framework and the rule of law — is both
a crucial prerequisite and a tool for achieving long-term
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is now up to the
authorities and political parties to do their part.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): It is
my pleasure to welcome High Representative Inzko
back to the Security Council, and to thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and his continued efforts to
support the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The United States is steadfast in its commitment
to the success of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we, like
our allies, have invested much in that country since the
signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement in 1995. As
we reflect on the report presented today (S/2013/263,
annex) and on the goodwill we have towards Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we wish to address three points.
First, we continue to strongly support the country’s
aspirations to integrate into the European Union (EU)
and NATO, and we had hoped that the new coalition
would make those goals its top priorities. Unfortunately,
politicians throughout the country seem more interested
in putting their own personal political agendas above
the interests of the citizens they were elected to
represent. In the Federation entity, ongoing efforts to
6

reshuffle the governing coalition have distracted from
the Euro-Atlantic reform agenda. The 2009 judgement
of the European Court of Human Rights in the SejdićFinci case remains unimplemented, violating the
human rights of non-constituent peoples and blocking
the country from applying for EU candidacy. Unless
the issue is resolved soon, Bosnia and Herzegovina
risks holding elections next year in violation of the
judgement. And the country must still register defence
properties in order to meet NATO’s condition for
activating the membership action plan, a process that
is being obstructed by politicians in Republika Srpska.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s lack of progress is all the
more visible in the context of its neighbours, all of
which are rapidly moving ahead towards Euro-Atlantic
integration.
Secondly, it has been more than five long years
since the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board adopted the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The so-called “5+2” consists of issues that the Office
of the High Representative is uniquely qualified and
authorized to oversee, and which the political leaders
of Bosnia and Herzegovina could easily have completed
in 2008, propelling the State on its way to EU and
NATO membership. Instead, a number of political
leaders have focused their energies on deconstructing
or undermining Dayton and the various institutions
and laws established since 1995 that Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs both for the people’s common good
and for functioning as part of a modern Europe.
The local authorities have a legal obligation to
respect the authority of the High Representative and
the Dayton framework. Yet, Republika Srpska officials
have persistently undermined State institutions and
made statements calling into question Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. In
the Federation, local parties in Mostar have failed to
meet their obligation to implement the Constitutional
Court ruling of 10 November 2011 on the electoral
system. Those actions disregard the most fundamental
elements of the Bosnian Constitution and the Dayton
Agreement. They must cease immediately. The
continuing threats to the Dayton Peace Accords are
why we continue to support the presence of the Office
of the High Representative until the 5+2 criteria have
been met. It is crucial that the Office continue to receive
sufficient resources and political support to fulfil its

13-33222

S/PV.6966

mandate under both the Dayton Peace Agreement and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Finally, I would like to highlight the continuing
importance of justice and reconciliation to longterm regional stability, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We join the High Representative in
recognizing President Nikolić of Serbia for his recent
public apology for the crimes committed in Srebrenica.
We strongly support the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia as it continues its crucial
work in bringing to justice those individuals responsible
for some of the most heinous crimes of the Bosnian
conflict. The January signing of a protocol on war
crimes cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia is another positive development that will
help ensure that locally indicted war crime suspects
face justice.
Other local developments related to reconciliation,
however, are more troubling. We are particularly
concerned about the continued efforts to build an
Orthodox church in close proximity to both an
exhumed mass grave and the Potočari memorial site and
cemetery, where thousands of victims of the Srebrenica
genocide are laid to rest. The United States strongly
supports freedom of religion, but the construction of
a church in such a sensitive location, where there is no
local Orthodox community, can only be interpreted as a
deliberate provocation designed to deepen mistrust and
fear between ethnic groups.
I again want to stress the strong commitment of the
United States to seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina move
beyond its troubled past towards a thriving future. We
look forward to working with the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the international community to
see the Dayton Peace Agreement fully implemented
and the country moving irreversibly towards its EuroAtlantic path.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I join
the speakers before me in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing and his commitment to that country.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union.
The High Representative has painted a somewhat
gloomy picture of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The political crisis at the Federation level
continues to obstruct essential reforms. The country’s

unity and territorial integrity are still not subject to full
consensus within political circles and have been called
into question in some disturbing separatist rhetoric. The
country is also dealing with a difficult socioeconomic
situation. In the absence of a shared vision for their
country’s future, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
have failed to launch the reforms necessary for
achieving their self-imposed goals regarding European
and Euro-Atlantic integration.
That said, not all the news is bad, as the High
Representative notes in his forty-third report to
the Security Council (S/2013/263, annex) and as he
recalled this morning. We welcome the fact that the
State-level Council of Ministers, which was reshuffled
in November, is meeting regularly. It is also noteworthy
that the State budget for 2013 was adopted on time for
the first time in two years.
Moreover, we see that the security situation has
remained calm and stable. Since its establishment in
2004, the European Union-led force Operation Althea,
has never had to intervene to restore peace, since the
Bosnian authorities themselves have been able to deal
with potential security threats. Against this backdrop,
Operation Althea was reconfigured in September. We
welcome the fact that since then the force’s efforts have
been chiefly focused on capacity-building and training,
while retaining the means to contribute to the Bosnian
authorities’ capacity for deterrent.
Luxembourg welcomes the increased political
presence of the European Union on the ground since
September 2011 and the strengthened mandate of
its Special Representative and Head of Delegation
in Sarajevo, Mr. Peter Sørensen, which testify to the
European Union’s continued willingness to help Bosnia
and Herzegovina do a better job in moving forward with
its programme of reform towards stability, development
and integration with the European Union.
Now that Croatia will be joining the European
Union in a few weeks and relations between Serbia
and Kosovo are normalizing, thanks to the dialogue
facilitated by the European Union, we, like the High
Representative, are concerned about the fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is lagging behind compared
with its neighbours. We take this opportunity to
encourage the political leaders to overcome their
differences and to implement the reforms needed for
progress in the country. It is most urgent to implement
the judgement of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdić-Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case

13-332227

S/PV.6966

regarding the rights of minorities to be elected to the
Bosnian Presidency and the House of Peoples of the
Bosnian Parliament. We regret that fact that, despite the
facilitation of the European Union, the political leaders
did not succeed in reaching an agreement on this issue
by the deadline of 11 April.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming our profound
conviction that the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
a united, stable and multi-ethnic country lies steadfastly
within a European context. That is, moreover, the wish
of the vast majority of the Bosnian population. For
its part, as a member of the European Union and an
elected member of the Security Council, Luxembourg
will spare no effort in encouraging the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the aspirations of
their citizens by overcoming the current stalemate and
taking the decisions needed to truly take the destiny of
their country into their own hands.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened carefully to the statement of High
Representative Inzko. His report to the Security Council
(S/2013/263, annex) is informative and detailed, but
unfortunately it is far from an objective analysis of the
true situation in the country and suffers from bias in its
criticism of the Bosnian Serbian leaders. So as to obtain
a more objective idea of the situation in Bosnia and the
processes there, we recommend that members of the
Council also read the ninth report of Republika Srpska
to the Secretary-General and the Security Council,
in which the commitment of the Bosnian Serbians to
international law and the spirit of Dayton is absolutely
clear.
We agree that the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to worsen. However, the reason for yet
another crisis at the State level is hardly to be found in
the rhetoric of the leaders of Republika Srpska. Of true
concern is the exacerbation of antagonism between the
two primary Bosnian parties. The effectiveness of the
intra-Bosnian dialogue has been undermined, creating
complications for the central Bosnian institutions.
Indeed, the Government of the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is indeed paralysed. The recent
detention of its President on charges of corruption
illustrates the further exacerbation of the political crisis
in the Croatian-Muslim entities against the backdrop of
tensions between Bosniaks and Croatians.
We are seriously concerned by the inflammatory
rhetoric of the Bosniaks. How else can we characterize

8

allegations that Republika Srpska arose solely as a result
of ethnic cleansing and war crimes? We are concerned
to note a significant rise in Islamist radicalism in the
Federation.
Unlike that in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the situation in Republika Srpska is
on the whole stable. Its political forces continue to
cooperate successfully in Bosnian affairs on the basis
of an approach that upholds the Dayton Agreement
and the national interests of the Bosnian Serbs in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its Government has insisted
on the need for an agreement to be reached in Bosnia
and Herzegovina on reform in the country, refraining
from violations of consensus, including when taking
decision on political matters. Unless these principles
are upheld, the existence of Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be impossible.
Russia supports the territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and hopes to see its institutions
function on a sound basis, with equal footing for the
three constituent peoples of the State, in line with
the Dayton Agreement. One important task for the
international community at this stage of the Bosnian
process would be to hand over responsibility for the
future of the country to the Bosnians themselves. In
that regard, we advocate the abolition of the Office
of the High Representative and a return to efforts to
achieve agreement on the “5+2” programme set by the
Peace Implementation Council Steering Board.
We are convinced that the residual issues in that
framework and any other matters vital to the future of
the country should be resolved by Bosnians themselves
through agreement among all three constituent
peoples of the Bosnia and Herzegovina: Bosniaks,
Serbians and Croatians. In that context, we support
the principled position regarding the inadmissibility of
outside intervention in the internal negotiating process
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Any outside support to
a single side would undermine the delicate political
balance in the country.
We oppose a resumption of the activities of the
Office of the High Representative in the European
integration agenda for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
right to define their future integration and to breathe
new energy into the reform process is proper to
Bosnians themselves.
We caution the High Representative against using
the obsolete Bonn emergency powers, which have only

13-33222

S/PV.6966

exacerbated situations that were already negative in
Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past year. A striking
example of this was the removal in March 2011 of the
procedural obstacles to the establishment of guiding
bodies in the Federation without the leading Croatian
parties. That is, to a large extent, the reason why the
crisis remains unabated today.
We feel that decisions on key matters in the
settlement of the situation should be taken on the basis
of the internationally agreed format emanating from
the Security Council and the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board.
There is a clear need for the Office of the High
Representative to work more actively to lift sanctions
imposed on Bosnian officials, primarily Serbians, due
to allegations of their having assisted suspects of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. This
process continues to move at a snail’s pace. I recall
that over the past six months, restrictions were lifted
only with respect to one individual and continue to be
applied to three out of approximately a dozen others.
The High Representative, together with the Steering
Committee, should consider appropriate steps towards
the final closure of the frozen international supervisory
regime in Brčko and the Arbitral Tribunal.
As a step in the drawdown of the Office of the
High Representative, we support a scaling up of the
European Union mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In that context, we support a clear division of labour
between the High Representative and the European
Union Special Representative, and strict compliance
with their mandates so as to avoid any duplication.
While we do not contribute to the European Union-led
force Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
we do support its tasks of ensuring security in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and training personnel of the national
Ministry of Defence and armed forces.
We should like to touch specifically on the matter of
international reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We support an impartial investigation of all crimes
committed from 1992 to 1995. At the moment, the
cases being considered before either the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia or within the Bosnia
and Herzegovina judicial system are clearly biased;
they tend to deal only with allegations against Serbians.
We question the demonstrative disengagement of the
Chief Prosecutor of The Hague Tribunal from contact

with organizations of relatives of Serbian and Croatian
victims of the crisis in Yugoslavia.
We attached great importance to the collective
efforts to enhance the comprehensive inter-Bosian
dialogue, free from outside intervention, regarding
consultative options for socioeconomic and structural
reform, in keeping with the Dayton Agreement and
mechanisms. We recognize the importance of amending
the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina following
the decision of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdić-Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case.
We are convinced that compromise in that respect
is possible and must be sought through continued
dialogue. However, we cannot agree with the broad
interpretation of the views of the Court on the use of
that decision as a pretext to impose a review of all of
Dayton provisions.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for presenting the fortythird report on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2013/263,
annex).
We note that the security situation in the country
continued to remain stable. Among achievements
registered during the reporting period were regular
meetings of the State-level Council of Ministers,
the timely adoption of the State budget for 2013, and
continued cooperation with the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. We also note the efforts
made to address the needs of displaced persons in
the country and finding durable housing solutions for
them in a more coordinated way. However, according
to the report, the unfortunate dynamic — a reverse of
progress and a return to the prevailing negative trends
of the previous six years — continued during the
reporting period. As a result, no concrete progress has
been made towards meeting the outstanding objective
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
The political consensus has been undermined
by deepening divisions among political parties and
the protracted power struggle at the federation and
cantonal levels. We are alarmed by the continuation
of direct and open challenges to the fundamentals of
the Dayton Peace Agreement, including in particular
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

13-332229

S/PV.6966

Azerbaijan condemns divisive rhetoric advocating
the dissolution of the State and any action or attempt
to challenge the functionality of the State and its
constitutional responsibilities. We would like to
emphasize in that regard that neither the General
Framework Agreement for Peace nor general
international law contain any provision invoking the
claimed right to self-determination for the purpose of
unilateral secession from, or dissolution of, the State.
Obviously, attempts to negate or challenge vital aspects
of the Peace Agreement and to undermine the unity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina require special attention by
the international community. We agree with the High
Representative that abiding by the Dayton Agreement,
in particular the constitutional framework and the rule
of law, is a prerequisite for long-term stability.
The economic and social situation in the country
continued to weaken during the reporting period, with
a decrease in exports, imports and industrial production
and an increase in the foreign trade deficit and
unemployment. It is therefore critical that all political
factions in Bosnia and Herzegovina focus on the
country’s economic and development priorities. There is
also a need for redoubled efforts to address and resolve
long-outstanding humanitarian issues, in particular
those related to property, and to ensure that the rights
of returnees are fully guaranteed and implemented. We
call on all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage
in constructive dialogue with a view to addressing the
pressing challenges, overcoming the political stalemate
and strengthening the stability and unity of the country.
It is also important that the Security Council and the
broader international community continue to support
progress towards stability and development in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the efforts of the country’s
political leadership to that end.
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I join others in welcoming Mr. Valentin Inzko
to the Council. We appreciate his concise and pointed
briefing.
We would like to offer some observations on the
challenges that lie ahead for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
First, while we welcome the relatively calm
and stable security environment in the country, it is
disappointing that there still remain major challenges
arising from the power struggle and lack of trust among
political actors. The cautious optimism that prevailed
early last year quickly turned into disappointment and
frustration. The Government coalition, which was
10

formed after six months of twists and turns, has proved
to be short-lived. The protracted power struggle among
political parties is still impeding the Government
from working on pressing issues such as constitutional
reform.
It is worrisome that the rule of law has been
similarly undermined by political instability. The rule
of law is a prerequisite for democracy and a central
component of long-term peace and security. In the
light of that, we remain deeply concerned that political
leaders casually violate the law for their own purposes
and repeatedly fail to implement the decisions of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court. The
deadlock on the appointment of the remaining judges
to the Federation Constitutional Court is also a serious
source of concern. We urge all the political stakeholders
to engage in constructive political dialogue and to
respect the Constitution and the procedures established
by the law so that the Government can fully function
and perform its responsibility under the Constitution.
Secondly, Another worrisome trend is the growing
open advocacy for the dissolution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As the High Representative elaborated
in his report (S/2013/263, annex), there have been
distressingly high levels of provocative rhetoric from
the leadership of the Republika Srpska, challenging
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Such nationalistic rhetoric will only serve
to inflame ethnic tensions. We call on leaders from all
parties to refrain from divisive rhetoric, which only
undermines national reconciliation and the prospects
for long-term stability.
The political instability in Bosnia and Herzegovina
brings me to my third point, that is, the importance
of national ownership. Despite years of international
support, we are still witnessing a continuing political
crisis, and little progress has been made on national
reconciliation. I believe that that can largely be
attributed to the lack of ownership on the part of political
stakeholders. No democratic process is sustainable in the
absence of a meaningful degree of political ownership
and national reconciliation. In that vein, we would like
to encourage the authorities of Bosnia-Herzegovina to
further strengthen their efforts to promote the value
of tolerance and inter-ethnic understanding through
multi-ethnic education and confidence-building
measures. Enhancing the engagement of civil society
will also be crucial in ensuring accountable, responsive
and democratic governance.

13-33222

S/PV.6966

Civil society can play a pivotal role by holding
political leaders and representatives more accountable.
In that regard, the Republic of Korea encourages the
High Representative to redouble his efforts to build
the capacity of grassroots civil society organizations.
Finally, we absolutely share with the High
Representative the idea that we need to pay continuous
attention to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress, with
patience and a long-term approach. In that regard, we
would like to express our full support for the efforts of
the High Representative.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for BosniaHerzegovina, for his briefing.
I associate myself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union.
The security situation on the ground has remained
calm and stable — something for which Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s institutions have been fully responible.
That has been the state of affairs for several years, and
we should welcome it.
However, the succession of political crises — for
months at a time at the central level, and now at the
Federation level — and the continuing tension between
the political representatives of communities paralyse
the country and are of concern to us. Those incessant
clashes divert Bosnian authorities from the goal of
Euro-Atlantic integration. We particularly regret that
in the light of the fact that other States of the region are
about to reach historical milestones in that process or
have demonstrated their ability to commit to dialogue
and compromise in order to give themselves the
opportunity to make progress towards the European
perspective.
We therefore call once again on the Bosnian
Government to undertake the reforms expected of it, first
and foremost with regard to bringing the Constitution
in line with the ruling of the European Court of Human
Rights in the Sejdić-Finci case. That is a crucial element
for progress towards European integration and resolving
the issue of the apportionment of defence and State
property. However, it is also essential to improve the
functioning and effectiveness of institutions, starting
with the establishment of a coordination mechanism on
European issues. We remain attached to the prospect
of seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina join the European
Union as a united and sovereign country enjoying
full territorial integrity. However, a country under

trusteeship and deeply divided cannot as such belong to
the European Union. It rests with the Bosnians and their
leaders to find an historic compromise that would allow
Bosnia and Herzegovina to develop institutions that
function effectively, which clearly would not allow the
prevailing exploitation of the institutional framework
inherited from the Dayton Agreement.
We welcome the ongoing reconfiguration of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is a harbinger of opportunity and an illustration
of the leading role that the European Union can and
should play in the country, in accordance with the
European vision offered to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union is stepping up its political, humane
and financial commitment to the country. The Office of
the Special Representative of the European Union has
been considerably strengthened in its regional presence
and the rule of law. Mr. Peter Sørensen, Special
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, enjoys our full support.
The reconfiguration of the European Union-led
force Operation Althea (EUFOR Althea), resulting from
a calm and stable environment, has made it possible
to reduce the forces stationed there to 600 persons
and to focus them on capacity-building and training.
The Security Council must acknowledge that change,
the nature of EUFOR Althea in the autumn, when it
scrutinizes the role of the mission. EUFOR Althea still
has a residual executive mandate to support the abilities
of the country’s authorities to maintain security as the
situation may require.
The Bosnian authorities have always been able to
ensure security, and therefore do not need the European
military presence for that purpose, as is regularly
recalled in the reports of the Operation Commander.
The activities of EUFOR Althea in its drawdown phase
must continue to complement those of other actors on
the ground, particularly the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which has deployed
its second largest mission covering a broad range of
activities, such as governance, the rule of law, respect
for human rights and the management of arms stocks
and munitions surpluses. In that area, the OSCE should
retain the leading role; a proliferation of actors would
be counterproductive.
The reconfiguration of the Office of the High
Representative is being considered, including by the
European Union, which I would remind the Council

13-3322211

S/PV.6966

contributes more than 53 per cent to the budget of the
Office. These considerations do not reflect a positive
assessment of the political situation; quite the opposite,
continuing political difficulties require us to rethink
and adjust our strategy. Maintaining at any price an
approach dating from the 1990s does not serve Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We would like to reduce the Office
to a scale consonant with its residual responsibilities
by strengthening its transparency and complementary
nature with the Office of the EU. The current
Government crisis reminds us that it is high time to
change our approach to ensure that Bosnian politicians
shoulder their responsibilities. When they do, the role
of the High Representative must be strictly limited to
the essential core of his mission within the framework
of the civil tranche of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for joining us in the Council today.
I would also like to join others in our appreciation of his
work and his latest report. His detailed and objective
analysis of the worsening political situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina makes for sobering reading. I wish
to convey the United Kingdom’s support for the High
Representative and his continued commitment to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement in that
context.
The United Kingdom shares the High
Representative’s frustration and concern at the
continuing lack of political will to deliver crucial
reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina since his last
appearance before the Council (see S/PV.6860). We
deeply regret that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
were unable to seize an important opportunity this year
to make tangible progress towards joining the European
Union (EU) and NATO. The United Kingdom has been
a consistent supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
Euro-Atlantic ambitions and continues to believe that
EU and NATO membership remain the strongest way
to ensure the security, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In July, one of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
neighbours, Croatia, will join the European Union.
There is a lesson here that determined and strategic
commitment to the accession process and to related
reforms yields results. Reform progress carries aspirant
countries forward on the path of European integration.
Journeys that seem long and distant in their early stages
can end up being completed. But that happens only

12

when politicians act decisively and strategically, when
they commit themselves to the goal of European Union
membership, and when they make sustained efforts to
implement the necessary reforms. What we have seen
in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the reporting period is
that yet again personal and political interests have been
prioritized over the needs and ambitions of ordinary
citizens, leaving the country to fall farther behind its
neighbours on the EU track.
We still hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be able to make progress towards the European Union
this year and to bring its Stabilization and Association
Agreement into force. But the ball is in its court. As the
High Representative notes in his report (S/2013/263*),
the European Union has already provided generous
support to help facilitate a solution to the European
Court of Human Rights Sejdić-Finci ruling, which
remains the sole obstacle to Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
Stabilization and Association Agreement. That the
political parties were unable to agree to a deal in
spite of that support was deeply disappointing. Unless
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s governing institutions act
quickly and decisively to remedy the situation and
find a solution, that has all but ended their chances of
submitting a credible membership application this year.
We are disappointed also by the failure to complete
the registration of defence property that continues to
hamper implementation of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
NATO membership action plan, in spite of assurances
made by party leaders to NATO Secretary-General
Rasmussen during his visit in February. We urge
them to fullfil their commitment to the March 2012
agreement. We share the High Representative’s concern
and condemnation of those in Republika Srpska who
continue to advocate the dissolution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There can be no redrawing of the map
or any prospects of Bosnia and Herzegovina joining
the European Union as anything other than a single
sovereign State.
We are also gravely concerned by the sustained
political crisis in the Federation and the continued
impasse in Mostar. The ongoing disputes and associated
institutional gridlock deeply discredit the political
parties in the Federation entity. As the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council has pointed
out, ensuring the functioning of institutions is not a
choice. It is an obligation. We fully support the High
Representative’s efforts to find a local solution to these
issues, and welcome his continued cooperation with

13-33222

S/PV.6966

the EU Special Representative in pushing for their
resolution.
There have been rare occasions this year where
agreement has been found among Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders. As the High Representative’s
report makes clear, the successful reshuffling of the
Council of Ministers has led to regular meetings this
year. The passing of the State budget on time is also to
be welcomed. These incidents show that political will
can be found to act in the national interest, and we must
continue to actively encourage the behaviour.
But those are regrettably rare examples. Meanwhile,
the social, political and economic impacts of inaction
are already apparent in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We share the High Representative’s concern at the
deteriorating economic situation and call on Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s leaders to ensure that the country is well
prepared to weather the economic impact of Croatian
accession to the EU in July. Here again, the state of
near gridlock that we have witnessed in recent months
is very damaging, not just because of the signal it sends
to potential investors, but also because it contributes
to delay in dispersing international financial assistance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The negative trends that the High Representative
illustrates in his report reinforce our assessment
that international safeguards and a strengthened EU
presence continue to play an important role in ensuring
security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As such, the United Kingdom supports the High
Representative’s recommendation that the European
Union Force-Operation Althea and its executive
mandate be retained this year. We look forward to
discussions on that matter at the October meeting of the
EU Foreign Affairs Council and at the United Nations
Security Council in November.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for the comprehensive presentation of the
ninth report he has submitted to the Council — the
forty-third report of his Office. We particularly thank
him for his work in ensuring that the Dayton Peace
Agreement is fully implemented.
Let me also commend the international efforts that
have for so long tried to foster peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly those of the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council.

Mr. Inzko’s ninth report presents mixed progress.
We have all noted that the security situation in the
country has remained calm and stable without any
major incident. We commend the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina in that regard, as well as the European
Union Force-Operation Althea for its valuable
assistance to the Government.
We are also encouraged by the fact that the Council
of Ministers met regularly and that the budget was
adopted on time. We are also happy to hear that a
tripartite summit will be held today among Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Turkey and hope that it will
boost regional cooperation.
However, we are concerned by the current political
stalemate. We note that the Government’s cohesiveness
and unity have been severely challenged by disagreement
among the political actors, particularly within the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The stand-off
has negatively impacted their own development and the
fulfilment of the agenda containing five objectives and
two conditions, set for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative.
It is important to stress that every branch of
power — particularly the Government and the
Parliament — must abide by its constitutional role.
It is also important that all stakeholders continue to
engage in dialogue in order to dislodge the stalemate.
For progress to be made, constructive dialogue among
all ethnic groups, including minorities, and among the
various structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina on one
side, and the High Representative on the other, are
critical.
Rwanda reaffirms its support for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
believes that all parties must refrain from divisive and
secessionist rhetoric, which is not only in violation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement but could also jeopardize
the fragile reconciliation process in the country.
Let me also point out that, far from representing
a handicap, the cultural differences constitute an
important asset of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Therefore, all parties and entities need to look beyond
ethnic lines in order to reach greater heights, including
meeting the requirements for joining the European
Union.
On justice and human rights, let me be clear as the
representative of Rwanda: the Srebrenica genocide is an
unquestionable fact, as established by the International

13-3322213

S/PV.6966

Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We
therefore condemn all senior officials of Republika
Srpska who deny it or defend its perpetrators.
Genocide denial is not only an insult to the victims
and to history, but also a serious hindrance to genuine
reconciliation. However, we believe that, in order for it
to be an effective tool for reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, justice must be carried out for all victims
without discrimination.
Rwanda also wishes to stress that human and
political rights need to be extended to the minorities.
I recall that the Sejdić-Finci ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights, on the right of minorities to be
elected to the presidency and to the House of Peoples of
the Parliament, is yet to be implemented. We therefore
urge all parties to engage in dialogue on that issue, with
a view to exploring constitutional reforms that could
ensure equality for all in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In the same vein, we call for the implementation of
the November 2010 ruling of the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding the electoral system
of the city of Mostar. We urge the local authorities to
assume their responsibility and abide by the Dayton
Peace Agreement in order to allow the people of Mostar
to exercise their democratic rights.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that the achievement of sustainable peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina lies with its people and its leaders.
We hope that, in the near future, the Government of
the country will be able to own its future with a limited
international presence. We therefore call upon all
parties to demonstrate political will and to implement
in good faith the outstanding requirements of the “5+2”
agenda, which is the only way to graduate from the
monitoring of the Office of the High Representative
and to ensure a better future for the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I would like
to join others in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative, for his report on the implementation
of the Dayton Peace Agreement (S/2013/263, annex).
Mr. Inzko has brought forward a typically thorough
and objective account of the continuing challenges to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress and its European
and Euro-Atlantic integration. I express Australia’s
strong support for him and for the work of his Office.

14

Australia has a close association with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In the 1990s, Australian peacekeepers
served alongside their European Union (EU) and
NATO counterparts to help build peace. During
that period, through our humanitarian immigration
programme, we were proud to receive in Australia
more than 30,000 people displaced from Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Today, they are valued members of our
society. We are demonstrably committed to seeing
Bosnia and Herzegovina consolidate itself as a stable,
unified country that can provide for the needs of all of
its citizens.
Seventeen years after the signing of the historic
Dayton Peace Agreement, Bosnia and Herzegovina
finds itself in the midst of a difficult political phase.
There have been some positive recent developments.
We welcome, for example, regular meetings between
the Presidency and the Council of Ministers. We
also welcome the fact that the 2013 State budget was
adopted on time, for the first time in two years. We
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders to display
the unity of purpose that will allow them to build on
those achievements.
We are, however, concerned by other developments
that threaten to role back the progress achieved since
the mid-1990s. In particular, challenges in some
quarters to the fundamentals of the Peace Agreement
and the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
risk eroding the fragile gains that have been made in
nation-building.
Australia fully supports the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is
the fundamental pillar of the Dayton Peace Agreement
that has underwritten peace and stability. It also
remains critical for broader peace and stability in the
Balkans. We encourage all political leaders in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to respect the status of the country
as an independent sovereign nation and to engage in a
constructive dialogue to strengthen the Government in
ways that deliver on the aspirations of the people. That
is all the more important as Bosnia and Herzegovina
approaches the election schedule for next year.
We also encourage political leaders to commit
to constitutional reform in order to establish strong
and representative State structures. Agreement on
constitutional amendments to implement the European
Court of Human Rights ruling in the Sejdić-Finci case
should be an immediate priority as a strong signal that
Bosnia and Herzegovina guarantees to all of its citizens
13-33222

S/PV.6966

an equal stake in the country’s future. It is also needed
to place Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly back on the
path towards its goal of European and Euro-Atlantic
integration.
Australia acknowledges the fact that Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains relatively safe and secure for its
citizens. We share the view that stability, at present, is
in no small part backed by the presence of the European
Union and NATO military missions. That is another
example of the role that regional organizations can
and must play in securing regional stability and the
importance of the Council in engaging closely with
them.
Australia endorses the ongoing presence of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR); its
ongoing monitoring and reporting and arms disposal
activities contribute to peace and stability every day.
EUFOR will not and should not stay forever; but, for
now, it remains important to sustaining confidence
among communities.
So long as the remaining objectives and conditions
for closure of the Office of the High Representative
remain unmet, we should continue to support the efforts
of the High Representative to help deliver sustainable
peace and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In a
climate of fiscal constraint, we applaud the efforts of
the Office of the High Representative to reduce costs.
Those efforts ensure the Office’s ongoing financial
viability.
In conclusion, the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
themselves have the ultimate responsibility to put their
country where we all want to see it — on an irreversible
path to peace and greater prosperity. To do so, we
encourage them to put aside their differences and
work together to implement the outstanding objectives
and conditions of the 5+2 agenda. The international
community, in particular the Security Council, has an
important supporting role to play. We must continue to
engage to help realize the goal of a stable, sovereign
Bosnia and Herzegovina, at peace with itself and united
in building a prosperous future for its own people.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I join other speakers
in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko for his briefing today
and for his good work as the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have taken note of his
report to the Security Council (S/2013/263, annex). We
welcome in our midst the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Her Excellency Ms. Mirsada Čolaković.

Pakistan is fully committed to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
support all efforts to strengthen the State at the national
level while preserving the rights and prerogatives of all
communal entities.
Let me start with the positive feedback given by
Mr. Inzko. We are glad to know that the State-level
Council of Ministers met regularly and that the budget
for 2013 was adopted. The European Union and NATO
military missions continue to ensure the safety and
security of citizens.
The negative feedback, however, surpasses the good
news. Progress on the political track is unfortunately
stalled. A worsening fiscal situation, poor growth
and high unemployment are compounding social
problems. There is no movement towards European
and Euro-Atlantic integration. The lack of progress
on the implementation of the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of
the High Representative is an indication of the lack of
commitment to the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We commend the High Representative for offering
his good offices and engaging political stakeholders to
break the impasse. Pakistan is deeply concerned by the
increasing challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement
and to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Republika Srpska and its leadership took several
actions during the reporting period that violated the
General Framework Agreement. They included the
adoption of a decree to unilaterally regulate citizen
identification, the non-implementation of the decisions
of the Constitutional Court, and intensified rhetoric
by its leadership, in particular its President, against
the General Framework Agreement. His assertions for
self-determination for the Serbs and his calls for the
dissolution of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina
should be a matter of serious concern for the entire
Council. We believe that statements such as those would
not serve the interests of any community, as they would
vitiate the atmosphere and undermine the prospects
for long-term peaceful coexistence. Challenges to the
Dayton Peace Agreement and divisive rhetoric should
therefore be avoided.
The President of Republika Srpska has also
continued to target the key State institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is undermining their
effectiveness. The institutions that were established

13-3322215

S/PV.6966

to exercise responsibilities of the State under the
Constitution are a cornerstone for safeguarding the
rule of law, sovereignty, territorial integrity and
constitutional order in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Efforts
to undermine them would have an adverse impact on
the long-term stability of the State.
We condemn statements by senior officials of
Republika Srpska denying the genocide committed
in Srebrenica in 1995, which has been confirmed
by the rulings of the International Court of Justice,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and other courts. Such statements will do
serious damage to the reconciliation process inside
Bosnia and Herzegovina and regionally. In that regard,
we welcome the courageous and historical statement of
Serbian president Tomislav Nikolić in which he offered
an apology for the genocide committed in Srebrenica.
It is vitally important for all parties to recognize
the international and legal frameworks for the division
of power in the country. Pakistan supports all efforts
to ensure a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We urge the leadership of the country to
resolve their differences through dialogue. The Office
of the High Representative should continue to play its
role in that regard. We wish him success.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
High Representative Inzko for his briefing.
China welcomes the achievements made by Bosnia
and Herzegovina in promoting national reconciliation
and economic development and in building the rule of
law. We have also noted that Bosnia and Herzegovina
still faces difficulties and challenges in attaining
stability and development in the country. We hope
that people of all ethnic groups in the country will
focus on the welfare and long-term interests of the
country, take effective measures to build mutual
political confidence, promote national reconciliation,
consolidate the achievements made in the political
process and actively settle differences through dialogue
and comprehensively implement the Dayton Peace
Agreement in order to bring about greater progress in
all areas.
China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We respect the choice made by its
people regarding their country’s future. We support
ethnic groups’ living in harmony and seeking common
development. Maintaining peace and stability in Bosnia

16

and Herzegovina and promoting its economic and social
development are in keeping with the interests of all the
parties concerned.
China supports the international community
in playing a constructive role and calls upon the
international community to continue its support and
assistance to Bosnia and Herzegovina. Meanwhile, the
question of Bosnia and Herzegovina is highly complex
and sensitive, as it involves not only the country itself
but also peace and stability in the entire Balkan region.
The international community should adopt a prudent
attitude on the question and make greater efforts to
hear the views and concerns of the parties involved.
China welcomes the efforts made by Mr. Inzko to
promote the political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and hopes that, based on his mandate, he will continue
to play an active and constructive role in promoting
the implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
China is ready to join the international community in
continuing its due contribution to achieving durable
peace, stability and development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Republic of Korea often says that
I am wont to mention elements of philosophy, and, yes,
that is what I studied. I think that when we think about
Bosnia and Herzegovina it cannot be, as has sometimes
been done, a conditioned response — we set up a model
and automatically the machinery should work. We are
dealing with the human, with societies, with peace. I
say that with great respect because, in 1995, we saw
once again in various places that, when humankind
faces the horror of cruelty and death, hope also appears.
As the philosopher said, “hope is found in those
who cannot find comfort”. Why do I bring that up? I
do so because sometimes it is very tedious to have to
listen to comments that consist of nothing more than
“six of one, half dozen of the other; this is good, that
is bad; that was signed; elections were held” — while
we forget how complicated it is to build societies, to be
willing to find peace and to resist the compulsion to set
up protectorates as we did in other periods in human
history. We must instead be amenable to contributing
so that each nation can create its own destiny.
Many colleagues have noted that steps have to
be taken in order to achieve full European Union
integration. Yes, undeniably, those steps must be taken
to achieve full inclusion in the international community,

13-33222

S/PV.6966

based on trust. However, even that must be done
without imposition, but in accordance with the rhythm
of the various cultures and peoples involved. We know
that, as in other cases, we are dealing with inter-ethnic
and intercultural communities that are not the result of
nature, but of a freely made decision to agree to come
together. As Mr. Inzko stated, that requires unwavering
attention, patience and a long-term perspective.
I thank Mr. Inzko for his report (S/2013/263,
annex). It is not always worthwhile dwelling on certain
considerations, but it is always worth recalling that
change cannot be imposed, but that it must be built,
particularly in the context of peace and integration.
In that regard, we view as encouraging news, as set
out in the report, that the new Council of Ministers
has held regular meetings since it was restructured in
November, and that a budget has been adopted for 2013.
We welcome those accomplishments, but they should be
routine. We welcome them as something extraordinary,
but they should be the norm if we are to have a State
with working institutions. Therefore, since that first
step has been taken, we hope that what is extraordinary
will become the norm.
We welcome the establishment of the Working
Group for Resolving State and Defence Property
Issues. Like others, we note that rather than regret that
the progress that began in 2011 is now slowing down,
according to what we read in the reports, and returning
to its negative tendencies of past years, we must seek to
understand the deep-rooted causes of that stalemate and
those difficulties. Rather than issuing new mandates,
we should contribute and make ourselves available to
ensure compliance with the Agreements that were so
freely signed in Dayton.
We welcome the smooth functioning of the
institutions of Republika Srpska, but we also reiterate
our willingness to understand and contribute to ensuring
that the open challenges launched by some leaders of
Republika to the bases of the Peace Agreement and the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
their verbal attacks on key State institutions, are not
repeated. How can we contribute to that objective?
Undeniably, rhetoric denying the Srebrenica
genocide, despite the rulings of the International Court
of Justice and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, is particularly worrisome. Those of
us from countries that have experienced such situations
realize that the path of denial is that of impunity.

Therefore, we call on the leadership of Republika
Srpska to renew its commitment to the constitutional
order, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to international law and human
rights.
The political crisis that broke out in the
Federation — starting with the vote of no confidence
of the Social Democratic Party to rid the coalition
Government of the Party for Democratic Action and
the invocation of vital national interest — is now being
analysed by the Supreme Court. The Court must decide
whether or not a vital national interest was affected.
We have all read the report, and I believe that this is a
clear example of Mr. Inzko’s assertion that party and
personal interests seem to be placed above those of the
common good and society. When institutions work as
corporations on behalf of the vested interests of the
few, they cannot in any way help to build confidence or
lay the foundations for democracy and peace.
The results of the local elections in October 2012,
in particular the case of Srebrenica, represent good
news, even as the courts will deal with the challenges.
We know elections remain to be held, for example in
the city of Mostar, to elect local authorities. We hope
that those elections will be held. Free elections never
hurt; failure to hold elections hinders efforts to build
genuine respect for the Constitution, signed agreements
and social peace.
Finally, with regard to the implementation of the
decision of the European Court of Human Rights in the
Sejdić-Finci case, we regret that the deadline of 11 April
established by the European Union for achieving an
agreement on the necessary constitutional amendments
was not observed. We call on the political leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble its efforts to reach
such an agreement.
Argentina acknowledges the work done by the
Office of the High Representative in implementing
the civil aspects of the Dayton Agreement, as well as
its action to ensure that Government institutions can
fulfil the terms of the Peace Agreement and the State
Constitution. We believe that the presence of the Office
is necessary to contribute to a dialogue, which cannot
be ensured forever, but which we believe is always
necessary.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as representative
of Togo.

13-3322217

S/PV.6966

For my part, I should like to thank the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin
Inzko, for his six-month report (S/2013/263, annex) on
the political and social situation in the country. I shall
limit my statement to a few comments and observations
on the political situation in the country, the state of
its institutions, the reforms to be undertaken and the
matter of conditions to be met for the closing of the
Office of the High Representative.
Regarding the political situation, my country
notes with regret the ongoing inability of the Bosnian
political class to achieve a lasting political consensus
on federative projects. That could explain the lack of
significant progress made over the last reporting period.
Indeed, the positive trend we saw in the beginning of
2012, which was welcomed during the debate held on
15 May 2012 (see S/PV.6771), seems to be losing steam.
During that debate, we had noted that following the
establishment of a central Government in February 2012,
after the political compromise arrived at following the
general elections of October 2010, the adoption in May
2012 of a number of measures, including the national
budget, the voting on the Census Law and State aid,
the Bosnian political class was able to go overcome its
community-based divisions so as to better tackle the
consolidation of the country’s unity and move forward
with common interests. Unfortunately, the leaders of
the country were unable to continue with that positive
trend, which would have led to positive prospects for
the country, in particular Euro-Atlantic integration.
My country believes that the current stalemate,
even backsliding, on the political front, which is due
on the one hand to the reluctance of certain actors to
engage in dialogue in a spirit of compromise and, on
the other, to a desire to weaken the central Bosnia and
Herzegovina State, jeopardizes the implementation
of the Dayton Agreement. That Agreements, as
other speakers have stated, must be safeguarded and
implemented in good faith so as to allow the country to
make further progress,
We condemn the nationalist discourse, which could
exacerbate existing political tensions among the various
communities, erode central State institutions and the
efforts of the international community to promote peace
and stability in the country and in the region. We urge
once again the leaders of the country to act with greater
political responsibility by decisively committing to

18

building a multi-ethnic, multi-confessional Bosnian
State, one that upholds the rule of law.
On that last point, my country shares the concern
of the High Representative that nothing can be achieved
without shoring up the rule of law and respect for State
institutions and their decisions. In that connection, we
regret the attitude of defiance shown by some entities
and individuals of the Bosnian State, which, in violation
of the Dayton Agreement and the Constitution of the
country, continue to take political and legal measures
that go against the central institutions in areas that fall
under the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s mandate.
It is important that the Central State institutions
responsible for upholding the rule of law, in particular
the Constitutional Court, be respected and implemented.
It is therefore unfortunate that in spite of the ruling
handed down by the Court in 2011, the electoral law
has yet to be implemented, which prevented the calling
of elections in Mostar during the local elections held on
7 October last.
Moreover, we call on the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly to swiftly adopt the constitutional
amendments that would allow non-constitutional
communities to fully participate in the political life of
the country.
Furthermore, given the very complex institutional
organization of the country, which can only hamper its
smooth running, Togo believes that it might be useful to
resume the debate on the streamlining and transparency
of those institutions. Here a consensual happy medium
should be found between those advocate for a largely
decentralized Constitution and those who would like to
strengthen the Central State.
Regarding the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative,
we regret that substantive progress was not made during
the reporting period. Nevertheless, we are pleased that
the Office of the High Representative in Brckо put an
end on 31 August 2012 to its mandate of supervision
in the district, in line with the recommendations
of the 23 May 2012 recommendations of the Peace
Implementation Council.
We welcome also the initial steps taken by Bosnia
and Herzegovina regarding the implementation of the
political agreement of 9 March 2012 regarding the
registration of military property as an asset of the State.
We call upon the political authorities of the country

13-33222

S/PV.6966

to continue their efforts to work constructively to
implement the agreement without further delay.
Given the significant challenges facing the country,
Togo believes that the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be maintained so as to help
the country achieve a lasting political settlement that
can strengthen central institutions and ensure peace
in the country and in the region. However, it is the
responsibility of the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to take the initiative to coexist. That
means that frank dialogue and compromise must be
sought, as those are the only solutions that can lead to a
lasting and definitive settlement of disputes.
Finally, I should like to conclude by reiterating
my country’s support for the efforts of the High
Representative and the civilian and military personnel
who are working for the implementation of the Dayton
Agreement and stability in the country.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Today
we are witnessing a complex political and economic
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I would like to
express my sincere hope that this Security Council
debate will facilitate a better understanding of the
current state of affairs. Allow me to briefly present my
view on the current situation along with possible future
developments.
There are diverging opinions and analyses among
the political actors, citizens and civil society regarding
current developments in the country. Although we are
witnessing a certain stalemate in the political process,
we believe that additional efforts will be made to
urgently find a way out of the current impasse. That is
a much needed step that would certainly be beneficial
to all of our citizens. That is something that everyone
in Bosnia and Herzegovina expects from their political
leaders and elected officials.
Bosnia and Herzegovina represents a positive
example of the peacebuilding efforts of both the
international community and national institutions.
A stable peace has been established; the country has
been functioning on a constitutional basis; and most
refugees and displaced persons have recuperated their
property, and many have returned to their homes.

Seven general parliamentary elections have been held,
the last several of which were completely organized by
local authorities. The defence sector and armed forces
reforms have been successfully implemented.
Moreover, we are well aware of the fact that the basic
prerequisites for building a functional State and society
include national reconciliation, the building of trust and
putting an end to impunity for all crimes committed.
That cannot be achieved without prosecuting all war
criminals, regardless of their ethnicity. Even though
the initial arrests of indicted war criminals were made
by the international military forces, most of the others
have been arrested and extradited to the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), in The
Hague, by local authorities. In addition to positive
cooperation with the ICTY, increasing numbers of war
crimes trials are now under way in the national courts.
We have to underline that the overall security
situation in the country has been calm and stable for
years. As a result of the apparent progress, NATO and
the European Union have both reduced the number
of their troops on the ground. Having been the host
country for peacekeeping operations in the past, Bosnia
and Herzegovina has now become a troop contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping and the NATO
International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan.
I can confirm Bosnia and Herzegovina is genuinely
committed to the European path, which remains an
issue of the highest priority in our foreign policy.
Our political leaders are pursuing dialogue with the
aim of finding solutions to all open questions so that
the Stabilization and Association Agreement can
come into force, which would in effect enable Bosnia
and Herzegovina to submit a credible application for
membership of the European Union. This process is
not only a major political objective, but the best way to
create a legislative and institutional environment that
will meet the standards for a better life for our citizens,
establish favourable conditions for the development of
our companies, and attract foreign direct investment.
Another foreign policy objective of high importance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina is to work closely and
develop intensive and good bilateral relations with all
countries of the region, especially the neighbouring
countries of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro. This
commitment has been evident in the recent intensive
political dialogue, conducted through bilateral
meetings, with Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro at the

13-3322219

S/PV.6966

most senior levels. A good example of such dialogue
is today’s meeting in Ankara. Effective cooperation
among neighbouring countries is especially important
on the issues of cross-border cooperation, combating
organized crime, illegal trafficking and smuggling, and
so on.

for political control compromises the ability of local
political parties to constructively engage in important
reform agendas. The stakes were raised further when
Federation President Budimir was apprehended at the
end of April on charges of involvement in organized
crime and corruption.

I believe that all our efforts will be reflected in
the further enhancement of relations and the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire region. It
is high time for all of us to turn to our joint future
of European integration, political and economic
prosperity, stability, mutual respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of our countries, and close,
friendly cooperation among all our peoples.

There are only remote prospects for the resolution
of this stalemate in the near future. Moreover, we have
noted some important signs of premature pre-election
positioning by the parties ahead of the October 2014
general elections. There is therefore a serious risk of
a prolonged period marked by political deadlock in
the Federation. This would further negatively affect
an already serious economic situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is already dependent on the
macrofinancial support of the International Monetary
Fund and the European Union.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Mayr-Harting.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Iceland; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Albania;
as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.
I join other speakers in welcoming the High
Representative, my good friend Valentin Inzko, back
to the Council, and would like to reassure him of our
continued support.
The lack of progress in implementing necessary
political and economic reforms, the continued use of
divisive rhetoric, and deeply rooted divisions among
political parties continue to create considerable
headwinds for the efforts of those who want to see Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a united, stable, viable, multi-ethnic
and prosperous State, cooperating peacefully with its
neighbours and irreversibly on track towards European
Union membership. We therefore encourage Council
members to urge Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political
leadership to overcome the political stalemate and to
undertake the reforms necessary to move the country
forward in its European perspective.
Political deadlock in Bosnia and Herzegovina
continues to burden the process of further stabilization
and development. At the entity level, particularly in
the Federation, the political climate remains tense
and difficult. Several attempts at reshuffling the
Federation Government have failed due to political and
constitutional challenges. Regrettably, this struggle
20

In Republika Srpska, the Government was
reshuffled on 12 March in response to the results of
municipal elections in October last year. The leadership
in Banja Luka nonetheless continued to challenge the
effectiveness and functionality of State structures,
as well as the international presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is unacceptable, complicates the
political processes in the country, and makes it more
difficult to establish sustained positive momentum.
Difficulties at the entity level are translated into
the weakened ability of the State-level institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to address in particular the
fight against corruption and organized crime. They
also complicate efforts to strengthen the judiciary and
implement reforms in the area of defence, including the
necessity to resolve the problem of unstable stockpiles
of surplus arms and ammunition in the country.
The European Union has been engaged for many
years in efforts to anchor Bosnia and Herzegovina on its
European Union path. We believe that it is critical that
Bosnia and Herzegovina fulfil as a matter of priority
its obligations under the Interim Stabilization and
Association Agreement. If it fails to do so, the country
will not be in a position to make progress on the path
towards European integration that its citizens rightly
expect. In particular, Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to
urgently bring its Constitution into compliance with the
European Convention of Human Rights and implement
the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights
ruling in the Sejdić-Finci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina
case. This ruling embodies the principle of ethnic
non-discrimination, which is at the core of the values
13-33222

S/PV.6966

promoted by both the European Union and the United
Nations. The implementation of the ruling would allow
the European Union to decide on the entry into force
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
Bosnia and Herzegovina, paving the way for further
steps forward, including a credible EU membership
application.
A new round of European Union facilitation efforts
in this regard started in early 2013 and was led by EU
Special Representative and Head of Delegation Peter
Sørensen and Commissioner Štefan Füle. Despite the
significant time, efforts and resources devoted by the
EU, political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina again
failed to agree on a solution, leading to the cancellation
of the 11 April meeting of the EU High-Level Dialogue.
Both EU High Representative Catherine Ashton
and Commissioner Štefan Füle recently visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina and urged its leaders to continue to
seek compromise and move the country forward on its
European Union path, including by implementing the
ruling of the European Court of Human Rights. By
not bringing its Constitution into line with European
standards, Bosnia and Herzegovina risks the legitimacy
and credibility of its future leaders to be selected in
the 2014 general elections. High Representative Ashton
and Commissioner Füle also reaffirmed once again
the European Union’s commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s European future.
Recent progress towards the European Union by
the rest of the region, in particular the beginning of the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
as well as the upcoming accession of Croatia to the
European Union, should help encourage progress in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as well.
Since September 2011, the European Union has
strengthened its political presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to facilitate progress towards
European integration. The single European Union
presence on the ground, with a single EU Special
Representative and Head of Delegation, is fully engaged
in supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in all European
Union-related matters. The Eureopean Union increased
its regional presence in 2012, with new offices in
Mostar and Brcko and a larger office in Banja Luka. The
Special Representative and Head of Delegation is also
offering the EU Force Commander political guidance
on military issues with a local political dimension, in

particular concerning sensitive operations and relations
with local authorities and with the local media.
The European Union also continues to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in the security field.
The overall security situation has remained calm and
stable, and Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have so
far proved capable of dealing with threats to the security
environment. The European Union will therefore keep
the European Union Force-Operation Althea (EUFORAlthea) focused on capacity-building and training.
However, EUFOR Althea will retain an executive
military role to support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
efforts to maintain a safe and secure environment under
a United Nations mandate. It therefore remains able to
contribute to the deterrence capacity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s authorities, if the situation so requires.
The European Union will also continue to provide
considerable pre-accession assistance.
In the context of the overall European Union
strategy for Bosnia and Herzegovina, we look forward
to continuing the discussion with the international
community on the reconfiguration of the international
presence, in the appropriate forum. We call on the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to meet the
outstanding objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
In conclusion, the European Union reiterates its
unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country. We remain ready to provide the necessary
assistance to support progress towards Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s European integration. It is that approach
that will take the country forward on its reform agenda
towards stability and development, on its path to the
European Union.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): At the outset, please allow
me to extend my sincere congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on the occasion of your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of May.
Let me also welcome to His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for the Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
to thank him for his briefing and his report (S/2013/263,
annex).

13-3322221

S/PV.6966

As members have heard, Croatia also aligns itself
with the statement of the European Union (EU).
The stability and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is crucial for the stability of the whole
region of South-East Europe. Croatia therefore
wholeheartedly supports the development of Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a fully functional State for the
benefit of all its citizens and strongly supports the
prospect of the country’s full membership in NATO
and the European Union.
However, we note with regret that, despite some
positive developments in the rest of the region, such
as the agreement between Belgrade and Pristina and
Montenegro’s progress in the Euro-Atlantic integration
processes, in Bosnia and Herzegovina progress has
stalled in almost all areas, including the EU agenda.
Since the High Representative’s previous report (see
S/2012/813) in November 2012, there has been no
significant progress in the strengthening of institutions,
the constitutional framework or the implementation of
the necessary reforms.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a crossroads. On the
one hand there is the Dayton Agreement, and on the
other the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdić-Finci case. We believe that the democratic
equality of all citizens and the institutional equality of
the three constituent peoples are both crucial for the
viability and stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
our view, political and national representation should
not result in any form of ethnic majorization, but in a
balance of individual and collective rights.
We would also like to reiterate once again Croatia’s
strong support for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We sincerely hope that political dialogue and
readiness for compromise will yield concrete results
and allow for the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union, which would
mark an important step forward in the process of
European integration and would offer Bosnia and
Herzegovina an additional tool for accelerating reform
processes. We hope that political elites will manage to
reach an agreement, which will show that they put the
interests of the country and all its citizens above the
interests of their parties.

22

Furthermore, for Croatia, as a neighbouring country,
the progress of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path
towards NATO membership is of vital importance. We
therefore call on political leaders in the country to make
additional efforts on the implementation of the political
agreement reached by the six political parties regarding
the resolution of the outstanding issue of military
property, in order to enable the implementation of the
first round of the action plan for NATO membership. In
the meantime, the existing cooperation between Bosnia
and Herzegovina and NATO should be maintained and
enhanced.
The principle of the early fulfillment of
conditionality, even before the process of institutional
negotiations, might not be at all times fully applicable
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. We support an approach
that would take into consideration the still-existing
need for a build-up of the necessary decision-making
capacities in Bosnia-Herzegovina, taking into account
its distinct complexities.
Croatia has been, and will continue to be, ready
to provide all possible assistance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina on its Euro-Atlantic path. Part of those
efforts includes the preparation of the agreement
on Euro-Atlantic partnership between Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as talks regarding
the economic and other impacts of Croatia’s EU
membership as of 1 July.
Let me conclude by saying that the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is first and foremost the responsibility
of its people. But, at the same time, the international
community needs to bear its part of responsibility with
an active and sustainable engagement, which remains
vital for the progress and prosperity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): At the outset, I would like
to welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to thank
him for his report to the Council (S/2013/263, annex).
My country has stable relations with Bosnia and
Herzegovina and fully respects the Dayton Peace
Agreement as the basis for the stability of that country
and the Western Balkans region. We are committed
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and believe that its future should
13-33222

S/PV.6966

be decided by its people and political leaders without
outside interference. To that end, we shall support
any agreement accepted by the two entities and three
constitutive peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbia considers Bosnia and Herzegovina to be one
of its closest partners and has a very strong interest
in promoting mutual relations to the highest possible
level. We are committed to developing those relations
on the basis of good-neighbourliness and shall work on
their promotion at the central level, as well as on the
expansion and intensification of cooperation with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the further
deepening and enrichment of special relations with the
Republic Srpska. Since new Governments were formed
in our two countries in 2012, cooperation between
us, both bilaterally and in regional organizations, has
increased considerably, with concrete results that have
made this recent period one of the most dynamic in our
history of cooperation.
Serbia is a staunch advocate of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s integration into Europe and of
strengthening our mutual cooperation in that process,
particularly with respect to exchanging experiences,
administrative
capacity-building
and
concrete
agreements on joint approaches and ways to use the
available European Union funds.
We note that the High Representative devotes a
significant segment of his report to a discussion of the
status and functioning of institutions in the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska.
We hope that the internal obstacles will be overcome
and an internal agreement conducive to Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s continued European integration reached
as soon as possible. Serbia is ready to address all
outstanding issues with Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
are now significantly fewer, in good faith and in our
mutual interests. We particularly welcome the united

position on the importance of having direct contact and
exchanges of views without outside mediation.
Serbia is committed to the stability and overall
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, for its
part, has taken a number of important steps towards
regional reconciliation. In March 2010, our National
Assembly adopted a declaration on Srebrenica, and
in an interview with Bosnian television in April,
President Nikolić apologized for all crimes committed
in Serbia’s name and announced that he would be
visiting Srebrenica to pay his respects to the victims.
In that regard, Serbia firmly believes that, in the
process of genuine reconciliation, all the perpetrators
of crimes must be punished, regardless of which ethnic
community they belong to.
We consider it particularly important that the
process of refugee returns be completed and that the
regional programme for dealing with the housing
problems of the region’s most vulnerable refugees
be implemented more efficiently, without red tape or
additional requests.
My country views intensive regional cooperation
and a politically and economically stable region in SouthEast Europe as a basic precondition for its sustainable
development. We are committed to strengthening
regional cooperation and welcome the successful
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina that has been
achieved through the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Regional Cooperation Council, the Central
European Free Trade Agreement — of which Bosnia
and Herzegovina is currently Chair-in-Office — the
Central European Initiative, the Adriatic and Ionian
Initiative and other forums.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

13-3322223
