38

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

1199 (XII). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board
The General Assembly
Takes notq of the annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board. 19
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1200 (XII). Report of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board on the fourth actuarial
valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund as of 30 September 1956 and
second review of the basic tables of the Fund
The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board on the fourth actuarial valuation of the Fund as of 30 September 1956 and the
second review of the basic tables of the Fund ;20
2. Takes note of the observations thereon of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as set forth in its twenty-third report to
the twelfth session of the General Assembly. 21
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1201 (XII). Amendments to the Regulations o:f
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
The General Assembly
Adopts the texts annexed to the present resolution as
amendments to the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund. These amendments shall
come into force on 1 January 1958.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
ANNEX

Article I, paragraph 4 (amended text)
"Final average remuneration" means the average annual
pensionable remuneration of the participant during the last
five years of his contributory service, on the understanding
that, in the case of participants who have entered the Fund
prior to 3 November 1955, it means the average pensionable
remuneration of the participant during the last ten years of
his contributory service whenever this average is higher. When
the participant has less than five years of contributory service,
the final average remuneration shall mean the average annual
pensioooble remuneration during the actual period of contributory service.

Article II, Paragraph 1 (amended text)
Every full-time member of the staff of each member organization shall become a participant in the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund:
(a) If he enters employment under a contract without a
time-limit;
(b) If he enters employment under a fixed-term contract for
five years or more ;
(c) If he has completed five years of employment and remains on a contract providing for further service of at
least one year, ,or remains in employment for more than
one year thereafter;
19
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/3611 and
Corr.I and 2).
""Ibid., Supplement No. 8A (A/3642).
111
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 45, document
A/3749.

(d) If the member organization certifies that the particular
fixed-term contract is considered to cover a probationary
period and is designed to lead to employment for an
indefinite period,
provided that he is under sixty years of age at the time of
entry into the Fund and that his participation is not excluded
by his contract of employment.

Article IV, paragraph 1 (amended text)
A participant who reaches the age of sixty shall, upon retirement, be entitled during the remainder of his life to an
annual retirement benefit, payable monthly, equal to one-fiftyfifth of his final average remuneration multiplied by the number of years of his contributory service not exceeding thirty
years.
Article V (amended text)
Subject to the provisions of articles X.1 ( b) and XVI, a
participant who, before reaching the age of sixty, has, in the
opinion of the Joint Staff Pension Board, become unable to
perform his duties owing to serious physical or mental impairment, shall be entitled, subject to article IX, while such
disability continues, to a disability benefit payable in the same
manner as a retirement benefit and equal to nine-tenths of
one-fifty-fifth of his final average remuneration multiplied by
the number of years of his contributory service not exceeding
thirty years. This disability benefit shall not be less than the
smaller of:
(a) One-third of the final average remuneration;
( b) Nine-tenths of the retirement benefit to which he would
have been entitled if he had remained in service until he had
reached the age of sixty and his final average remuneration
had remained unchanged.

Article VII, paragraph 1 (amended text)
Subject to the provisions of article XVI, if a married male
participant dies, his widow shall be entitled, subject to article
IX, to a widow's benefit amounting, except as provided in
paragraph 3 below, to half of the benefit which would have
been paid to the participant had he qualified for a disability
benefit at the time of his death or, if such deceased participant
had attained the age of sixty, to one-half of the benefit which
would have been paid to the participant had he retired under
the provisions of article IV at the time of his death. Whenever
the amount of the widow's benefit so determined shall be less
than $750 per annum, it shall be increased to the smaller of:
(a) $750 per annum, or (b) twice the original amount determined. This benefit shall cease on the widow's remarriage.

Article XXIX (amended text)
The Joint Staff Pension Board, upon the advice of a
qualified actuary or actuaries, shall adopt from time to time
service and mortality tables and the rate of regular interest
which shall be used in all actuarial calculations required in
connexion with the Pension Fund. The rate of regular interest
applicable shall be 2½ per cent per annum through 31 December 1957 and 3 per cent per annum thereafter unless and until
changed by the Joint Staff Pension Board. At least once in
each six years following the establishment of the Pension Fund,
the Board shall have an actuarial investigation made into the
mortality, service and compensation experience of the participants and beneficiaries of the Pension Fund; and taking into
account the results of such investigation, the Board shall adopt
such mortality, service and other tables as it shall deem appropriate.
(The change in the rate of regular interest specified in article XXIX entails consequential changes in articles III.1, VII.5,
X.1 and 3, XI, XII.1 and 2, and XVI.6. In each case the phrase
"at the rate of 2½ per cent per annum" is replaced by the
phrase "at the rate designated in article XXIX".)

Supplementary article B (new text)
1. Every full~time member of the staff of each member
organization shall become an associate participant in the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund:

-------------------~-----------------------Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
(a) If he enters employment under a fixed-term contract for

at least one year but less than five years ;
(b) If he has completed one year of continuous employment,
provided that he is not eligible under article II.1 to become
a participant, provided that he is under sixty years of age,
and provided further that his associate participation is not
excluded by his contract of employment. For the purposes of
this article, intervals of not more than thirty calendar days in
the period of employment shall not be considered as breaking
the continuity of employment.
2. The participation of an associate participant shall cease
when he reaches the age of sixty.
3. An associate participant shall be eligible for a disability
benefit under article V and his survivors to a death benefit
under article VII.1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7, and to a child's benefit
under article VIII. He shall not be entitled to a retirement
benefit under article IV nor to a withdrawal benefit under
article X, and his survivors shall not be entitled to a death
benefit under article VII.5.
4. Each member 011ganization shall pay monthly into the
Pension Fund, in respect of each associate participant, a contribution equal to 4¼ per cent of his pensionable remuneration,
or such percentage contribution, not to exceed 6 .per cent, as
shall be -determined from time to time by the Joint Staff Pension Board on the basis of actuarial valuations of the Fund
5. Whenever an associate participant is entitled under article II to become a participant, he may elect during the first
year of his participation to brave the period performed as an
associate participant included in his contributory service to the
extent to which he pays into the Pension Fund a sum or sums
equal to the contributions he would have paid as a participant,
plus interest. at the rate designated in article XXIX. Payment
into the Pension Fund of amounts sufficient to meet the Fund's
obligations, resulting from the inclusion of such additional
contributory service, which are not met by payments made by
the participants shall be made by the member organization
designated for that purpose in accordance with arrangements
concluded by the member organizations, provided that payment
has not already been made by a member organization for the
period concerned.
6. All other provisions of these regulations consistent with
the present article shall be applicable to associate participants,
mutatis mutandis, in the same manner as to a participant. Such
administrative rules as shall be considered necessary for the
implementation of this article shall be established by the
Joint Staff Pension Board.

Supplementary article C (new text)
For the purposes of these regulations, the International
Atomic Energy Agency shall be treated as if it were a
specialized agency.

1202 (XII). Pattern of conferences

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 694 (VII) of 20 December
1952,
Recognizing the need to establish further clear procedures for the planning and financing of meetings and
conferences of the United Nations in order that the
most rational and economical use may be made of the
resources of the Organization,
1. Decides that a fixed pattern of conferences to
govern the places and dates of the meetings of United
Nations bodies shall come into force on 1 January 1958
for a period of five years;
2. Decides further that, as a general principle,
meetings of United Nations bodies shall be held
at the established headquarters of the bodies concerned,
with the following exceptions :

39

(a) The regular summer session of the Economic
and Social Council may be held each year at Geneva,
during which period no other United Nations body
shall meet there ;
( b) Not more than one functional commission of
the Economic and Social Council, to be determined
by that Council, in addition to the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, may meet annually in Geneva; a session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs may, in
exceptional circumstances, and by decision of the Economic and Social Council in consultation with the
Secretary-General, be held in New York; in such
years one other functional commission may meet in
Geneva in its place without overlap;
( c) The regular sessions of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East and of the Economic
Commission for Latin America as well as meetings of
their subsidiary bodies may be held away from their
headquarters when the commission concerned so decides, subject, in the case of regular sessions of the
commissions, to the approval of the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly ;
( d) The annual session of the International Law
Commission would be held in Geneva without overlapping with the summer session of the Economic and
Social Council ;
( e) Meetings may be held away from the established headquarters of any body in other cases where
a Government issuing an invitation for a meeting to
be held within its territory has agreed to defray, after
consultation with the Secretary-General as to their
nature and possible extent, the additional costs involved;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly every year a basic programme of conferences for the following year established in conformity with the present pattern and after consultation,
as appropriate, with the organs concerned;
4. Decides that as a general rule any meeting, other
than an emergency meeting, not covered by the basic
programme for a given year shall not be held during
that year; the General Assembly nevertheless authorizes the Secretary-General, within a financial limit to
be set annually in the resolution relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses, to decide when and
where any body or ad hoe conference not covered by
the basic annual programme shall meet ; in the event
that the decision of the Secretary-General is not accepted, the final decision in the matter shall be taken
by the Assembly at its next regular session;

5. Invites all organs of the United Nations as well
as the specialized agencies to review their working
methods and the frequency and length of sessions in
the light of the present resolution and of the growing
volume of meetings, the resulting strain on available
resources, and the difficulty of effective participation
of members.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1203 (XII). Control and limitation
of documentation

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the present very considerable output of United Nations documents,
