United Nations

S/PV.6607

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-sixth year

6607th meeting
Wednesday, 7 September 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Onemola
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

11-48797 (E)

*1148797*

S/PV.6607

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Council for the month of
September 2011, I should like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His
Excellency Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri, Permanent
Representative of India, for his service as President of
the Security Council for the month of August 2011. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Puri and
his delegation for the great diplomatic skill with which
they conducted the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to echo your words of
recognition and gratitude, Sir, to Ambassador Hardeep
Singh Puri and his entire delegation for the efficient
and dedicated manner in which they led our work
during their presidency of the Council in August. I am
also very pleased to be the first member of the Security
Council to warmly welcome you, Mr. President, and to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for this month, which is going to be a very busy one.
We wish you every success.
In my capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), I shall now give my briefing, which I
shall deliver in English.

2

(spoke in English)
Today, I am very pleased to present to the
Security Council the nineteenth 90-day report in
accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of resolution 1737
(2006). The report covers the period from 24 June to
1 September 2011, during which time the Committee
held no meetings but conducted its work using the
no-objection procedure.
I would like to begin by congratulating the Panel
of Experts, which was formally reappointed by the
Secretary-General on 30 June following the adoption
of resolution 1984 (2011) on 9 June, by which the
Security Council decided to extend until 9 June 2012
the mandate of the Panel.
During the reporting period, the Committee
revised the guidelines for the conduct of its work,
which were approved on 19 August by the members of
the Committee and will be posted on the Committee’s
web page in due course. The Committee also updated
its programme of work, which is currently under
consideration by the members of the Committee. The
Committee continues to consider a series of draft
implementation assistance notices prepared by the
Panel.
The Panel submitted its own programme of work
to the Committee, as required by paragraph 3 of
resolution 1984 (2011). The Panel also provided to the
Committee its second quarterly assessment of Member
States’ implementation reports under paragraph 31 of
resolution 1929 (2010). From 29 to 30 August, the
Panel visited Brazil to hold consultations with relevant
Government agencies on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions.
During the current reporting period, the
Committee received additional information from a
Member State on a previously reported incident of an
alleged violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007). The Committee encouraged the Member State
to invite the Panel to visit the concerned State in
support of its inquiry into this matter.
The Committee also received a joint
communication from four Member States reporting “a
violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010)”.
The Committee sought the full cooperation from the
four Member States and is currently examining this
alleged violation with the assistance of the Panel.

11-48797

S/PV.6607

The Committee received three notifications: one
from a Member State confirming, in response to the
Committee’s earlier request for information, that none
of the individuals and entities designated by the
Committee’s consolidated list had been found to own
companies or shares under its jurisdiction; one from a
Member State informing the Committee of its
successful disposal, with the assistance of another
competent Member State, of the confiscated cargo
aboard the vessel M/V Hansa India; and one from a
Member State pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747
(2007), indicating its intention to authorize the release
of funds in order to make a payment due under a
contract entered into prior to the listing of an entity.
The Committee answered a written query from a
Member State seeking clarifications about its presumed
involvement in an incident of illegal arms
trans-shipment previously reported by another Member
State. The Committee was able to confirm, with the
support of the Panel, that the inquiring Member State
was not involved in this incident.
In following up on two other written queries from
two separate Member States — one concerning energy
cooperation with an Iranian company and the other
related to specific information about financial
transactions — the Committee is still awaiting
additional information in order to provide appropriate
responses to the two Member States.
This concludes my briefing to the Security
Council today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the members of the Council.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council and thanking
Ambassador Puri and the Indian delegation for their
leadership last month. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his report and briefing today.
We appreciate his continued leadership as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
The most recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Director General,
released just last week, once again highlights Iran’s
failure to comply with its international nuclear
obligations and its violations of several Security

11-48797

Council resolutions. Iran refuses to address outstanding
issues related to its nuclear programme.
The Director General reports that Iran is
continuing enrichment and heavy water-related
activities, in defiance of both the Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors. Iran still refuses to respond
substantively to information regarding possible
military dimensions to Iran’s nuclear programme.
Iran’s reported installation of centrifuges at Qom
constitutes yet another intentional violation of Security
Council resolutions and a clear provocation. This is
unacceptable.
We condemn Iran’s persistent refusal to fulfil its
international nuclear obligations. Iran’s actions
underscore the continuing necessity of full
enforcement of sanctions by the international
community in order to motivate Iran to comply with
those obligations and to deny it the ability to advance
its proscribed programmes.
The United States encourages the 1737
Committee to enhance its efforts to actively implement
its mandate. We are pleased that the Committee has
concluded its review of the Panel of Experts’ useful
and informative final report. We are also pleased that
the Committee has started to act on a number of the
Panel’s excellent recommendations. However, much
work remains to be done. We urge the Committee to
take steps to complete this work and implement the
Panel’s recommendations as soon as possible.
I should also like to stress that my Government
remains seriously concerned at the fact that the Panel
of Experts’ final report has not yet been posted to the
Committee’s website. We strongly believe that this
report must be made available to all States Members of
the United Nations as soon as possible, as it highlights
information and best practices that can help States
carry out their obligations. Furthermore, failure to
circulate these documents contravenes the Committee’s
commitment to transparency and undermines the entire
purpose behind having a Panel of Experts. We urge a
prompt solution to this impasse.
Since we last met, the United States, along with
France, Germany and the United Kingdom, reported
Iran’s violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
(2010), which prohibits Iran from launches using
ballistic-missile technology. My Government stands
ready to cooperate fully with the Committee and its
Panel of Experts in their investigation of this violation.

3

S/PV.6607

We encourage all Member States to report sanctions
violations to the Committee and the Panel of Experts.
The United States remains dedicated to
preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.
Iran’s nuclear intentions are a major concern, not just
for the United States but for the region, the Council
and the world. Let there be no doubt that the United
States is committed to a dual-track policy of applying
pressure in pursuit of a diplomatic resolution of
international concerns regarding Iran’s nuclear
activities.
We also remain committed to working closely
with our partners in the 1737 Committee, the Panel of
Experts and the Council on this important issue. Our
joint efforts will demonstrate the international
community’s resolve to address Iran’s continued
disregard of its international nuclear obligations. We
have made important progress in strengthening our
implementation and enforcement of United Nations
sanctions on Iran. We must now redouble our efforts to
sharpen the choice for Iran’s leaders to abandon their
dangerous course.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to wish you, Sir, every success in your
presidency, which is just beginning, and I should like
also to thank Ambassador Puri and his team for their
presidency during the month of August.
I should like to start by thanking Ambassador
Osorio for his 90-day report. Iran remains at the core
of our concerns. Currently the international community
is focusing its attention more closely elsewhere —
Syria and Libya — and Iran may believe that it can
profit from that state of affairs. It has redoubled its
efforts, it is increasing the number of centrifuges, and
it is making ever more provocative statements. But we
are not misled by all this, as was underscored by the
President of the Republic last week. Iran’s military,
nuclear and ballistic ambitions pose a growing threat.
For a number of years, Iran has pursued, in
violation of international law, a policy of fait accompli.
After having for 20 years carried out a clandestine
nuclear programme, in violation of its safeguards
agreement, Iran has refused to cooperate fully with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and it
continues, despite six Security Council resolutions, to
enrich uranium, supposedly for peaceful purposes — in
spite of the absence of any credible electronuclear
programmes on its territory.

4

Alarming signs are increasing. The Iranian
regime is releasing information in small doses so as to
mitigate its impact and importance, but it is no less
serious. Thus in February 2010 Iran began to enrich its
uranium to 20 percent, thus bringing it even closer to
the military threshold, supposedly with the sole goal of
fuelling the Tehran Research Reactor. In June last, it
stated that it planned to increase threefold its 20 per
cent uranium production, and on 22 August it
announced the establishment of the first centrifuges at
the Qom facility — a facility whose existence was
hidden and was only revealed by the international
community in September 2009. Let us also recall that
the site’s history and ultimate objectives remain
unknown, as Iran refuses to provide the Agency with
all of the clarifications that it is seeking.
Let us also recall that in 2009 Iran had announced
that the Qom site was to produce low-enriched 3.5 per
cent uranium. Now, however, we have been told that it
will be used to produce 20 per cent enriched uranium.
Finally, on 30 August, Iran declared that it was no
longer interested in an offer concerning the Tehran
Nuclear Reactor, because it had produced all of the
20 per cent uranium necessary to that reactor.
Fundamental questions therefore arise. Why is
Iran continuing to produce 20 per cent uranium, given
that the supply for the Tehran Research Reactor is
already guaranteed? Why is it transferring production
of 20 per cent enriched uranium to the Qom facility, a
bunkerized installation designed for military use — an
installation that was built secretly and that could be
easily and quickly reconfigured so as to produce
uranium enriched at a rate higher than 20 per cent.
On all those issues, Iran owes the international
community some answers. However, it has refused to
tell the IAEA the full truth. In that context, the most
recent report of the Agency, which we received on
Friday, only intensifies our concerns. The Agency has
indicated yet again that it is unable to confirm that all
nuclear material in Iran is being used for peaceful
purposes. Above all, the Agency underscores the fact
that it is increasingly concerned by the possible
existence in Iran of secret activities, past or present —
and I underscore the word “present” — related to a
possible military aspect of the Iranian programme
concerning the development of a nuclear payload for a
ballistic missile. The Agency has indicated that it
continues to receive data on that issue that are detailed
and exhaustive. Furthermore, they are for the most part

11-48797

S/PV.6607

consistent and credible with regard to their technical
precision, the time periods during which the activities
took place, as well as the names of individuals and
entities that were involved.
The serious and worrisome data on activities
related to the design and fabrication of nuclear
weapons are a serious concern for the international
community. This is in addition to Iran’s continued
undertaking of a ballistic and space programme, which
jeopardizes the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We call on the Director General of
the IAEA to continue ceaselessly his activities aimed at
investigating this key issue.
In view of the challenge posed by the Iranian
nuclear crisis, we have no choice but to remain unified
and resolute. The sanctions that have been adopted by
the international community have had an impact that
we should not underestimate. They have already led to
concrete results, as the final report of the Panel of
Experts explains in detail. We must therefore continue
rigorously to implement those sanctions in order to
persuade the Iranian regime to negotiate and to return
to the path of international law. That will require first
of all a firm response to violations. These are multiple
in nature and concern all categories of measures
adopted by the Security Council. I am thinking in
particular of the violations of the arms embargo. Iran is
producing flows of arms, with, in particular, the active
support of Syria, thus threatening the security of
neighbouring countries as well as countries in already
unstable regions.
Allow me to recall also that France, working
together with the United Kingdom, the United States
and Germany, has already notified the Committee of
the launching of the Rassad-1 satellite on 14 June last.
That is a clear violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). We must also enhance the implementation
of sanctions when necessary. The Panel of Experts has
issued several recommendations in that respect. We
hope that the Committee will follow up and that in
particular it will designate the individuals and entities
involved in the violations. We therefore once again
request that the final report of the Panel be published,
in accordance with the ongoing practice of sanctions
committees and for the legitimate reason of
transparency with regard to other Member States.
As the heads of State and Government of the
Group of Eight indicated in Deauville at the end of

11-48797

May, we will determine, on the basis of Iran’s conduct,
the need to take additional measures, in keeping with
the dual-track strategy that we have ceaselessly
pursued jointly with our partners in the group of six
States.
Iran affirms that its nuclear programme is
civilian, but it produces uranium at levels that are
increasingly near the military threshold in ever larger
quantities and in bunkerized facilities. Iran affirms that
its nuclear programme is civilian, but the IAEA itself
affirms its growing concern about the possible military
dimension of the Iranian programme.
In view of the serious facts pointed out by the
Agency, we need specific actions, not empty words or
promises that simply seek to gain time. Iran must
demonstrate to us its resolve for sincere negotiations,
to shed all possible light on the issues raised by the
IAEA, and to respond to the repeated demands of the
Council.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join my
colleagues in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
Lebanon’s assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. Our best wishes accompany you. Let
me equally thank our neighbours and colleagues from
India for their leadership last month. I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing.
As the report of the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) points
out, Iran is in continued violation of its international
obligations. New sanctions violations have been
reported. Iran is increasing its enrichment capacities
and transferring centrifuges to its enrichment facility
near Qom. It is unfortunate that we have to observe
further Iranian activities disregarding the Council’s
resolutions. Together with our partners France, the
United Kingdom and the United States, we have
reported yet another violation. The launch of the
Rassad-1 satellite on 14 June was a clear breach of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010).
The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) highlights
in no uncertain terms that the Agency is increasingly
concerned about the possibility that Iran may have
conducted undisclosed nuclear-related activities
involving military or related organizations. My country
is concerned about the fact that the Agency continues
to receive new information with regard to the
development of a nuclear payload for a missile. The

5

S/PV.6607

Agency reports that it has received new information on
the weaponization from various sources. According to
the IAEA, the information is broadly consistent and
credible. We call on Iran finally to engage with the
Agency on the resolution of all outstanding issues in
order to make sure that there is no military dimension
to Iran’s nuclear programme.
The dual-track strategy offers two options. We
continue to be ready to engage Iran in meaningful
negotiations on its nuclear programme in the
framework of the engagement track. That is our
preferred choice. However, as long as Iran does not
cooperate to the extent necessary, we see no other
option but to pursue the pressure track.
My country attaches great importance to the
proper implementation of sanctions, as agreed by the
Council. Germany believes that that remains vital in
order to keep up the pressure on Iran and make it come
back to the negotiating table. The 1737 Committee
continues to play a vital role in pursuing the dual-track
strategy vis-à-vis Iran.
Let me thank the Panel of Experts for its valuable
work.
We
particularly
welcome
the
five
implementation assistance notices that are currently
under consideration by the Committee. We believe that
those documents can provide more clarity on how to
better implement sanctions and avoid new violations.
On 7 May, the Panel of Experts presented its final
report. We deeply regret that that comprehensive report
is yet to be published. For the sake of transparency, my
delegation reiterates its call for the report to be
published.
Germany continues to be concerned about the
numerous cases of weapons exports from Iran to other
countries, often to Syria, which are in violation of the
Council’s resolutions. We call on all Member States to
carefully implement the weapons embargo, as
stipulated in paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).
Let me reiterate that, together with our partners in
the international community, in particular in the
framework of the E3+3, we remain committed to
finding a sustainable and peaceful solution to the
Iranian nuclear file. We affirm our unity of purpose and
determination, working through direct diplomacy. We
call on Iran to respond in a positive and constructive
spirit to our offers of engagement.

6

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Permanent Representative of Columbia Néstor Osorio,
for his briefing on the work of the Committee over the
past three months. The Committee has worked actively
in the reporting period in strict compliance with its
mandate. The Committee must continue to work
specifically along those lines, as must its Panel of
Experts, which provides useful and practical assistance
to the Committee. It is extremely important that the
work of the experts be impartial and independent, and
that they use only reliable sources and verified
information.
Russia strictly complies with all requirements of
the sanctions regime against Iran. By and large, we
believe that in order to ensure the maximum
effectiveness of that regime, all members of the
international community must strictly comply with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, and not
deviate from them.
With respect to the current situation regarding
Iran’s nuclear programme, we have consistently been
in favour of resolving all problems through dialogue
with the Iranian side. We are convinced that, with no
alternative to a political and diplomatic approach, we
must find compromise solutions that would enable us
to move towards the stated aim of removing any doubt
over the purely peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. Iran will then be able to fully enjoy all the
rights of a non-nuclear weapon State under the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Russia will do its utmost for the swift resumption
of talks between the E3+3 and Iran.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month. I also thank the
Ambassador of India and his team for their important
contribution to the smooth conduct of the Council’s
work last month.
I also wish to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
report on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the past
90 days, and to commend the many activities that the
Committee has carried out under his leadership. China
has always attached importance to the work of the

11-48797

S/PV.6607

Committee, and will continue to provide active
support.
Meanwhile, we also expect the Panel of Experts
to continue to carry out its work under the leadership
of the Committee, as mandated by resolution 1737
(2006), in an objective and prudent manner in order to
truly facilitate its comprehensive and effective
implementation. China has consistently believed that
dialogue and negotiations are the only way to achieve a
comprehensive, lasting and appropriate settlement of
the issue of Iran’s nuclear capabilities and to meet the
common interests of the international community. We
hope that all parties will move towards each other,
address difficulties, intensify their diplomatic efforts,
use innovative thinking and adopt new measures to
foster mutual trust and create the conditions for the
appropriate settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue.
China notes the latest report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on Iran’s nuclear issues. China has always
believed that, as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Iran enjoys the
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy and should
fulfil its international obligations. At the same time,
China hopes that Iran and the IAEA can maintain and
strengthen their dialogue and cooperation and achieve
effective solutions to the relevant problems, with a
view to strengthening the international community’s
confidence in the peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. In the current circumstances, it is more
important than ever to continue to work steadfastly
towards dialogue and negotiation in order to arrive at a
proper solution to the Iranian nuclear issue, since that
will contribute materially to the maintenance of peace
and stability in the Middle East.
China is confident that, so long as all parties
concerned display belief and patience, take a flexible
and pragmatic approach, work on bringing positive
elements to bear and take the initiative to build up
mutual trust, progress will be made in the conduct of
dialogue and negotiations.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Lebanon’s assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of September,
and offer you our best wishes. At the same time, I
would like to thank Ambassador Puri and his team for
their very competent conduct of our work in the month
of August.

11-48797

I also thank the Permanent Representative of
Colombia, Ambassador Néstor Osorio, for his briefing
on the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). Brazil has closely followed
the work of the Committee under his competent
leadership. We have taken note of the Committee’s
revised guidelines for the conduct of its work, which
should help it to fulfil its mandate more efficiently.
As Ambassador Osorio mentioned in his briefing,
the Panel of Experts visited Brazil last week. The
purpose of the visit was to hold consultations with the
Brazilian authorities on issues pertaining to the Panel’s
mandate, including implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions and the side effects of
sanctions on legitimate trade. A number of meetings
were held in Brasilia between the experts and relevant
Government officials on areas such as maritime
transportation, inspections of ships, customs, export
controls, trade, finance, bank transactions and
immigration policy controls. The successful visit gave
the Panel the opportunity to be informed about
regulations and procedures in place in Brazil, and will
certainly contribute to further enhancing the
constructive dialogue we have had with the experts on
a regular basis.
Unfortunately, there is no progress reported on
the negotiations dealing with the Iranian nuclear issue.
We regret this situation and reaffirm our understanding
that without mutual trust, progress on this issue will
remain elusive. Brazil has encouraged the Iranian
Government to cooperate fully and promptly with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to clarify
all outstanding issues. While we share the goal of
ensuring that Iran’s nuclear programme is entirely
peaceful, we expect Tehran to respond to the
international community’s legitimate concerns. At the
same time, we reiterate the sovereign right of Iran, like
any other State, to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy
under IAEA safeguards.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, let
me start by thanking Ambassador Hardeep Singh Puri
and his team for the very competent way they
conducted the work of the Council last month, and by
wishing you, Mr. President, every success in your
efforts during Lebanon’s presidency of the Council and
assuring you of our constant support.
I thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his
comprehensive briefing on the activities of the

7

S/PV.6607

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) on Iran, and wish to congratulate him on his
very efficient stewardship of the Committee. I would
like to commend the work of the 1737 Committee,
particularly the review of the document on guidelines
and the ongoing update of the programme of work,
which are both very useful tools for improving the
efficiency of the existing regime.
I reiterate our full support for the Panel of
Experts, mindful of the vital role it has to play in
assisting the Committee. I would also like to express
my appreciation for the meaningful recommendations
they made to the Committee in May. I trust that some
of the Panel’s valuable suggestions will soon be
translated into concrete measures. In this regard, I must
say that I continue to be convinced of the usefulness of
publicizing the final report of the Panel of Experts as
soon as possible, thus making important and helpful
information available to all United Nations Member
States.
Our concern over Iranian nuclear activities, as
well as over the development of its ballistic missile
capabilities, has not diminished during the past three
months. We took note of the mention in the last report
on Iran by the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Authority that, in response to an
invitation from the Iranian authorities, the Deputy
Director General for Safeguards, Mr. Herman
Nackaerts, recently visited the country. That is an
encouraging development, and I sincerely hope that
this initiative is meant to indicate that Iran has the
intention of significantly improving its cooperation
with the Agency.
But the pending issues that Iran has to clarify go
far beyond a single visit to the country by Agency
officials. The Director General’s report stresses that
Iran has not suspended its enrichment-related
activities. In the meantime, the Agency is still waiting
for a thorough response to a number of pending
questions regarding those activities, and for further
information in connection with Iran’s announcement
that 10 new Iranian enrichment facilities will be built
in the near future. The same opaque situation applies
with regard to heavy water-related projects; those
projects were not suspended and may begin to be
operational by the end of 2013.
We regret that to date Iran has not provided the
Agency with access to these facilities. In such

8

circumstances, it is impossible for the Agency to fully
affirm the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme. In order to restore international
confidence, Iran must without delay grant unlimited
access to all its nuclear sites, equipment and personnel,
and show genuine willingness to provide the Agency
with previously requested documentation and all
relevant information, in accordance with Iran’s
safeguards agreement and subsidiary arrangements.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): We join others in
congratulating you, Mr. President, on Lebanon’s
assumption of the presidency for September, and
express our gratitude to India for its able stewardship
of the Council in August. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Néstor Osorio of Colombia for his
briefing on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
South Africa reiterates its concern regarding the
threat posed by weapons of mass destruction. We
believe that the ongoing possession of nuclear
weapons, irrespective of where they are, continues to
pose a threat and a danger to international peace and
security. We therefore pledge our support to the Chair
of the Committee, with the understanding that South
Africa would neither accept a nuclear-weaponized Iran
nor the denial of the right of any signatory to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
exploit peaceful applications of nuclear technology,
with appropriate safeguards.
South Africa, however, remains deeply concerned
about the fact that it continues to be impossible for the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to
provide credible assurances regarding the peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, and strongly urges
Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA to resolve this
outstanding issue. The IAEA is the only international
authority that can verify and provide the necessary
assurances as to the peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme.
South Africa is pleased that the 1737 Committee
has been able to engage in a constructive dialogue on
the matters before us. The revised guidelines for the
conduct of our work have provided us with a good way
forward on the implementation of the current sanctions
regime. We trust that the discussions of the programme
of work will continue in the same constructive manner.
We also believe that the implementation assistance
notices provided by the Panel of Experts are a good

11-48797

S/PV.6607

basis and a work-in-progress at this stage. We trust that
constructive political dialogue will continue, with the
goal of peaceful resolution of this dispute.
Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September. Let me also extend our warm appreciation
to the Permanent Representative of India and his
delegation for the wonderful work they did last month.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Néstor
Osorio for his succinct briefing and commend his
excellent leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We appreciate the
work done by the Committee in the past three months
in furtherance of its mandate. We congratulate the
members of the Panel of Experts on their
reappointment and plan to continue to work with them
and the Committee in promoting a more secure world.
It is encouraging that Member States have
continued to report incidents of non-compliance to the
1737 Committee in addition to extending the necessary
support to the Panel of Experts in its investigations.
Many of the subsequent investigations by the Panel,
including the January visit to Nigeria, concern Iran’s
transfer of conventional arms and related materiel
prohibited under resolution 1747 (2007). This
development is worrisome given the devastating effect
of small arms on the security, stability and
development of countries and regions.
Nigeria and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) have consistently voiced
their concerns about the growing trend in arms
trafficking in the subregion, which infringes on the
provisions of the ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms
and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other
Related Materials. We therefore urge Member States to
maintain a high level of vigilance in monitoring and
curtailing these movements pursuant to resolution 1747
(2007) and to uphold the obligations under the various
negotiated instruments on small arms.
They should also report alleged sanctions
violations to the Committee and cooperate with the
Panel of Experts in its investigation of incidents of
non-compliance. It is essential that States be provided
with the resources, facilities and expertise necessary to
enhance their ability to fulfil their obligations under
these resolutions. We further encourage the Panel of
Experts to continue to examine these activities to

11-48797

determine if there are any patterns of sanctions
violations and circumventions.
Nigeria has the utmost respect for the multilateral
accountability and transparency mechanisms for arms
transfers, including United Nations treaties and
protocols dedicated to covering illicit transfers of
conventional arms. We have further demonstrated our
commitment to this noble goal by signing the
ECOWAS Convention on Small Arms and Light
Weapons. We believe that complementary action at the
regional and international levels on the marking and
tracing of arms will be helpful in underpinning the
achievements recorded thus far in the West African
subregion.
The recent report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) indicates
that Iran has not fully met its obligations, nor has it
established international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. We call on
Iran to extend full cooperation to the IAEA and respect
its obligations under the resolutions of the Security
Council. We therefore urge Iran to engage in
constructive dialogue as an expression of its
commitment to a peaceful nuclear programme.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Please allow
me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. Please rest
assured of our fullest cooperation. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation
for the warm words you had for our Permanent
Representative and for all the words of appreciation
and thanks that were expressed by other members of
the Council.
I would like to join other colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Néstor Osorio for presenting the 90-day
report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). We commend his stewardship
of the Committee and the professionalism with which
the Committee has been implementing its mandate. We
have noted the work done by the Committee during the
reporting period, including its finalization of the
revised guidelines for the conduct of the Committee’s
work. We hope that the Committee will soon approve
its updated programme of work. Reappointment of the
Panel of Experts consequent upon the adoption of
resolution 1984 (2011) should facilitate the
Committee’s work.

9

S/PV.6607

We appreciate the quarterly update prepared by
the Panel of Experts assessing the implementation
reports of Member States submitted during the period
from 1 May to 31 July 2011. We encourage the Panel to
continue its work impartially, independently and
transparently, based on verifiable information under the
Committee’s direction, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.
I would like to reiterate India’s consistent stand
on the Iranian nuclear issue. We support the right of all
States, including Iran, to the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. Exercise of this right should, however, be
consistent with their international obligations. We
believe that the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) should play a central role in the resolution of
technical issues concerning the Iranian nuclear
programme. The issues should be resolved peacefully
through dialogue and negotiations. Iran should
cooperate fully with the IAEA to restore international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. We support all efforts aimed at the
peaceful resolution of the issue.
We also call upon all sides to fully implement the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council. There
should be no violation of the measures mandated in
those resolutions. At the same time, all efforts should
be made to ensure that the legitimate trade and
economic activities of Iranian entities and those of
other countries do not suffer.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the
Chairman of the 1737 Committee that we will continue
to work cooperatively with the other members of the
Committee and contribute constructively to the
Committee’s work.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to join others in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and also to thank the Indian delegation for the
excellent work done during its presidency in August.
I would also like to join colleagues in thanking
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) during the past 90 days. Bosnia and
Herzegovina appreciates the work of the Committee,
which is of crucial importance for enforcement of the
Iran sanctions regime. We welcome the adoption of the
Committee’s guidelines for the conduct of its work,
aimed at improving the implementation of sanctions

10

provisions and at assisting Member States in meeting
their obligations under those provisions. My delegation
also appreciates the results of the work of the Panel of
Experts. We believe that the Panel has made a valuable
contribution to the better implementation of resolution
1929 (2010).
It is our strong belief that only full
implementation of the safeguards agreements pursuant
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons can ensure that nuclear energy is used in a
safe and responsible manner. The role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as an
implementing agency remains the most reliable
instrument for verifying compliance with the
stipulations of the Treaty. Bosnia and Herzegovina
maintains the view that all States without exception
must submit their nuclear facilities to the IAEA
safeguards regime and must be transparent in fulfilling
their commitments.
In this context, we remain concerned about the
lack of progress with regard to Iran’s compliance with
the relevant IAEA and Security Council resolutions.
Therefore, we urge Iran to comply with all resolutions
of the Security Council and to implement the
Additional Protocol and all measures requested by the
IAEA. It is imperative that confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear
programme be restored.
We still believe that a diplomatic and
negotiations-driven approach with Iran based on both
good political will and responsible judgment can
redress the current situation. We call for additional and
serious efforts by the parties directly involved and
sincerely hope that they will demonstrate the political
will needed to lead to a comprehensive solution to the
issue of nuclear-capacity development in the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Onanga Ndiaye (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Like previous speakers, I would like, on behalf of my
delegation, to reiterate to you, Mr. President, our
warmest congratulations and our wishes for your
presidency’s every success during this very busy month
of September. We would also like to express our thanks
and gratitude to the delegation of India for its work last
month.
My delegation wishes to reaffirm its attachment
to the international non-proliferation regime, whose
cornerstone is the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of

11-48797

S/PV.6607

Nuclear Weapons. On 23 June, our delegation
welcomed the consideration by members of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) of the recommendations contained in the report
of the Panel of Experts, which we would like to see
implemented in their entirety. Similarly, we have
expressed our profound concern at Iran’s repeated
violations of resolutions of the Security Council and at
its continued uranium enrichment activities. In this
context, our delegation reiterated its call on the Iranian
authorities to meet the demands of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to return to the
negotiating table with the E3+3.
Today, I wish to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio
for introducing the nineteenth 90-day report of the
1737 Committee and to congratulate the Panel of
Experts on its work. We also welcome the adoption by
the Council on 9 June, under the Gabonese presidency,
of resolution 1984 (2011), which renewed the mandate
of the Panel of Experts for a further year. We remain
committed to the implementation of all resolutions of
the Council.
Our delegation exhorts the Committee to
accelerate the publication of the experts’ reports on its
website. We also welcome the negotiations under way
in that Committee with a view to finalizing its
programme of work and the assistance that the Panel of
Experts continues to provide in the implementation of
the resolutions of the Council relating to the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Gabon remains of the view that Iran must meet its
obligations by cooperating fully with the IAEA in
order to build international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
My delegation deplores the alleged violations of
sanctions against Iran referred to by the Chair of the
Committee. We view it as urgent that all necessary
clarification be provided to both the Committee and the
Panel of Experts.
Finally, my delegation expresses its appreciation
of the work carried out by the 1737 Committee, for
which it reaffirms its full support, and encourages it to
make every effort to ensure that the recommendations
of the Panel of Experts are fully implemented.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): May I
offer my congratulations on your assumption, Sir, of
the Council presidency for the month of September. I
also add my thanks to those of others to Ambassador

11-48797

Puri and his team for their stewardship of the Council
in the month of August.
I should like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
briefing to the Council today and for his report on the
vital work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts.
The Committee’s report makes clear that Iran
continues to violate the Council’s sanctions as a
proliferator of nuclear and conventional weapons alike.
The Iranians themselves say as much. In August, they
announced that they had begun the transfer of
centrifuges to their site at Qom in order to triple the
capacity to enrich uranium to 20 per cent. This directly
contravenes six Security Council resolutions requiring
Iran to suspend enrichment. It also illustrates how
inconsistent with peaceful purposes Iran’s illegal
enrichment programme is. There is no credible civilian
justification for producing this much 20 per centenriched uranium.
The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) makes
clear that once again Iran has not fully cooperated with
the Agency and highlights his “increasing concerns” at
the possible military dimensions to Iran’s programme.
This reporting period has demonstrated the
continuing need for vigilance on violations of
sanctions. In this regard, we reported with France,
Germany and the United States a violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010) — namely, the
launch of the Rassad-1 satellite, which is dependent on
ballistic missile technology. We request that the
Committee take forward investigation of this and all
pending violations as a matter of urgency, with the
close assistance of the Panel of Experts.
Quick and thorough investigation of violations
will contribute to a clearer picture of the broader
pattern of violations by Iran. This will enable the wider
membership to focus on areas for particular vigilance.
It is important that Member States be equipped with
the knowledge and expertise to identify and act upon
suspected violations. We therefore welcome the Panel’s
efforts to raise awareness of steps that all Member
States are required to take to implement sanctions and
to foster greater knowledge-sharing and collaboration
between States.
We welcome the implementation assistance
notices that the Panel of Experts has produced and

11

S/PV.6607

which are before the Committee for consideration.
These will be of great benefit in raising awareness
among Member States of their responsibilities and the
actions they can take to prevent further violations. We
look forward to quick agreement and publication of
these notices on the Committee website.
We regret that the Panel’s report has not yet been
made public. The Committee is denying the wider
membership of the United Nations access to this
valuable assessment, which will assist with the
implementation of sanctions. The Committee should
agree to release the report as a matter of urgency.
We remain committed to engaging Iran to address
these concerns, but it is clear that Iran continues to
proliferate and to pursue a nuclear weapons
programme. Iran has given us no reason to believe that
engagement on a nuclear programme will be
reciprocated in a meaningful way. If the dual-track
strategy is to succeed, rigorous implementation by
States of the measures contained in resolution 1929
(2010) and the Council’s prior resolutions is therefore
essential.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Lebanon.
I join my colleagues in expressing my gratitude
to Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his briefing on the
90-day report on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I
should like to make the following additional remarks.
First, we reiterate the importance of political and
diplomatic efforts to find a solution to the Iranian
nuclear question through negotiations. We support all
initiatives aimed at reactivating negotiations and
dialogue, which remain the best path towards a final
and comprehensive solution that encompasses all
outstanding questions regarding the peaceful nature of
Iran’s nuclear programme, thus opening the way for the
development of productive and cooperative relations
with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Secondly, we emphasize the need for a balanced
application of the three main pillars of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT):
non-proliferation, disarmament and the peaceful use of
nuclear technology. We reaffirm the right of all States
parties to the NPT to develop, research, produce and
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. We also call

12

for the issue of non-proliferation in the Middle East to
be addressed within an integrated and comprehensive
vision, without selectivity or double standards. Such a
vision should be based on the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
Thirdly, we believe that weapons of mass
destruction, especially nuclear weapons, cannot be a
source of security or stability anywhere in the world;
quite to the contrary, they constitute a motivation for
other States to seek possession of such weapons, thus
opening the door to an endless and destructive arms
race.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio
to respond to comments.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I should like to thank all the members of the
Security Council for their words of support to the work
just concluded by the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). Their words will be
conveyed in particular to the members of the Panel of
Experts who have worked with me and demonstrated
not only a great spirit of cooperation, but also the
ability to compromise in the search for the best ways to
run the Committee, which shoulders a great
responsibility, as evidenced by all the statements made
here today.
I have taken due note of the calls to ensure that
the activities of the Panel be as transparent, objective
and clear as possible and that, as a result, we can fulfil
our obligation and commitment to conveying the
results of the follow-up to all United Nations Members
and the legal responsibilities of the members of the
Panel and of the Committee.
We shall continue our work and, pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001), to update the members of the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.15 a.m.

11-48797
