24

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

gust 197 6, concerning the situation in the Middle East
and the question of Palcstine, 42
Deeply concerned that the Arab territories occupied
since 1967 have continued, for more than ten years, to
be under illegal Israeli occupation and that the Palestinian people, after three decades, are still deprived
of the exercise of their inalienable national rights,
Reaffirming that the acquisition of territory by force
is inadmissible and that all territories thus occupied
must be returned,
Reaffirming also the urgent necessity of the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the region, based
on full respect for the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as for its resolutions concerning the problem of the Middle East including the question of Palestine,
Taking note with satisfaction of the joint statement
on the Middle East issued on 1 October 1977 by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Secretary of State of the
United States of America in their capacities as CoChairmen of the Peace Conference on the Middle East,
Reaffirming that peace is indivisible and that a just
and lasting settlement of the Middle East problem must
be based on a comprehensive solution, under the auspices of the United Nations, which takes into account
all aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in particular the
attainment by the Palestinian people of all their inalienable national rights and the Israeli withdrawal
from all the occupied Arab territories,
Convinced that the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East with the participation of
all parties concerned, including the Palestine Liberation
Organization, in accordance with relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly, is essential for the realization
of a just and lasting settlement in the region,
1. Condemns Israel's continued occupation of Arab
territories, in violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and repeated
resolutions of the United Nations;
2. Reaffirms that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, in which all countries and peoples in the
region can live in peace and security within recognized
and secure boundaries, cannot be achieved without
Israel's withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied
since 5 June 1967 and the attainment by the Palestinian
people of their inalienable national rights;
3. Calls anew for the early convening of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East, under the auspices of
the United Nations and the co-chairmanship of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
States of America, with the participation on an equal
footing of all parties concerned, including the Palestine
Liberation Organization;
4. Urges the parties to the conflict and all other
interested parties to work towards the achievement of
a comprehensive settlement covering all aspects of the
problems and worked out with the participation of
all parties concerned within the framework of the
United Nations;
5. Requests the Security Council, in the exercise
of its responsibilities under the Charter, to take all
necessary measures in order to ensure the implementa42 See

A/31/197.

tion of relevant resolutions of the United Nations and
to facilitate the achievement of such a comprehensive
settlement aiming at the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the region;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the
implementation of the present resolution and to inform
all concerned, including the Co-Chairmen of the Peace
Conference on the Middle East;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to report
to the Security Council periodically on the development
of the situation and to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session a comprehensive report covering, in all their aspects, the developments in the
Middle East.
82nd plenary meeting
25 November 1977

32/21.

Credentials of representatives to the
thirty-second session of the General
Assembly

A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee.43
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977

B
The General Assembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee. 44
104th plenary meeting
16 December 1977

32/ 40.

Question of Palestine

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3236 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974, 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975 and
31/20 of 24 November 1976,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
Peoplc, 4 "
Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of the Palestinian
people,·16
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this problem
therefore continues to aggravate the Middle East con4 .1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/32/336.
44 Jbid., document A/32/336/ Add. I.
4 5 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 35 (Al
32/35).
4 6 Jbid., Thirty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 84th meeting, paras. 46- 79.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

25

---------------------------------------------

flict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international peace and security,
Reaffirming that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be established without the achievement, inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of
Palestine on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right
of return and the right to national independence and
sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
Taking note of the resolution on the question of
Palestine adopted by the Council of Ministers of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-ninth ordinary session, held at Libreville from 23 June to
3 July 1977, 47
Taking note of the Declaration on the situation in
the Middle East and the question of Palestine adopted
by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of non-aligned
countries at their extraordinary meeting in New York
on 30 September 1977, 48
Taking note also of the final communique of the
extraordinary meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States members of the Islamic Conference,
held in New York on 3 October 1977, 49
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned
to it by the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the Committee and
endorses the recommendations contained in paragraphs 43 and 44 of that report;
3. Notes with satisfaction that, during the consideration of the report of the Committee by the Security
Council at its 2041st meeting, on 27 October 1977,
all members of the Council who participated in the
discussion reaffirmed that a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East could not be established without the
achievement, in particular, of a just solution of the
problem of Palestine on the basis of the attainment of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people;
4. Urges the Security Council to take as soon as
possible a decision on the recommendations endorsed
by the General Assembly in its resolution 31/20 as a
basis for the solution of the problem of Palestine;
5. Decides to circulate the report to all the competent bodies of the United Nations and urges them to
take necessary action, as appropriate, in accordance
with the Committee's programme of implementation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
reports of the Committee to all conferences on the
Middle East held under the auspices of the United
Nations, including the Geneva Peace Conference on
the Middle East;
7. Authorizes the Committee to continue to exert
all efforts to promote the implementation of its recommendations, to send delegations or representatives
to international conferences where such representation
would be considered by it to be appropriate, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtythird session;
47 A/32/310, annex I,
48 A/32/255-S/12410,

resolution CM/Res.580 (XXIX).
annex. For the printed text, see
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-second Year,
Supplement for October, November and December 1977.
49 A/32/261, annex.

8. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Committee with all the necessary
facilities for the performance of its tasks, including
summary records of its meetings;
9. Decides to include the item entitled "Question of
Palestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-third
session.
91 st plenary meeting
2 December 1977

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 50
Noting, in particular, the observations contained in
paragraphs 38 to 42 of that report,
Recognizing the need for the greatest possible dissemination of information on the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people and on the efforts of the United
Nations to promote the attainment of those rights,
J. Requests the Secretary-General to establish
within the Secretariat of the United Nations a Special
Unit on Palestinian Rights which would:
(a) Prepare, under the guidance of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, studies and publications relating to:
(i) The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people;
(ii) Relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and other organs of the United Nations;
(iii) The activities of the Committee and other
United Nations organs, in order to promote
the attainment of those rights;
( b) Promote maximum publicity for such studies
and publications through all appropriate means;
(c) Organize in consultation with the Committee
commencing in 1978, the annual observance of 29 No~
vember as the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to ensure
the full co-operation of the Office of Public Information
an~ other units_ ~f the ~ecretariat in enabling the Special
Umt on Palestmian Rights to perform its tasks;
3. Invites all Governments and organizations to
lend their co-operation to the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and the. Special Unit on Palestinian Rights in the
1mplementat1on of the present resolution.
91 st plenary meeting
2 December 1977
32/ 41.

International Conference in Support of
the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the International Conference in Support of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia was
held at _Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 31/145 of
17 December 1976,
50 _0f]icial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 35 (A/32/35).
