United Nations

A/RES/55/46

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 37

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/L.40 and Add.1)]

55/46.

Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for
Social Development and of the special session of the
General Assembly in this regard

The General Assembly,
Recalling the World Summit for Social Development, held in Copenhagen
from 6 to 12 March 1995, and the twenty-fourth special session of the General
Assembly entitled “World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving
social development for all in a globalizing world”, held in Geneva from 26 June to
1 July 2000,
Stressing the importance of the outcome of the twenty-fourth special session of
the General Assembly which reviewed and assessed the implementation of the
Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development 1 and the Programme of Action 2 and
adopted further actions and initiatives to implement the commitments made at the
Summit, 3
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 4 and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000:
Gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”, 5
1.
Reaffirms the commitments made by heads of State and Government at
the World Summit for Social Development, contained in the Copenhagen
Declaration on Social Development 1 and the Programme of Action,2 which
established a new consensus to place people at the centre of the concerns for
sustainable development and pledged to eradicate poverty, promote full and
productive employment and foster social integration so as to achieve stable, safe and
just societies for all, and the decisions on further action and initiatives to accelerate
social development for all, adopted at the twenty-fourth special session of the
General Assembly and contained in the further initiatives for social development;3
1

Report of the World Summit for Social Development, Copenhagen, 6–12 March 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.8), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
2
Ibid., annex II.
3
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
4
See resolution 55/2.
5
Resolutions S-23/2 and S-23/3.

00 56215

A/RES/55/46

2.
Also reaffirms that the Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of
Action and the further initiatives for social development adopted at the twentyfourth special session will constitute the basic framework for the further promotion
of social development in the forthcoming years;
3.
Emphasizes the vital importance of placing the goals of social
development, as contained in the Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of
Action and in the outcome document of the twenty-fourth special session, at the
centre of economic policy-making, including in policies that influence domestic and
global market forces and the global economy;
4.
Invites the Secretary-General, the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission for Social Development, the regional commissions, the relevant
agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system and other relevant
intergovernmental forums, within their respective mandates, to take on a priority
basis all steps necessary to ensure the effective implementation of all commitments
and undertakings contained in the Copenhagen Declaration and the Programme of
Action and in the outcome document of the twenty-fourth special session;
5.
Expresses its appreciation to the Government and people of Switzerland
for contributing to the successful outcome of the twenty-fourth special session;
6.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of the
twenty-fourth special session; 6
7.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session an
item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for Social
Development and of the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly”,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fiftysixth session a report on this question.
74th plenary meeting
29 November 2000

6

2

A/55/344.
