asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6930

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

6930th meeting
Wednesday, 6 March 2013, 10.15 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Briens
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Shin Dong Ik
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

13-25029 (E)

*1325029*

S/PV.6930

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Ambassador Gary Quinlan, Permanent
Representative of Australia, in his capacity as
Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I have the honour to
present the 90-day report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in accordance
with paragraph 18 (h) of the same resolution. The
report covers the period from 5 December 2012 to
4 March 2013, during which time the Committee held
one meeting and conducted additional work using the
non-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of
the guidelines for the conduct of its work.
At the informal consultations on 13 February, the
Committee exchanged preliminary views on a case
reported by a Member State in a note verbale dated
6 February 2013, according to which the authorities of
that State had intercepted, on 23 January, a vessel that
it suspected was carrying illicit weapons from Iran to
be delivered to that State. Given the serious allegations
contained in the report, the Committee encouraged the
Panel of Experts to expedite its investigation of the
incident and report to the Committee on its findings.
The Committee stands ready to examine in an impartial
and objective manner and, based on solid evidence,
take appropriate action upon receipt of that report from
the Panel.
The Committee also discussed the incident report by
the Panel dated 11 January 2013 on the missile launches
by Iran during the Great Prophet VII exercise, conducted
from 2 to 4 July 2012. Members of the Committee took
note of the Panel’s conclusion that Iran’s launches of

2

Shahab-1 and Shahab-3 missiles during the exercises
constituted a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). Several Committee members expressed
great concern that Iran’s launches represented a clear
violation of resolution 1929 (2010), condemned the
launches and suggested that the Committee consider
appropriate actions in response. The Committee is
currently exploring those options. In the meantime,
the Committee emphasizes the importance of all
Member States redoubling their efforts to implement
all measures required in resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010).
As my predecessor informed the Council in
December (see S/PV.6888), the Panel had been tasked
by the Committee with compiling publicly available
statements made by Iranian officials and alleged
recipients of Iranian military assistance regarding
potential violations of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747
(2007). The compilation was transmitted by the Panel
to the Committee on 14 December 2012, and was
considered at the informal consultations I mentioned
earlier. During the discussion, several members
expressed the view that it would be appropriate to
send a letter to Iran inquiring as to the veracity of the
statements reflected in the compilation.
While not questioning the possibility of sending
such a letter to Iran in the future, other members
believed that the Committee should be prudent and
that further efforts should be made first in order to
obtain material evidence of the alleged arms transfers
mentioned in the statements. The Committee believes
strongly that any transfer of arms or related materiel in
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007) is a
matter of grave concern. In line with its mandate, the
Committee stands ready to examine alleged violations
in an impartial and objective manner and, based on
solid evidence, to take appropriate action regarding
them. Furthermore, during the informal consultations,
the Panel briefed the Committee on its investigative and
outreach activities.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received communications from five Member States
relating to action they had taken in implementation of
the relevant Security Council measures. One of those
was the letter I mentioned earlier concerning a possible
violation of paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007),
which was discussed by the Committee at its informal
consultations on 13 February. In the second, dated
17 January 2013, a State informed the Committee of

13-25029

S/PV.6930

an alleged breach of the embargo on Iran by a company
located in that State. In the third, on 24 January 2013,
a State provided details relating to the inspection and
seizure, on 15 March 2011, of three shipping containers
of arms and related materiel onboard the ship
M/V Victoria. In the fourth, on 1 February 2013, a State
reported to the Committee the arrest of a businessman
suspected of violating the national law implementing
the relevant United Nations sanctions measures. Lastly,
the fifth State transmitted, on 14 February, a report on
the shipments confiscated by its respective authorities
during the second quarter of 2012, and on measures
taken to prevent transit of shipments to Iran that are
suspected to contain prohibited items. All those cases
are currently being investigated by the Panel.
The Committee is pleased that States are responding
to its requests for information on reported incidents of
non-compliance. I would like to take this opportunity to
encourage all States to cooperate with the Committee
and its Panel of Experts in reporting and investigating
possible sanctions violations.
Following up on the Panel’s findings in other
cases of non-compliance, the Committee agreed, on
20 December 2012, to designate two entities, namely,
Yas Air and SAD Import Export Company. A note
verbale was sent on 8 January 2013 to all Member
States informing them of the designations. On a related
matter, the Committee sent, on 23 January 2013, another
note verbale to all States requesting them to provide, on
a voluntary basis, additional identifying information
regarding the individuals on the Committee’s
consolidated list. I take this opportunity to renew that
request for information.
The Committee continues its efforts to assist States
implement the relevant Security Council measures.
I am pleased to report that the Committee adopted,
on 26 December 2012, an implementation assistance
notice (IAN) on conventional arms and related materiel
and, on 27 February of this year, an IAN on financial
and business measures. Both were posted on the
Committee’s website.
The Committee decided, on 4 March, to update the
lists of nuclear-related and ballistic missile-related items
referred to in paragraph 13 of resolution 1929 (2010).
The updated lists are available on the Committee’s
website.
During the reporting period, the Committee
received a number of written inquiries concerning

13-25029

the application of the sanctions. In two letters dated
16 January 2013, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization (UNIDO) requested
confirmation that two proposals for technical assistance
to Iran by UNIDO did not contravene the applicable
Security Council sanctions regime. On 1 February, the
Committee informed UNIDO that the projects were not
prohibited by the relevant resolutions.
In a letter dated 10 December 2012, a State sought
information from the Committee on the return of the
funds concerning an advance payment made by the
Ministry of Defence of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
a company located in that State. As the contract was
signed before 2007, when the relevant measures were
imposed, the Committee advised the State that there
were no obstacles to the return of funds.
The Committee also received communications from
two Member States, one dated 10 December 2012 and
the other 4 January 2013, requesting information as to
whether certain specified entities were included in the
consolidated list of individuals and entities subject to
the travel ban and assets freeze pursuant to the relevant
Council resolutions. Committee members exchanged
views as to the possible ways to respond to such queries
during the informal consultations I mentioned earlier.
In addition, the Committee received a communication
dated 20 February from a State requesting an exemption
from the travel ban on a designated Iranian national who
had been invited to attend the high-level International
Atomic Energy Agency conference on nuclear power
in the twenty-first century in Saint Petersburg from
27 to 29 June 2013. The request is currently under
consideration by the Committee.
The Committee also received four notifications:
three from a Member State with reference to paragraph
5 (c) of resolution 1737 (2006), concerning the delivery
of items for use in the nuclear power plant in Bushehr,
Iran; and one from another Member State submitted
pursuant to paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006) and
paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007), in connection
with the unfreezing of funds to make a payment due
under a contract entered into prior to the listing of an
entity.
Finally, I am very happy to note that during the
reporting period the Committee received a report from
Saudi Arabia on the implementation of resolutions 1737
(2006) and 1929 (2010).

3

S/PV.6930

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his briefing. Since
assuming his role as Chairman of the Committee, he
has guided its work in an orderly manner, for which
China would like to register its appreciation.
China attaches great importance to the work of
the Committee. We are ready to work with all parties
in a spirit of pragmatism and stability to conduct
balanced and effective work. The relevant Security
Council resolutions on the nuclear issue should be
comprehensively implemented. However, sanctions
are not the ultimate purpose of those resolutions. The
Committee and Panel of Experts should serve the
purpose of settling the issue via diplomatic means. The
Committee recently came up with allegations regarding
certain cases and we hope that it will, based on the
principles of caution and objectivity, fully consult with
the relevant countries and resolve those problems on
the basis of solid evidence.
The Iranian issue has a bearing on the authority
of the regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and on peace and stability in the
Middle East. Dialogue and negotiations are the only
way to resolve the issue. China has consistently opposed
the use or threat of use of force. China does not agree
that excessive pressure should be put on Iran, or that
new sanctions should be introduced. Some countries,
which have imposed unilateral sanctions and wilfully
expanded their scope, are undermining the legitimate
interests and rights of other countries. China is opposed
to such an approach.
Positive results were achieved previously as a result
of the Almaty dialogue on the Iranian nuclear issue,
which marked a first step towards launching substantive
negotiations conducive to finding a solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue through dialogue and negotiation.
China has long striven to keep the issue on the right
track. China hopes that all parties will strengthen trust
and create conditions condusive to a comprehensive,
long-term and appropriate solution to Iran’s nuclear
issue. We also encourage Iran to cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency. China is ready to
continue to work with all parties in a constructive effort
to find a peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue
through diplomatic means.

4

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), under the new and able
chairmanship of Ambassador Quinlan, as well as the
Panel of Experts, for their work in supporting the
implementation of the Security Council’s resolutions
on Iran.
The United Kingdom, like others in the international
community, remains deeply concerned by Iran’s nuclear
programme. The 21 February report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (see S/2013/103) shows that Iran
continues to enrich uranium and expand its enrichment
capacity, including with the installation of 180 advanced
centrifuges at Natanz. This development comes closely
on the heels of the full installation of the Fordow
enrichment facility, as reported by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in November 2012.
These actions are in contravention of the resolutions of
both the IAEA Board of Governors and the Security
Council.
Iran’s stockpile of nearly 20-per cent enriched
uranium continues to grow and is already far in excess
of its current needs. The IAEA Director General’s
report highlights yet again Iran’s continued failure to
engage on the possible military dimensions of its nuclear
programme. We are now 15 months from the IAEA’s
first report on possible military dimensions. Iran
must show that it is prepared to take the urgent action
necessary to address the international community’s
serious concerns and be judged on its actions, not on
its words.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
finding a peaceful, negotiated solution to the nuclear
issue. Representatives of the E3+3 Governments
met representatives of Iran on 26 and 27 February in
Kazakhstan. Those were useful discussions, and the
United Kingdom looks forward to further progress by
experts in March on the revised and credible proposal
that the E3+3 has put to Iran. That proposal is intended
to build confidence on both sides and move negotiations
forward.
Iran has much to gain from a diplomatic resolution
to the nuclear issue, but we are clear on the need for
talks to deliver results. It is vital that progress now
be made on addressing the most immediate concerns
about Iran’s nuclear programme.
Turning to the work of the 1737 Committee, we
note with regret that the Panel of Experts confirms that

13-25029

S/PV.6930

Iran continues to breach its international obligations. A
blatant and worrying example is Iran’s ballistic missile
launches, highlighted in the Panel’s 11 January report.
The evidence of this breach is compelling, and the
Panel was clear that these launches of ballistic missiles
in a military context by Iran constitute a violation of
resolution 1929 (2010).
The 1737 Committee must now act on this breach. It
should, as a first step, write to Iran to express its concern
at the violation and ask Iran to provide a response. The
Committee should issue an implementation assistance
notice regarding this incident, highlighting to Member
States the ban on transferring technology or technical
assistance to Iran regarding ballistic missile activities.
We also encourage the Panel to investigate and share
in its final report in May the names of individuals and
entities responsible.
We are also concerned by the Panel of Experts’
compilations of statements on the transfer of arms to
Gaza by Iran, which indicate that Iran has breached
resolution 1747 (2007). Iran’s support to militant groups,
such as Hamas, directly undermines prospects for
peace in the region and further undermines the Iranian
Government’s claim to the international community
and to its own people that it supports stability in the
Middle East. We are furthermore dismayed by the
boldness of the Iranian public statements that seek to
undermine the credibility of the Security Council and
its resolutions. The United Kingdom calls on the Panel
to continue to monitor this issue, identify individuals
and entities responsible and include recommendations
on designations in their final report.
The United Kingdom also notes with concern
the recent report from Yemen on the seizure of illicit
arms reported by the Government of Yemen as coming
from Iran. That transfer appears to be a violation that
threatens to undermine Yemen’s fragile transition. We
look forward to the Panel’s report of its recent inspection
visit. The Committee should be prepared to take action
if the Panel’s evidence confirms the violation.
It is time for Iran’s leaders to engage. They
cannot continue to ignore the serious concerns of the
international community over Iran’s nuclear programme
and its violations of Security Council resolutions. If Iran
aspires to be treated as a normal non-nuclear-weapon
State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, it must now take urgent and concrete
steps to fully address those concerns. Until it makes

13-25029

the choice to engage, it will face the consequences of
increased pressure and isolation.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his first briefing
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). We appreciate the focus
and energy that he and his team are bringing to this
Committee.
The Iranian nuclear issue remains one of the gravest
threats to international security and a top priority for
the Security Council. We meet today at a time of new
opportunities but growing risks. In recent weeks, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Director
General has reaffirmed yet again that Iran continues
to advance its nuclear programme and obstruct the
IAEA’s investigation into the programme’s possible
military dimensions by refusing to grant the IAEA
access to the Parchin site and to documents, personnel
and equipment requested by the Agency. Those actions,
as well as Iran’s continued enrichment and heavy
water-related activities, are in clear violation of the
Council’s demands. More alarming still, the IAEA
Director General has confirmed that Iran is now further
contravening Security Council resolutions by installing
hundreds of second-generation centrifuges that could
significantly increase its uranium enrichment capacity.
The installation of those centrifuges, as well as Iran’s
stockpiling of 20-per cent enriched uranium and
continued enrichment at the Fordow facility, are cause
for serious concern.
Those actions are unnecessary and thus
provocative. Iran already has enough enriched uranium
to fuel the Tehran Research Reactor for at least a
decade. Increasing that capacity without any clear
civilian use makes no sense. Iran’s actions neither
build international confidence nor bring us closer to a
comprehensive and peaceful solution. On the contrary,
they raise the world’s concerns. For this very reason,
the work of the Iran sanctions Committee is vital. As
long as Iran rejects its international obligations, we
must be resolute in implementing fully the sanctions
the Council has imposed.
In recent months, we have witnessed troubling new
violations of those sanctions. In January, Yemen seized
a vessel transporting a very large cache of sophisticated
Iranian arms, ammunition and explosives, in violation
of resolution 1747 (2007). Those arms could have
destabilized Yemen’s fragile transition. We urge the

5

S/PV.6930

Committee, with the support of the Panel of Experts,
to investigate that case rigorously and work with the
Council to craft a worthy response.
We have also observed more public statements
acknowledging Iran’s illicit arms smuggling.
Representatives of Hamas, Hizbullah, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and even Iran itself are now publicly
admitting to activities that violate United Nations
sanctions. The Committee should consider those
statements as additional proof of Iran’s blatant disregard
for its obligations and follow up to the fullest extent
possible.
The Committee is now also assessing Iranian
missile launches that have violated resolution 1929
(2010). Those launches allow Iran to refine and develop
a technology that, if ever combined with weapons of
mass destruction, would constitute an intolerable
threat to international peace and security. We urge the
Committee, in line with its mandate, to take swift and
sure action in response, including by imposing targeted
sanctions on those responsible for such violations.
Each and every violation of United Nations
sanctions is a serious matter. It is our collective
responsibility to report on those cases, to support
efforts to investigate them, and to act decisively when
investigations are completed. Responding effectively to
those incidents bolsters both the Council’s credibility
and the efficiency of diplomatic efforts to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue.
The United States remains committed to a diplomatic
solution. Therefore, we welcome the recently resumed
dialogue between the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany (P5+1) and Iran. But let
us not forget that dialogue is only a means to an end.
Our goal remains a durable and comprehensive solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme, in accordance with the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and in
compliance with all relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA Board of Governors.
As a first step, we seek to address Iran’s most
significant nuclear activities — the production and
accumulation of uranium enriched to near 20 per cent
and the installation of additional centrifuges at Fordow.
In that event, the P5+1 countries have demonstrated
that we are willing to take steps to respond to Iran’s
expressed concerns.

6

The talks between the P5+1 and Iran in Almaty were
useful, but we must see whether real progress towards a
negotiated solution can result from the renewed process.
The process cannot continue indefinitely or be used as
a stalling mechanism. Therefore, we remain committed
to the dual-track approach, mounting pressure on
Iran as we pursue meaningful dialogue in good faith.
Working together we can continue to clarify for Iran the
consequences of its actions and show Iran the benefits
of choosing cooperation over provocation.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the report
on the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts.
Ambassador Quinlan has worked with ardour and
brought new energy to the Committee. We also take
note of the recent report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of
safeguards under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in Iran.
The Council and the 1737 (2006) Committee have
made considerable efforts to address the issues relating
to Iran’s nuclear programme. We take this opportunity
today to reaffirm the need for the Council to consider
revisiting objectives and strategy as set out in the
relevant resolutions. We welcome the resumption of
diplomatic efforts between the five permanent members
of the Security Council and Germany (P5+1) and Iran.
We hope that recent positive and conciliatory overtures
and statements will not only improve the atmosphere
but lead to results. Affirmation by all sides of their faith
in negotiations is important. There may be a way out
of the current impasse through consistent engagement.
A peaceful resolution of the issues is possible on the
basis of reciprocal confidence-building measures and
the necessary steps to ensure Iran’s right to peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. The Council and the Committee
need to lend their support to those efforts. It is essential
to avert confrontation over Iran’s nuclear programme,
which has the potential to destabilize the immediate
neighbourhood of Iran and the volatile region.
As other Council members have pointed out, the
work of the Panel of Experts and its activities should
conform to its mandate. Its reports, analyses and
recommendations must be objective, impartial and
backed by solid evidence. We reiterate our view that
Security Council sanctions should not be pursued as an
end in themselves; a negotiated solution to the unresolved

13-25029

S/PV.6930

issues needs to be facilitated by striking a balance
between sanctions and negotiations. We call upon the
Council, the Committee and the Panel of Experts to
adjust the objectives and strategy accordingly. Easing
of pressure could help with negotiations.
Iran is a party to the NPT and, as a member of
the IAEA, is entitled to certain rights that should
be respected in line with the provisions of those
instruments. At the same time, Iran should fulfil its
legal obligations under the NPT. We urge Iran to stay
engaged with the IAEA and extend full cooperation to
it, with a view to resolving all outstanding issues.
It is important for the Council to broaden the
composition of the Panel of Experts, particularly from
developing countries. Such a step would enhance
awareness and make implementation of the relevant
Council resolutions more effective. The Council should
revisit the existing method of appointment of the Panel
of Experts and align it with the United Nations core
values of transparency and impartiality. We hope that
the Council will attend to that issue in all its subsidiary
bodies. We will gladly contribute to that process.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking Ambassador Gary Quinlan
for presenting the first report on the activities of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), which he chairs with most able stewardship. I
would like to reiterate the support of my delegation.
The Iranian nuclear issue in many of its aspects has not
significantly changed since our meeting of 13 December
2012 (see S/PV.6888), as noted in the latest report of
the Board of Governors, dated 21 February 2013 (see
S/2013/103). Pursuant to resolution 2011/69 — in which
the Board of Governors of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) requested the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the Agency to cooperate and step up
dialogue so as to urgently resolve all significant
pending issues, including access to all information,
documents, sites, materials and staff — the two parties
met several times. Unfortunately, the report notes that
no specific results were obtained. Moreover, the report
underscores that the negotiations of December 2012
and of 16 and 17 January 2013, as well as the meeting
of 13 February, which sought to finalize the document
on the structured approach to the issue, did not lead to
an agreement with Iran or to substantive discussions
on, inter alia, the possible military dimensions of the
country’s nuclear programme.

13-25029

In addition to those outstanding issues, it is also
noted that activities conducted in declared installations
under the Safeguards Agreement run counter to relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors. Generally speaking, the report
underscores the fact that Iran has not suspended its fuel
enrichment activities in the declared facilities in Natanz
and Fordow. Moreover, more advanced centrifuges have
been installed at Natanz. The same holds true for heavy
water projects, uranium conversion and fuel production.
In all cases, while the Agency has concluded that the
information obtained basically corresponds to Iran’s
statements, additional information continues to be
expected from the country.
In the light of the foregoing, it is hardly surprising
that the International Atomic Energy Agency is
increasingly concerned about the possible existence
of secret nuclear-related activities involving military
sector organizations, in particular activities for the
development of a nuclear payload for a missile. There
is significant evidence that the crisis of confidence
between the international community and Iran
continues to grow.
The information contained in the report of the
Panel of Experts regarding the launching of Great
Prophet VII missiles during the operations carried out
from 2 to 4 July 2012, as well as official Iranian public
statements regarding possible military assistance to
Hamas and other terrorist groups, only exacerbates the
tensions. Those acts, according to the Panel of Experts,
run counter to resolutions 1929 (2010) and 1747 (2007)
and are a source of great concern.
Talks between the group made up of the five
permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany (P5+1) and Iran, such as the meeting held
in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 27 February, aimed, inter
alia, at inducing that country to renounce its nuclear
programme and to send its stock of 20 per cent enriched
uranium abroad, have not yet led to significant progress
on the matter.
Despite that regrettable situation, my country
continues to believe in a negotiated solution and calls
on Iran once again to uphold its commitments under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Board of Governors.

7

S/PV.6930

In that respect, Togo calls on Iran to step up its
cooperation with the IAEA so as to arrive at acceptable
solutions to the requests made by the Agency and to
continue, in good faith, negotiations with the P5+1. We
remain hopeful that at upcoming meetings, in particular
at the expert meeting to be held in Istanbul on 17 and
18 March, upstream of the meeting between Iran and
the P5+1 slated for 5 and 6 April, progress will be made
in that respect.
At the same time, it is crucial for Iran to accept the
request of the IAEA as set out in paragraph 65 of its
report, by facilitating access to the Parchin site and by
addressing the concerns regarding that site.
While recognizing the right of all countries,
including Iran, to develop peaceful nuclear energy,
we would urge that country to work to implement a
peaceful programme and to draw on the cooperation
necessary to achieve that goal.
In conclusion, I should like to express my gratitude
to the Committee and to the Panel of Experts for their
tireless efforts in assisting the Council in the quest for
a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear question.
That undertaking requires joint efforts on our part.
It is in that context that Togo is pleased to host, in
Lomé from 13 to 17 May, a regional seminar that will
allow West African and Central African countries to
discuss the measures necessary to abide by the United
Nations sanctions regime in that respect and to adopt
relevant recommendations.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Gary
Quinlan for his informative briefing. We should like
to congratulate him and his team on having assumed
the chairmanship of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to undertake the tasks assigned to it with
transparency, impartiality and objectivity, without
compromising its mandate. We believe that it should
continue to do so in future.
We commend the work of the Committee, which
has continued to examine national reports, requests
and reports of alleged violations by Member States.
Regarding the requests made by States for information
on the sanctions regime, it is important that the
Committee respond in a clear, direct and expeditious
manner, pursuant to its mandate.

8

We welcome the work being done by the Panel of
Experts, including its dissemination and awarenessraising activities. We encourage the Panel to continue its
work in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions.
The Panel provides invaluable support to the
Committee through, inter alia, its investigations into
alleged violations and incidents. Its conclusions and
recommendations, based on verifiable and reliable
information, provide a substantive basis for the
Committee’s decision-making process.
Guatemala has always been in favour of the right of
all States to pursue the peaceful use of nuclear energy,
pursuant to international treaties, as long as they
comply with their verification obligations.
We believe that the Islamic Republic of Iran should
fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to re-establish trust and to prove the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Iran is obligated to meet its
treaty obligations. Likewise, that country, as a member
of the IAEA, must cooperate fully with the Agency
within the framework of its Safeguards Agreement.
We have taken note of the recent IAEA report
on the implementation of the safeguards regime in
Iran pursuant to the NPT, in which it is once again
indicated that Iran has continued to accelerate its
nuclear programme and that pending questions remain
unresolved, including those related to the possible
military dimension of its nuclear programme. That
situation continues to be of great concern to us.
We join the call of the IAEA and urge Iran to
adopt measures towards the full implementation of the
Safeguards Agreement and other NPT obligations and
commitments and, in particular, submit to inspections.
In that context, we note with satisfaction the talks
held with the Agency in January and February, and we
hope that an agreement will soon be reached on the
structured approach.
Guatemala has been consistent in pressing for a
political and diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear
question. It does not believe that there is an alternative
to a negotiated solution. Efforts towards that end must
be made on the basis of the principles of consistency
and reciprocity and pursuant to the NPT.

13-25029

S/PV.6930

We are encouraged by the recent talks between
the E3+3 group and the Islamic Republic of Iran held
in Almaty, which have been described by some as a
turning point in the process. Perhaps it is too early to
feel optimistic, but we hope that we can soon envision a
negotiated solution to the Iranian nuclear questions. We
can only hope, together with the rest of the international
community, that the upcoming meetings to be held in
Istanbul and again in Almaty will result in real progress
and a positive outcome.
In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
actively participate in the Committee’s deliberations,
with the goal of contributing to a lasting solution
ensuring the full implementation of the relevant
resolutions.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we congratulate Ambassador Gary Quinlan
on assuming the chairmanship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
thank him for presenting the quarterly report on the
work of that subsidiary organ. We also acknowledge his
committed and transparent work.
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to efficiently carry out its work in the
context of its mandate. In that regard, we believe
that it is important to keep Member States informed
of the Committee’s work, for example by holding
briefings that are open to all States. We also believe
that it is appropriate for the Committee to respond to
all inquiries received from Member States in order to
encourage them to remain vigilant in implementing the
relevant resolutions. Furthermore, we believe that the
Committee plays a crucial role in providing assistance
and cooperation to Member States on implementing the
pertinent resolutions. In that regard, we believe that the
guidance notes that help States in their implementation
efforts are a key tool.
Allow me to underscore three points with regard to
the Iranian nuclear programme. First, I would like to
reaffirm the inalienable right of all States parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons to
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination. That is the principled
position that we have stated in this and other relevant
forums. At the same time, my country has a firm and
long-standing commitment to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, which I reaffirm
in the Council. I believe that the international

13-25029

community should support the relevance of the nuclear
non-proliferation regime and its cornerstone, the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Secondly, I would like to mention the most recent
report of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of 21 February, which
was transmitted to the Council (see S/2013/103). In that
regard, we share the assessment of the Director General
and his concern about the lack of progress in clarifying
the outstanding issues, including those linked to a
possible military dimension of the Iranian nuclear
programme. We believe that the Islamic Republic
of Iran must continue to actively cooperate with the
Agency and supply all required information on its
nuclear programme, providing access to all necessary
sites. In that regard, it is important that Iran adopt the
necessary measures to fully implement its safeguards
agreement and to meet its other obligations, including
the relevant Security Council resolutions, and to regain
the international community’s trust in the exclusively
peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
Thirdly, I would like to underscore that we are
encouraged by the recent talks between the Government
of Iran and the E3+3, held in Almaty. My country
believes that we must continue to seek a solution through
talks that allow for certainty about the peaceful nature
of the Iranian nuclear programme. We encourage the
parties to continue their efforts in that regard.
We also believe that it is relevant to recall the appeal
of the IAEA Board of Governors, in its resolution of
September 2012, for Iran to adopt and implement the
so-called structured approach to resolve the outstanding
issues. Since the adoption of that resolution, there have
been three rounds of negotiations between the IAEA
and Iran without the Director General having been
able to record substantive developments. We hope that
the periodic meetings between the two parties lead to
specific results with regard to the structured approach
so that the process of clarifying the outstanding issues
can begin. I have concluded my remarks.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Like
my colleagues, I would like to thank Ambassador
Quinlan for presenting the quarterly report on the
activities of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I would like to assure him of my
delegation’s full support in carrying out his functions
as Chair of that sanctions committee, which is at the
heart of the non-proliferation regime. We also thank the

9

S/PV.6930

Panel of Experts for their invaluable assistance to the
Committee’s work. Its role is crucial in ensuring that
the sanctions measures adopted by the Security Council
be fully upheld. My country had the opportunity to host
the Panel on 6 and 7 February during a working visit to
Luxembourg.
The quarterly report of the 1737 Committee
considers the various aspects of its work with regard
to restricting Iran’s ability to develop its nuclear and
ballistic missile capability for military purposes. It is
important that the Committee continue on that path
and we fully support its efforts along those lines. In
that regard, we note with concern the recent report of
the Panel of Experts, which unequivocally decides that
Iran violated the provisions of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010) in June 2012 by launching ballistic missiles
in the context of a military exercise. We believe that
the report must be followed up. The Committee must
respond. The same applies to the weapons intercepted
on 23 January off the coast of Yemen. In the light of
the outcome of the inquiry under way, the Committee
should ensure an appropriate follow-up.
The credibility of the appeals to Iran, insisting on
its effective cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), also depends of the effective
implementation of the sanctions regime. Iran will
regain the trust of the international community only by
fully cooperating with the IAEA. Iran must therefore
clarify the numerous outstanding issues and allow
the IAEA inspectors to test the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme.
Regrettably, the IAEA’s recent report does not
enable us to believe in Iran’s readiness to uphold its
international obligations. In contravention of the
resolutions of the Security Council and the IAEA
Board of Governors, Iran has not suspended its uranium
enrichment and processing activities. On the contrary,
it has continued to develop its enrichment capacities
by using new-generation centrifuges at the Natanz
site. Continuing heavy-water projects and refusing the
IAEA access to the Parchin site are just are worrying.
In such conditions, it is difficult to know the exact
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. That in no way
helps to create a climate of trust.
While calling on Iran to comply with its international
obligations and to fully clarify the nature of its nuclear
programme, Luxembourg nevertheless reaffirms its
commitment to a negotiated solution based on the

10

dual-track approach. That is why we are pleased about
the talks between Iran and the E3+3 on 26 February
in Almaty, facilitated by the European Union High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
At that time, a proposal was put on the table that sought
to establish trust and to provide true substance to the
dialogue. If accepted, that proposal should allow for
progress towards a long-term solution on the basis of
compliance with the resolutions of the Security Council
and the IAEA Board of Governors.
We hope that the Iranian Government will positively
view the proposal made in Almaty and that the followup meetings planned for 18 March at the technical level
and for 5 and 6 April at the political level will finally
allow for a positive dynamism.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his work as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for his presentation of the
90-day report of the Committee.
The Committee received from Member States
a number of communications on actions taken in
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and on responses on reported incidents
during the reporting period. The Committee discussed
the incident report by the Panel of Experts dated
11 January 2013, exchanged views on the case reported
by a Member State on 6 February 2013 and encouraged
the Panel to expedite the investigation in that regard
and report to the Committee on its findings. It is critical
that the Committee examine all cases and incidents
in an impartial and objective manner and consider
appropriate actions on the basis of solid evidence. It
is essential that the Committee continue its efforts to
assist States in implementing the relevant Security
Council measures. We note in that regard the adoption
by the Committee of an implementation assistance
notice on conventional arms and related material and
on financial and business measures.
We also note the Panel’s visit to several Member
States to discuss matters pertaining to the mandate
of the Panel, and the participation of its experts in
a number of conferences and seminars during the
reporting period. It is essential that the Panel continue
its outreach activities, which play an important role
in increasing the number of national implementation
reports from Member States.

13-25029

S/PV.6930

The reporting period was also marked by three
rounds of talks between the Islamic Republic of Iran
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
aimed at finalizing the structured approach document.
However, according to the report of the IAEA Board of
Governors of 21 February (see S/2013/103), it has not
been possible to reach agreement or begin substantive
work on the outstanding issues.

professionalism and impartiality of the Panel of Experts.
We call on the Committee to continue to consider all
the assistance notices and to call for their application,
given their importance for the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We would also
highlight the need to pursue the consideration of the
final report of the Panel of Experts (see S/2012/395), in
particular the recommendations it contains.

There is no doubt that every country has the right to
develop its nuclear industry for peaceful purposes in full
accordance with the relevant international obligations.
It is therefore important that the Government of the
Islamic Republic of Iran continue its efforts to build
international confidence in the exclusively peaceful
nature of its nuclear programme.

In the summary of its 16 November report, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) stressed
that few concrete results had been achieved in terms of
resolving the pending issues with respect to the Iranian
nuclear programme, despite the three series of talks held
in Tehran since the previous December. We therefore
hope that the Islamic Republic of Iran and the IAEA
will quickly reach agreement on a structured approach
to undertaking substantive work on the pending issues.
As the only institution with the competency to deal with
safeguards, the IAEA must have all the cooperation
necessary to make concrete progress on the pending
issues.

It is encouraging that high-level talks took place
at the end of February between Iran and the five
permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany. We hope that the meeting at the technical
level to be held later this month, and the resumption of
high-level negotiations in April in Almaty, Kazakhstan,
will help move the resolution of the problem forward. It
is essential to continue dialogue and cooperation on the
issues on which progress is urgent for regional stability.
We encourage further efforts aimed at resolving the
issues of concern peacefully and in a constructive
manner.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Like
other colleagues who have preceeded me, I would like
to reiterate my congratulations to Ambassador Gary
Francis Quinlan on his assumption of the chairmanship
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), as well as to thank
him sincerely for his first 90-day report. Aware of his
thoroughness, integrity and professionalism, we would
like to express our full confidence in him and assure
him of our cooperation.
I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution
1929 (2010). We encourage it to continue, under the
aegis of the Committee, to participate in the various
conferences and meetings having to do with the
Committee’s mandate and, above all, to pursue the
dialogue undertaken with Member States during the
visits that it makes to the countries concerned.
The Committee continues to consider all the
cases referred to it. We hope that it will continue to
benefit from the cooperation of Member States and the

13-25029

At the same time, we welcome the positive
atmosphere in which the most recent talks between
the Islamic Republic of Iran and the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany, held
on 26 and 27 February in Almaty, Kazakhstan. On the
basis of our belief that dialogue, diplomacy and peaceful
means are the only way to resolve this issue, we hope
that the dialogue that has been undertaken, which will
continue in March in Istanbul and in April in Almaty,
will allow for progress towards a negotiated solution.
I would like to highlight the urgent need to
prevent any weakening of the non-proliferation regime
and to ensure that all States are in strict compliance
with their safeguards obligations. Non-compliance
with obligations undertaken through the voluntary
and sovereign decision to join the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons will only
make the achievement of the global goal of nuclear
disarmament more difficult and out of reach. My
country remains firmly attached to that goal. At the
same time, we reaffirm the right of every State to
use nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful ends. The
non-proliferation regime depends upon a delicate
balance between the rights and obligations of States. It
is important to protect, preserve and ensure full respect
for that balance.

11

S/PV.6930

Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I congratulate
Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia on assuming
the chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I thank him for his
first briefing before the Council on the 90-day report
of the Committee and for the commendable work he is
doing at the helm of the Committee. I also commend
the Panel of Experts created by resolution 1929 (2010)
for its valuable support to the work of the Committee.
Rwanda believes that it is the right of every country
to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
However, it is clear that the nuclear programme of the
Islamic Republic of Iran is of particular concern for the
international community. Iran is party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). Therefore, it shall fulfil all its obligations under
the NPT, fully cooperate with the IAEA and comply
with all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
We are particularly concerned about the regional
dimension of the crisis. The continued enrichment of
uranium, violation of Security Council resolutions,
lack of adequate cooperation with the IAEA, slow
path of negotiations and legitimate security concerns
of countries of the region are all elements that could
transform this crisis into an additional conflict that the
Middle East does not deserve. In that respect, it is of
paramount importance that the Islamic Republic of Iran
take all the necessary measures that could convince
the international community of the peaceful nature
of its nuclear programme. That confidence-building
approach is the only way to ensure that the United
Nations and the larger international community lift the
sanctions that continue to harm the Iranian people.
To conclude, we reiterate our support to the
negotiations between the five permanent members of
the Security Council and Germany and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the purpose of which is to find a
diplomatic and political solution to the Iranian nuclear
crisis. We commend the constructive talks that the two
sides recently held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, and we
hope that the next talks, scheduled for next month, will
reach tangible results.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for presenting the
90-day report of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). I also appreciate his leadership
of that important Committee.

12

The Republic of Korea calls upon Iran to
immediately comply with all the relevant Security
Council resolutions in which the Council decided
that Iran shall halt all proliferation-sensitive nuclear
activities. My Government remains deeply concerned
about Iran’s nuclear programme as described in the
latest report (see S/2013/103) of the Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
It is regrettable that progress has not been made in
resolving the outstanding issues, including the possible
military dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme.
It is disappointing that Iran continues to expand its
enrichment capacity by installing more advanced
centrifuges in Natanz. Extensive activities and resultant
changes at the Parchin site undermine the IAEA’s
capacity for effective verification. We urge the Iranian
Government to engage with the IAEA and provide it
with the necessary cooperation without further delay.
In the recent meeting between the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany (P5+1)
and Iran, in Almaty, they agreed to further meetings
in the future. We look forward to Iran responding
constructively to the proposal of the P5+1.
As a State Member of the United Nations, Iran
must comply with all the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In that context, some incidents described
in the 90-day report of the 1737 Committee are indeed
troubling. First of all, we have serious concerns about
the report from the Government of Yemen regarding
the alleged transfer of arms from Iran. Such illicit arms
transfers would destabilize Yemen’s political transition
and undermine regional stability. With the help of the
Panel, the Committee must conduct a thorough and
comprehensive investigation and act on its findings.
Secondly, we also express concern with regard to
the Panel’s compilation of public statements that admit
Iran’s military assistance to Gaza. That case requires
further investigation by the Committee.
Thirdly, the Panel of Experts clearly concluded in
its recent report that Iran’s ballistic missile launches
during its military exercise in July 2012 constituted
a violation of resolution 1929 (2010). The Committee
should take appropriate action, including the
designation for sanctions of individuals and entities
responsible for that violation. The repeated violation of
resolutions with impunity will undermine the authority
and credibility of the Security Council. The role of
the Committee and the Panel of Experts is crucial to

13-25029

S/PV.6930

ensuring that sanctions are implemented effectively
and efficiently.
Lastly, once again, we urge Iran to address the
serious concerns regarding its nuclear programme
and to comply immediately and fully with the relevant
Security Council and IAEA resolutions. We stress that
extraordinary efforts will be required to regain the lost
confidence of the international community.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his 90-day report
and to take this opportunity to wish him the greatest of
success in his task as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
for its work in support of the Committee.
The Council has taken note of the 21 February
report (see S/2013/103) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That
report once again drew attention to Iran’s refusal to
meet its international obligations and commitments
under the resolutions of the Security Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors. The report underscores
several elements of concern, including the absence of
substantive discussions between the IAEA and Iran on
unresolved issues and the possible military dimension
of the Iranian nuclear programme. Iran, as we know,
resorts to making objections on methods so as not to
respond substantively. The Agency has still not had
access to the Parchin military site.
Another element of concern is the continuation
of enrichment activities at Natanz and Fordow, with
no credible civilian aim. Twenty-per cent-enriched
uranium continues to be accumulated. Enrichment
capacity is also being stepped up, in both quantity
and quality. That is what we have concluded from the
announcement, on 23 January, of the installation of
new generation centrifuges at the Natanz enrichment
facility. The deployment and use of centrifuges on such
an industrial scale represents a significant development
in Iranian capacity to produce enriched uranium.
It is without a doubt another violation by Iran of its
international obligations.
Finally, let us not forget that other nuclear
activities are continuing, including those related to
the construction of a heavy water reactor, without Iran
allowing the IAEA to carry out verification.

13-25029

The quarterly report of the 1737 Committee also
shows that Iran is still not meeting its international
obligations, as it continues to pursue its illicit nuclear
and ballistic activities as well as its attempts to get
around sanctions. France is concerned by the repeated
violations by Iran of the arms embargo imposed by
the Security Council, which are fuelling the spiral of
violence in the Middle East. In particular, we have
already expressed our concern regarding the transfer of
arms from Iran to Syria. Several such cases were noted
by the Experts’ report. We welcome, in that regard, the
imposition of sanctions on Yas Air and SAD Export
Import Company, which were implicated in attempts to
deliver weapons to Syria.
We are also concerned by information relating to
the transfer of arms and ballistic material to non-State
actors in Gaza. The Panel of Experts provided the
Committee with a compilation of statements by Iranian
officials on that matter. Iran must explain those
deliveries, which represent a violation of the arms
embargo imposed by resolution 1747 (2007).
Yemen also recently informed the Council of the
seizure off its coast of a large quantity of weapons
originating in Iran and likely destined for Yemeni
insurgents, risking the destabilization of the political
transition process in that country.
Developments continued in the Iranian ballistic
programme during the reporting period, with contempt
for Council resolutions. Iran launched Shahab-1 and
Shahab-3 missiles in July 2012 as part of Great Prophet
VII military exercises. France, together with Germany,
the United Kingdom and the United States, notified
the Committee of that new violation of resolution 1929
(2010), following which the Panel of Experts carried
out an investigation leading to a report concluding
unambiguously that the exercise undeniably constituted
a violation of resolution 1929 (2010).
In that case, as in the others I mentioned, the 1737
Committee must remind Iran of its obligations. It must,
together with the experts, consider the appropriate
measures that must be taken, including the imposition
of sanctions against the entities and persons responsible.
We remain open to dialogue, as shown by the
numerous meetings held between the E3+3 with Iran in
2012. More recently, during the Almaty meeting held
on 26 and 27 February, the E3+3 put new, balanced
proposals to Iran, which bear witness once again to
the will of the six parties to react positively if Iran

13

S/PV.6930

undertook the necessary steps to respond to the urgent
concerns of the international community. While those
discussions allowed for useful first steps to be taken,
they did not produce concrete results. The discussions
will therefore continue, first between experts in March,
then at the political director level in early April to
evaluate the situation. We remain, with our partners
in the group, fully committed to seeking solutions
providing for concrete progress to be made. But nothing
will be possible without clear political will on the part
of Iran to respond to the concerns of the international
community. Unfortunately, Iran has yet to show any
such will.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of France for his statement. I shall
now make a statement in my national capacity as
representative of the Russian Federation.
We congratulate Gary Quinlan on assuming his
role as Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We hope
that under the Australian leadership the Committee
will continue to act in an impartial and objective
manner to find a political and diplomatic settlement to
the situation regarding Iran’s nuclear programme. The
Chairman can count on our solid support.
The Committee has worked hard over the past
three months to continue efforts in different areas
of its activities, including investigations of possible
sanctions violations, processing information received
and agreeing on different draft documents. We note the
work of the Panel of Experts in providing the Committee
with valuable assistance. We continue to feel that the
Panel must work on an impartial and objective basis
guided by the Committee.
With regard to the investigation of possible cases
of sanctions violations, an important area of work,
we should like to underscore that the conclusion and
assessments of the Committee must be based only on
verified and reliable information with a careful analysis
of the conditions surrounding the incidents. Hasty
conclusions have no place in that regard. That pertains
equally to the work of the Panel.
Russia has consistently called for a political and
diplomatic settlement of the situation with regard to
Iran’s nuclear programme and sees no alternative to
a negotiated settlement. Efforts here must be carried
out on the basis of the principles of consistency
and reciprocity and in accordance with the Treaty

14

on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We
remain convinced that the collective activities of the
international community in resolving pending matters
pertaining to Iran’s nuclear programme are undermined
by unilateral sanctions, which in a number of cases
are extraterritorial in nature. That is categorically
unacceptable under international law.
We call for progress in the negotiations process in
the six-party talks, as well as in talks between Iran and
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We
hope that the forthcoming six-party talks with Iran next
week will be effective and allow for both sides to come
together in their positions.
On the whole, we understand the indisputable
right of Iran to develop a civilian nuclear programme,
including enrichment, after resolving all outstanding
issues and bringing Iran’s nuclear programme come
under the reliable and comprehensive oversight of the
IAEA. Russia continues to do all that devolves upon it to
achieve progress in resolving the situation surrounding
Iran’s nuclear programme.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to Ambassador Quinlan to respond
to comments and questions.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I will be very brief,
knowing how busy the programme is. I would just like
to thank Council members for their contributions this
morning and for the warm welcome they have given
to the Australian chairmanship. At this stage, I would
also like to thank my predecessor and acknowledge his
contribution, Ambassador Néstor Osorio, who is now
President of the Economic and Social Council.
Since this is my first report to the Council, I would
like to emphasize that we are very conscious of the
responsibilities we have as Chair and the need to work
impartially and objectively to secure evidence and to
ensure that we are very professional about that. In that
regard, I would like to recognize the contribution of
the Panel of Experts. They are clearly an indispensable
professional platform for our work. I would also like
to express my appreciation for the very professional
support of the Secretariat.
We need, and we see, an organic working
relationship among the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), the Panel and the Secretariat.
The Committee is just finalizing a programme of work

13-25029

S/PV.6930

for the next little while, which covers its obligations
on compliance, investigations, outreach, dialogue,
assistance and cooperation. I think that we have made
a good start. I would like to thank Committee members
for that. The Committee next meets on 15 March.
Finally, some Council members have raised the
issue of the transparency of the Committee’s work
and, like my predecessor, Ambassador Osorio, I would
like to provide forums where the Committee and Panel

13-25029

members can engage with the broader United Nations
membership. We will work with the Committee
members to make arrangements for a briefing in the
coming months.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

15
