A/56/PV.86

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-sixth session

86

th plenary meeting
Friday, 14 December 2001, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Han Seung-soo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Statement by the President on the occasion of the
awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to the
United Nations
The President: As members know, I have just
returned from Oslo, Norway, where I had the great
honour to accept the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize on behalf
of the United Nations. I was also honoured to attend
that occasion along with Secretary-General Kofi
Annan, who accepted the prize on his own behalf. Let
me take this opportunity to congratulate all the family
members of the entire United Nations system and to
pay tribute to our Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan.
Since this was the first time that the United
Nations as a whole was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize,
I was especially pleased that the major United Nations
organs and various agencies were also represented at
the ceremony. I wish that all the representatives of the
Member States could have been there as well. The
Nobel Peace Prize belongs to each of them as much as
to any other member of the United Nations family.
Surely this award is meant to offer
encouragement to the men and women of the United
Nations in carrying out their work. Such
encouragement will be especially welcome to the
thousands of United Nations personnel who serve
under extremely difficult conditions, often at grave risk
to themselves. While we can be justly proud of what
the United Nations has accomplished, we should also

(Republic of Korea)

look ahead to the many daunting challenges that still
lie before us, such as terrorism, poverty, drug abuse
and trafficking, HIV/AIDS and environmental
degradation. These challenges cannot be met by any
single Member State or by any single organization
alone.
Since 1945, the international community and the
peoples of the world have exerted their best efforts,
often with high hopes, for the realization of global
peace and well-being through the United Nations. Our
efforts have not always been successful or our
successes always permanent, but we should not be
discouraged. I have no doubt that, were it not for the
United Nations, humankind could hardly have
advanced as far as it has in realizing the vision of the
United Nations founding fathers in 1945. The
indispensable role of the United Nations was clearly
recognized by Chairman Berge of the Norwegian Nobel
Committee at the award ceremony in the following
words: “The only negotiable route to global peace and
cooperation goes by way of the United Nations.”
Finally, let me mention that I will closely consult
with the representatives of the major organs and
Member States about how to utilize the prize money
which the United Nations has received from the Nobel
Committee.
In concluding my brief report, I join with
representatives in celebrating the award of the 2001
Nobel Peace Prize as both recognition of past
achievements and a spur to even greater efforts in the
future.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-69700 (E)

*0169700*

A/56/PV.86

Agenda item 14 (continued)
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Draft resolution (A/56/L.10)
Amendment (A/56/L.11)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held the debate on this item at its 30th
plenary meeting, on 22 October.
I call on the representative of Australia to
introduce draft resolution A/56/L.10.
Mr. Dauth (Australia): Australia, in its capacity
as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), has the
honour to introduce the draft resolution on the report of
the IAEA, as contained in document A/56/L.10.
The draft resolution is sponsored by 50 countries,
as follows: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the
Russian Federation, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
and Yugoslavia.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
continues to make a vital contribution to international
security. The Agency plays a key role in our collective
efforts to achieve the twin goals of peace and
development by ensuring that the benefits of nuclear
technology are shared globally, by building and
maintaining a global nuclear safety regime and by
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and
ensuring the security of nuclear material and facilities.
Following the tragic events of 11 September, the
work of the IAEA has taken on even greater
significance, as Member States have become united in
their concern about terrorism and in their recognition
of the important role of the IAEA in providing an
international response to increased risks of nuclear
terrorism. Through the General Assembly’s annual

2

resolution on the report of the IAEA, we are able to
take note of the Agency’s important work and to affirm
our confidence in its role in the application of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes.
The draft resolution we are introducing today is
the product of an exhaustive process of open-ended
negotiation among delegations in Vienna — where
Member States’ expertise on nuclear issues is
focused — and subsequent, equally exhaustive
consultations in New York. The approach taken among
experts in Vienna in drawing up the draft resolution
was to draw on agreed language from previous
substantive General Assembly resolutions on the
IAEA, updated and amended as necessary to take
account of the outcomes of the most recent session of
the IAEA General Conference, which was held, as the
Assembly is aware, in September 2001. The draft
resolution is a faithful reflection of the Agency’s work
and the General Conference resolutions.
As many delegations stated during the
consideration of this agenda item last year, it was
disappointing that the General Assembly was unable at
its fifty-fifth session to adopt a substantive resolution
on the work of the IAEA. This was particularly so,
given that the Agency itself has a long history of
making decisions in Vienna on the basis of consensus.
Many States have therefore worked hard in Vienna and
New York to ensure that a substantive resolution could
be adopted by the General Assembly this year.
Significant investments have been made in the draft
resolution, with hard compromises made on key issues
such as integrated safeguards, the role of innovative
nuclear technology and the safe transport of radioactive
material.
In view of the comprehensive and transparent
process of consultation which has taken place in
Vienna and New York, it is the strong wish of the 50
sponsors of the draft resolution, and of the Director
General of the IAEA, that the draft resolution be
adopted as it stands, without further amendment. We
look forward to the Assembly’s support for the draft
resolution and its endorsement of the important work
of the IAEA.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Iraq to introduce the draft amendment contained in
document A/56/L.11.

A/56/PV.86

Mr. Aldouri (Iraq): My delegation has presented
a draft amendment, contained in document A/56/L.11,
to the draft resolution entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”, which would be
inserted as a new paragraph after paragraph 12.
We fully understand that this draft resolution is
the result of consultations in Vienna and that there
were other delegations that had wished to amend it in
ways that would reflect their interests. Despite our
strong reservations with regard to paragraph 12 of the
draft resolution, which demands that Iraq implement
relevant Security Council resolutions, with which Iraq
has actually complied throughout the past decade, my
delegation did not object to its inclusion, for the sake
of reaching consensus and adopting a substantive draft
resolution.
However, considering the draft resolution an
unbalanced and selective document that neglects the
verification activities carried out in Iraq by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), my
delegation presented its draft amendment. The draft
amendment is actually a quotation from what the IAEA
states in its reports to the General Assembly and to the
Security Council regarding the IAEA’s implementation
of the safeguards agreement in Iraq, referred to in
documents S/2000/300, S/2001/337, S/2001/26,
S/2001/129 and S/2000/120 and in the IAEA report
presented to the current session of the General
Assembly contained in document A/56/313. From
among these, I would like to quote from a letter dated
10 April 2000 from the Director General of the IAEA
addressed to the President of the Security Council:
“As I informed the IAEA Board of
Governors during its recent meeting, the Agency
inspectors were able to verify the nuclear material
subject to safeguards, which consists of low
enriched, natural and depleted uranium. Iraq
provided the necessary cooperation for the
inspection team to perform its activities
effectively and efficiently”. (S/2000/300, p. 3)
This fact was stated in the resolution concerning Iraq
recently adopted by the General Conference of the
IAEA
in
Vienna,
contained
in
document
GC(45)/RES/17.
I hope that the General Assembly will decide that
the main element in considering this draft resolution
should be transparency, not selectivity that would
reflect the political agenda of one or two States.

Representatives should be careful not to set the
precedent of a political resolution that would not send
the right message to the States Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We should
not forget that we are talking about the cornerstone of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which carries out the
safeguards agreements between Member States and the
IAEA. We hope that representatives will support our
draft amendment, which simply reflects what the IAEA
reports have stated regarding this matter.
The President: I give the floor to
representative of Australia on a point of order.

the

Mr. Dauth (Australia): I should like, on behalf of
the sponsors of draft resolution A/56/L.10, to raise a
point of order in connection with the amendment
contained in A/56/L.11. On behalf of the sponsors of
the draft resolution, I formally move, under the terms
of rule 74 of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly, that no action be taken on that amendment. I
should also like to request a recorded vote.
Draft resolution A/56/L.10 is the product of an
intensive, transparent negotiating process, which took
place among experts in Vienna over many weeks. The
process included many open-ended meetings at which
all delegations were given ample opportunity to present
and defend their proposals. The amendment proposed
in document A/56/L.11, which was introduced by Iraq,
was considered during that exhaustive consultative
process. At the conclusion of that process there was no
agreement to incorporate that amendment proposal.
In New York, open-ended consultations were also
convened, and delegations had a further opportunity to
present and defend amendment proposals. No
agreement was reached for the further amendment of
the draft resolution, which is widely viewed as
reflecting a fair compromise, after weeks of negotiation
among experts. This draft resolution is traditionally
based on the resolutions adopted at the annual General
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in Vienna. This year’s draft was again based on
the principle, accepted by all during the consultative
process, that the United Nations General Assembly
draft resolution should be faithful to the resolutions of
the IAEA General Conference. The amendment
proposed by Iraq does not accord with the relevant
General Conference resolution on Iraq, resolution
GC(45)/RES/17.

3

A/56/PV.86

Bearing in mind the fact that the draft resolution
is the product of a comprehensive and transparent
process of negotiation, the sponsors believe that a noaction motion on the proposed amendment in
A/56/L.11 would be the best means of ensuring that the
substantive draft resolution, in its current form, is
adopted by the General Assembly at the fifty-sixth
session. We therefore hope that the no-action motion
will be supported.
The President: The representative of Australia
has moved, within the terms of rule 74 of the rules of
procedure, that no action be taken on the amendment
contained in document A/56/L.11. Rule 74 reads as
follows:
“During the discussion of any matter, a
representative may move the adjournment of the
debate on the item under discussion. In addition
to the proposer of the motion, two representatives
may speak in favour of, and two against, the
motion, after which the motion shall be
immediately put to the vote.”
Mr. Coutts (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile
believes that the draft resolution in A/56/L.10, entitled
“Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency”,
is the outcome of a broad and transparent negotiation
process, carried out in both Vienna and New York.
Given this fact, we believe that taking no action on the
proposal contained in document A/56/L.11 would be
the most appropriate way for the Assembly to adopt the
draft resolution, in its current form.
For that reason, we second the no-action motion
put forward by the representative of Australia.
Mr. de Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union would like to recall that it
attaches great importance to the activities of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. As a result, we
sincerely hope that the substantive draft resolution in
A/56/L.10, which is before the Assembly today, will
shortly be adopted in its current form.
For reasons that have just been set out by the
delegation of Australia, the European Union would like
to express its unreserved support for the no-action
motion with regard to the draft amendment in
A/56/L.11 — the motion just made by the delegation of
Australia on behalf of the sponsors of the draft
resolution. We call on delegations to vote in favour of

4

the motion to take no action so that draft resolution
A/56/L.10 can be voted upon in its current form.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq): My delegation would like to
ask delegations to vote against the no-action motion
that is intended to deprive a Member State of its right
to express its position with regard to a draft resolution
and to introduce a paragraph that would reflect the
simple truth, as expressed in the reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency on its activities
carried out in Iraq.
I hope that delegations will take a stand against
the introduction into the General Assembly of a veto
that is designed to achieve political ends.
Miss Thomas (Jamaica): While taking into
consideration the arguments that have been put
forward, my delegation believes that, on a point of
principle, any Member State has a right to have its
proposals considered. While we do not necessarily
support the substance of A/56/L.11, we believe that any
Member State has the right to present a proposal. We
therefore oppose the no-action motion.
The President: I shall now put to the vote the
motion by the representative of Australia that no action
be taken on the amendment contained in document
A/56/L.11.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia,

A/56/PV.86

Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yugoslavia
Against:
Algeria, Cuba, Jamaica, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia
Abstaining:
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Benin, Botswana,
China, Djibouti, Egypt, India, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Jordan, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Togo,
Venezuela, Zambia
The motion for no action was carried by 96 votes
to 7, with 20 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Angola informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour.]
The President: Since the motion for no action
has carried, no action will be taken on the amendment
contained in document A/56/L.11.
We shall therefore take a decision on draft
resolution A/56/L.10.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/56/L.10.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Marcus (United States of America):
Paragraph 10 of draft resolution A/56/L.10 does not
reflect what was agreed at the General Conference in a
balanced way and is thus objectionable. Agreements
reached in Vienna should be respected as we pursue
our efforts in New York. We regret that this has not
been the case.
Mr. Govrin (Israel): Israel attaches great
importance to the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and to the tradition of consensus in this
Organization.
The report of the IAEA, which reflects the work
of the Agency, taking into consideration efforts made
by the Members of the Organization to promote the

important tasks of the Agency, should also reflect
agreed language. Unfortunately, the wording of
paragraph 10 of the draft resolution on the report of the
IAEA does not reflect that cooperative spirit.
The draft resolutions on the application of IAEA
safeguards in the Middle East have been adopted by
consensus since 1991. Their language represents a
delicate balance reached after long and difficult
negotiations aimed at achieving consensus. Israel has
joined that consensus because we support the goal of
establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle
East in due course, notwithstanding certain
reservations regarding the modalities.
Paragraph 10 of the draft resolution on the IAEA
report represents the General Conference resolution on
the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East
in a selective and unbalanced way. Paragraph 10
contains some components from the resolution, but
ignores others. This attempt to introduce a new
interpretation of the compromise consensus resolution
on the Middle East is unacceptable, and may damage
the common understanding required for reaching
consensus on this issue.
Israel will vote against paragraph 10 of the draft
resolution.
Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The core element of the Agreed Framework
between the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and the United States, which was reached on 21
October 1994, is the provision of light-water reactors
by the United States on the condition of a freeze on our
nuclear activities.
Seven years have passed since the adoption of the
Agreed Framework between the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States. During this
period, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
been fully carrying out its obligations under the Agreed
Framework, including freezing our graphite-moderated
reactors. However, the United States is not
implementing the Agreed Framework in good faith.
The project for the light-water reactors, which is to be
finished by 2003, is only at the ground-excavation
phase.
The United States is not providing due
compensation for our loss of electricity resulting from
the delay in constructing light-water reactors; it would
rather take up the issue of inspections. This cannot be

5

A/56/PV.86

construed as anything but an attempt to impose upon us
the blame for the delay in the construction of the lightwater reactors and to scrap the Agreed Framework.
However, the draft resolution ignores the essence of the
issue and arbitrarily forces my country to implement
the safeguards agreement. A safeguards agreement is
not a matter to be implemented by using pressure. The
solution to the issue lies in the implementation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea/United States
Agreed Framework.
My delegation would once again like to make
clear its position that the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula is not a matter to be addressed at the United
Nations, but rather one to be settled between the
Democratic Peoples’ Republic of Korea and the United
States. My delegation will therefore vote against the
draft resolution contained in document A/56/L.10.
Mr. Mehta (India): India, a founding member of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
attaches the highest importance and value to the
objectives of the Agency. Since draft resolution
A/56/L.10 pertains to the activities of the IAEA, we
will go along with it. Nevertheless, we have
considerable difficulty with the third preambular
paragraph.
The language in that paragraph appears to link
adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) with the freedom of research,
development, production and use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. The statute of the IAEA, which
must guide all our deliberations on the activities of the
Agency, calls on the Agency to accelerate and enlarge
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world. Furthermore, the
statute stresses the principle of the sovereign equality
of all its members. The purpose of those provisions in
the statute of the IAEA is obviously to encourage
unfettered access of Member States to the peaceful
uses of atomic energy without any discrimination
whatsoever, albeit with appropriate safeguards.
The IAEA statute predates the NPT. Also, the
Agency has not been designated secretariat of the NPT.
The Agency merely carries out safeguards activities
with the various member States in accordance with
agreements; and the concept of safeguards itself
predates the NPT. The NPT is not an equitable Treaty.
Also, the provisions of article VI of the NPT have not
been fulfilled by the nuclear-weapon States parties to

6

the Treaty. The NPT should therefore not be used to
discriminate between members of the IAEA. By
implying that adherence to the NPT — on which my
Government’s views are well known — alone would
mean access to the peaceful uses of atomic energy, the
draft resolution deviates from and, in fact, derogates
the objectives enshrined in the statute of the IAEA.
We have therefore been constrained to call for a
vote on the third preambular paragraph, and shall vote
against it.
Mr. Aldouri (Iraq): My delegation regrets that its
draft amendment has not been adopted by the General
Assembly. It would have reflected the activities of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in Iraq as
mentioned in IAEA documents. Considering the
current unbalanced state of the draft resolution, my
delegation has no choice but to ask for a separate vote
on paragraph 12, in view of the fact that Iraq has fully
complied with all its obligations under Security
Council resolutions.
I should like to quote from paragraph 35 of the
report of IAEA to the Security Council dated 27 July
1998 (S/1998/694):
“As previously recorded, there are no
indications of Iraq having retained any physical
capability for the indigenous production of
weapon-usable nuclear material in amounts of
any practical significance, nor any indication Iraq
has acquired or produced weapon-usable nuclear
material other than the nuclear material verified
by IAEA and removed from Iraq in accordance
with paragraph 13 of resolution 687 (1991).”
I therefore would ask representatives to support
my delegation and, given the facts I have mentioned
earlier, vote against paragraph 12 of the draft
resolution before us.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
Separate votes have been requested on the third
preambular paragraph, operative paragraph 5, operative
paragraph 10 and operative paragraph 12 of draft
resolution A/56/L.10.
If there is no objection, we will therefore proceed
accordingly.

A/56/PV.86

I now put to the vote the third preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/56/L.10.

The President: I now put to the vote operative
paragraph 5 of draft resolution A/56/L.10.

A recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded vote has been requested.

A recorded vote was taken.

A recorded vote was taken.

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland,
Italy,
Jamaica,
Japan,
Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America,
Uruguay,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela,
Yugoslavia, Zambia

In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bolivia, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait,
Latvia,
Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu,
Venezuela, Yugoslavia, Zambia

Against:
India, Israel

Against:
None

Abstaining:
Bhutan, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Pakistan

Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti, India, Pakistan, Syrian Arab
Republic

The third preambular paragraph was retained by
127 votes to 2, with 6 abstentions.

Operative paragraph 5 of draft resolution
A/56/L.10 was retained by 130 votes to none, with
5 abstentions.

7

A/56/PV.86

The President: I now put to the vote operative
paragraph 10 of draft resolution A/56/L.10.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San
Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela,
Yemen,
Yugoslavia, Zambia
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Operative paragraph 10 of draft resolution
A/56/L.10 was retained by 136 votes to 2.
The President: I now put to the vote operative
paragraph 12 of draft resolution A/56/L.10.
A recorded vote has been requested.

8

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium,
Bhutan,
Bolivia,
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Mozambique, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
Yugoslavia
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Algeria, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti, Egypt,
Jordan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Morocco, Pakistan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Zambia
Operative paragraph 12 of draft resolution
A/56/L.10 was retained by 119 votes to none, with
14 abstentions.
The President: Before proceeding to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to announce that,
since the introduction of the draft, Suriname has
become a co-sponsor of A/56/L.10.

A/56/PV.86

I now put to the vote draft resolution A/56/L.10
as a whole.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Libyan
Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United
States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia
Against:
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Abstaining:
Côte d’Ivoire, Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Draft resolution 56/94 was adopted by 150 votes
to 1, with 2 abstentions (resolution 56/94).
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives wishing to make statements in
explanation of vote. May I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Durrani (Pakistan): I have asked for the
floor after the vote on draft resolution A/56/L.10,
entitled “Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency”, to explain Pakistan’s position on the third
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 5. My
delegation abstained in the voting on those paragraphs.
The language of the third preambular paragraph,
which links the right to nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), is not acceptable to us. Since
Pakistan is not a party to the NPT, we cannot accept
any commitment on its behalf.
Similarly, we recorded our reservations on
language in the first part of operative paragraph 5,
which reads in part as follows:
“bearing in mind the importance of achieving the
universal application of the safeguards system of
the Agency, urges all States which have yet to
bring into force comprehensive safeguards
agreements to do so as soon as possible”.
In our view, the International Atomic Energy Agency’s
role is to facilitate the technical safeguards and not to
indulge in taking political decisions.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation voted in favour of resolution 56/94,
entitled “Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency”, as a whole. The Chinese delegation is of the
view that the Agency has done a great deal of fruitful
work and achieved significant progress in many areas
over the past year for which we wish to express our
appreciation.
The Chinese delegation wishes to explain its
position on the following issues.
With respect to the nuclear issue concerning the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the Chinese
Government’s principled position on this question
remains unchanged. We have always supported the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and the
maintenance of peace and stability there. The parties

9

A/56/PV.86

concerned need to seek an appropriate solution to the
nuclear issue concerning the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea through constructive dialogue,
consultations and good-faith cooperation. The
countries concerned also need to pursue their dialogue
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the
basis of equality and mutual respect and to faithfully
implement the relevant Agreement.

organizations that submit reports to the United Nations
consider in their own forums controversial issues on
which divisions exist among their member States.
However, the resolutions that we adopt here on those
organizations do not reproduce the controversial
aspects and are adopted without a vote. We do not
believe that the resolution on the IAEA’s report should
be an exception to the rule.

As regards Iraq, the Chinese delegation is of the
view that the prolongation of the problem without
resolution has aggravated the humanitarian crisis there
and is not conducive to the peace and stability of the
Gulf region. The relevant resolutions of the Security
Council should be implemented fully and the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq must be
respected. China calls for the lifting of the sanctions
imposed on Iraq as soon as possible on the basis of an
objective assessment of Iraq’s implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

That is why my delegation abstained in the voting
on operative paragraph 12 and would have abstained in
the voting on operative paragraph 11 if it had been
submitted to a separate vote. Cuba voted against the
motion of no action on the amendment contained in
document A/56/L.11 because we felt that it prevented
Member States from exercising their legitimate right to
express their position on a highly relevant substantive
issue in the context of the draft resolution under
consideration.

Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba has again this year voted in
favour of the resolution on the annual report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Our
support reflects the great importance that Cuba attaches
to the Agency’s work.
As we said in the debate on this subject some
weeks ago, Cuba highly appreciates the IAEA’s work
and achievements in the area of technical assistance
and cooperation, safeguards and nuclear safety. At the
same time, we regret that the resolution includes
controversial language that does not enjoy the support
of all delegations.
For technical and political reasons, the General
Assembly should not become a forum for the
reproduction of debates on sensitive issues considered
by the States members of the IAEA. Reopening such
debates in the General Assembly is technically
inappropriate because many delegations in New York
cannot give rigorous follow-up to the debates held in
Vienna and therefore do not have all the background
information needed to reopen in this forum serious
negotiations on highly sensitive issues.
Even more important than the technical
considerations, however, we believe that, from the
political standpoint, the voting that is traditionally held
when action is taken on resolutions devoted to the
Agency’s annual report does not contribute positively
to the work of the IAEA. Many international

10

The third preambular paragraph establishes a link
between the rights of States to develop research,
production and use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes and their adherence to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Cuba’s
position on the NPT is well known. We believe that it
is selective and discriminatory in its essence, which
establishes two categories of States with different
rights and obligations and legitimizes the possession of
nuclear weapons by one group of countries. For all
these reasons, Cuba did not support the wording in the
third preambular paragraph and abstained in the voting
on it.
Mr. Atieh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation voted in favour of resolution
56/94 on the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). Our position reflects our conviction
that the resolution constitutes a basis for the
strengthening of the IAEA’s safeguards regime, which
in turn is a means of maintaining international security.
However, my delegation expresses its concerns
and fear that the constant precedence accorded to the
development of the safeguards regime over other
programmes of the Agency will upset the balance
sought by the developing countries in the Agency’s
programmes and budget. It should be noted that the
General Assembly is not entitled to define the priorities
of the Agency’s work, which is the prerogative of the
IAEA Board of Governors.

A/56/PV.86

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 14?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 29 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/56/L.48)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the debate on this agenda item
at its 58th and 59th plenary meetings, on 19 November
2001.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/56/L.48.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.48?
Draft resolution
(resolution 56/95).

A/56/L.48

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
29.
Agenda item 35 (continued)
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Draft resolution (A/56/L.46)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the debate on this agenda item
at its 83rd plenary meeting, on 11 December 2001.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/56/L.46.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since its
introduction, the following countries have become
sponsors: Cyprus, Ethiopia, Liechtenstein, New
Zealand and Venezuela.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.46?
Draft resolution
(resolution 56/96).

A/56/L.46

was

adopted

The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. May I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Madej (Poland): I am speaking on behalf of
the members of the Convening Group of the
Community of Democracies, namely, Chile, the Czech
Republic, India, Mali, Mexico, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, the Republic of South Africa, the United
States of America and my own country, Poland, to
welcome the adoption of the resolution entitled
“Support by the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies”.
The United Nations system as a whole continues
to play a substantial role in providing timely, coherent
and adequate support for Member States in their efforts
to achieve democratization and good governance.
Consolidating and promoting democratic principles and
practices, in particular in new or restored democracies,
should remain one of the main tasks of the
Organization.
The Convening Group of the Community of
Democracies particular note of the observation of the
Secretary-General contained in paragraph 33 of his
report (A/56/499) on the issue that two international
forums — namely, the Conference of New or Restored
Democracies and the Community of Democracies —
play an important role in mobilizing the political will
for advancing democratic values, principles and
practices and ensuring that the lessons learned from
democratization processes in various parts of the world
will not be lost by future generations.
Ms. Tobing-Klein (Suriname): Suriname is very
satisfied with the debate on agenda item 35 and its
outcome, regarding the strengthening and consolidation
of democracy, peace, security and the rule of law in our
countries. Suriname attaches great importance to the
strengthening and consolidation of new or restored
democracies, and congratulates Benin and the
international community on the important Cotonou
Declaration.
The experiences of Suriname, after the past
serious disruptions of our democratic system, have
taught us that continued attention and action are needed
to develop and maintain a true democratic culture in

11

A/56/PV.86

which, peace, security, respect for human rights, good
governance and the rule of law can prevail. Suriname
has therefore paid special attention in its Multi-Annual
Development Plan for 2001-2005 to democracy, good
governance, and the restoration and rehabilitation of
democratic order and a constitutional State. A true
partnership between Government, civil society and
non-governmental organizations is indeed a condition
sine qua non for the realization of these noble goals.
In the preparatory process for its participation in
the important Organization of American States (OAS)
General Assembly meetings in Costa Rica and Peru
earlier this year, Suriname organized a broad
consultation with organizations for women, youth,
churches, entrepreneurs, trade unions and human rights
institutions to discuss the draft Inter-American
Democratic Charter. Suriname was one of the countries
that adopted by acclamation the Democratic Charter at
the twenty-eighth special session of the OAS in Lima,
Peru, on 11 September 2001.
Suriname is very pleased at the central role of
democracy in that Charter, in which democracy and its
relationship to human rights, integral development and
the war on poverty are crucial. In addition, Suriname
welcomes the protection provided to member countries
by the provisions of the Democratic Charter in the
event of disruption or unconstitutional alteration of
democratic order.
In conclusion, Suriname is grateful for the
generous support we are receiving from the
international community, including the United Nations,
the United Nations Development Programme, the OAS
and countries such as the Netherlands, for the process
of democratization and the consolidation of our
democratic institutions.
The President: I give the floor to
representative of Australia on a point of order.

the

Mr. Stuart (Australia): We raised our flag earlier
as one of the sponsors of the draft resolution proposed
by the delegation of Benin, on support by the United
Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies.
We had signed the lists of sponsors held by the
delegation of Benin and the Secretariat. We are puzzled
that we do not appear as a sponsor and hope that this
can be rectified in the record of the meeting.

12

The President: I give the floor
representative of Benin on a point of order.

to

the

Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
like to recall, for the benefit of the Secretariat, that
when I introduced the draft resolution during the
preceding meeting, we provided a list of the names of
all of the countries that were kind enough to sponsor
the draft resolution. I should like, therefore, to stress
that the names of all of the countries that we mentioned
earlier, which are sponsors of the draft resolution,
should appear in document A/56/L.46/Rev.1 when it is
issued.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 35?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 33 (continued)
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Draft resolution (A/56/L.41/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on this agenda item at its 81st
and 82nd plenary meetings on 10 December 2001.
The Assembly will take a decision on draft
resolution A/56/L.41/Rev.1.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Madagascar, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Paraguay and Tonga.
Are there any other sponsors? Yemen indicates
that it wishes to be included as a sponsor of draft
resolution A/56/L.41/Rev.1.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.41/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/56/L.41/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 56/97).

A/56/PV.86

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 21 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Economic System
Draft resolution (A/56/L.43)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate under agenda item 21 and its
sub-items (a) to (m) at its 77th to 80th plenary
meetings, on 6 and 7 December 2001.
I give the floor to the representative of Jamaica to
introduce draft resolution A/56/L.43.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): On behalf of the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States, I have the
honour to present the draft resolution entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the Latin
American Economic System”, contained in document
A/56/L.43, further to the statement I made on behalf of
the Group under agenda item 21 in connection with the
report of the Secretary-General contained in document
A/56/171.
I would like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Antigua and Barbuda,
Bahamas, Chile and the Dominican Republic.
This draft resolution, which is presented
biennially to the General Assembly, aims at
encouraging greater cooperation in support of
economic and social development in the region
between the Latin American Economic System (SELA)
and the United Nations organizations, agencies and
programmes, particularly the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean. It is essentially
an update of resolution 54/8, which was adopted by
consensus during the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, in 1999.

System, in which both parties agree to strengthen and
expand their cooperation in matters that are of common
concern in the field of their respective competence,
further to their constitutional instruments. Reference is
also made to the joint activities that SELA is
developing with the specialized agencies and other
organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system. Finally, the preamble welcomes the continued
monitoring and changes in the treatment of topics
relating to the United Nations system, in close contact
with the delegations of Member States participating in
such deliberations.
In the operative part of the draft resolution, the
General Assembly will urge the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean to continue
deepening its coordination and mutual support with
SELA. It will also urge the United Nations
Development Programme to continue its financial and
technical cooperation programmes that the Permanent
Secretariat of SELA is carrying out in areas of mutual
interest and concern. Lastly, it will urge the specialized
agencies and other funds and programmes of the
United Nations system to continue and intensify their
support for, and cooperation in the activities of, SELA.
In operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution,
the General Assembly reiterates its request that both
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Permanent
Secretary
of
SELA
assess
the
implementation of the Agreement between the two
bodies and report to the General Assembly at its fiftyseventh session. Finally, in operative paragraph 6 the
Secretary-General is requested to submit a report on
the implementation of the resolution to the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session.
I wish to conclude by commending to the General
Assembly the draft resolution contained in document
A/56/L.43 for adoption by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/56/L.43.
Before proceeding to take action, I should like to
announce that the following countries have also
become sponsors of draft resolution A/56/L.43:
Dominica, Guatemala, Saint Lucia and Trinidad and
Tobago.

In the preambular part of the draft resolution,
reference is made, inter alia, to the Agreement between
the United Nations and the Latin American Economic

13

A/56/PV.86

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/56/L.43?
Draft resolution
(resolution 56/98).

A/56/L.43

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(A/56/3 and Add.1 and 2)
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider agenda item 12, entitled “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, in accordance with its
decision adopted at the 43rd plenary meeting, on 9
November 2001.
I give the floor to the President of the Economic
and Social Council to introduce the report of the
Economic and Social Council.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): On 9 November 2001, the General Assembly
decided to place on its agenda the consideration of the
report of the Economic and Social Council for the year
2001. The Economic and Social Council welcomes that
decision, which is indeed a historical one.
Contrary to what is customarily done for the other
two main bodies — the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice — hitherto the General
Assembly dealt with the annual report of the Economic
and Social Council in a piecemeal fashion. Although
the Assembly dealt directly with a limited number of
issues, it nonetheless entrusted the consideration of
most of this report to its main committees, primarily
the Second Committee, the Third Committee and the
Fifth Committee.
That approach, admittedly, did have one major
benefit, which we welcomed: it ensured a certain
degree of efficiency from a sectoral perspective.
However, it is also true — and regrettable — that over
the years that approach contributed to blurring the
image of the Economic and Social Council, because it

14

did not allow for an overall perception of its work or
for an understanding of its strategic approaches.
The General Assembly, in deciding to consider
the report of the Economic and Social Council, in
accordance with the Charter, not only set out to restore
a proper balance to the situation, but also — and most
importantly — made clear, through this decisive act, its
desire to become actively involved in the process of
renewal and revitalization of the work of the Council,
begun a few years ago.
On behalf of the President of the Economic and
Social Council, I should like sincerely to thank the
Assembly and to express our gratitude to it for this
decision.
The Assembly will recall that last year the heads
of State or Government welcomed the renewed
dynamism of the Economic and Social Council, which
is much more in keeping with the mandate entrusted to
it under the Charter. The Assembly’s decision to give
due consideration to our report is indeed deeply
appreciated by our heads of State.
The Economic and Social Council is entrusted
with providing general guidance to those bodies of the
United Nations system that are charged with the
promotion of economic and social development, and
also with coordinating their activities. The Council also
coordinates the follow-up of the outcome of major
international conferences in the economic and social
fields and in other related areas.
That is why the Economic and Social Council has
devoted considerable time and effort to the systematic
follow-up of the development strategies emanating
from the major conferences and summit meetings held
under the auspices of the United Nations in the 1990s,
including the decisions taken in the context of the fiveyear follow-up to these meetings.
The role of the Council has also been pivotal in
the implementation of the recommendations and
decisions flowing from international conferences from
the integration of women and human settlements.
It is against that backdrop that the Economic and
Social Council undertook more closely to supervise its
technical committees by emphasizing coordinated
follow-up of these major conferences. Closer links
between the Council and its technical bodies have
allowed for a more coherent approach and for more
efficient and effective methods of work.

A/56/PV.86

The working relationship between the Council
and the five regional economic commissions has also
been better defined. A dialogue with their respective
Executive Secretaries on a specific topic is held every
year, and their contribution is increasingly enriching
the work of the Economic and Social Council.
In keeping with its mandate, the Council in recent
years has spared no effort in bringing together all of the
development partners, with a view to enhancing
cooperation and to harmonizing the policies of the
various United Nations bodies, in order to maximize
their results in the area of development and, more
specifically, in the area of the combat against poverty,
whose eradication remains our top priority.
This prioritization of the combat against poverty
and underdevelopment has placed Africa at the very
centre of the concerns of the Economic and Social
Council, which has devoted a large part of its work to
that continent, undertaking a detailed examination of
the reasons for Africa’s economic backwardness and
endeavouring to identify ways and means of integrating
it into an increasingly competitive global economy.
The special attention accorded to the situation of
Africa reached its apex last July. During the high-level
segment of its substantive session, the Economic and
Social Council undertook to reflect on the role that the
United Nations system — that is, we the Member
States — should play in order effectively to support
Africa’s efforts to achieve sustainable development. In
keeping with the guidelines set out by the heads of
State or Government in the Millennium Declaration,
the Economic and Social Council subsequently adopted
a Ministerial Declaration setting out specific measures
to be taken by the international community to foster
Africa’s development.
The General Assembly should give equitable and
appropriate consideration to that Declaration, which is
one of the key elements of the report before the
Assembly. As a leading international body in the area
of economic and social issues, the Council contributed
to the mobilizing, along with States, of the heads of the
financial institutions and of the specialized agencies,
the private sector, non-governmental organizations and
all the other development partners, in support of the
new African initiative, now called the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development. The report before the
Assembly contains compelling proposals regarding the
implementation of that initiative.

The Council has played a major role in drawing
the attention of international organizations to the
importance of information and communication
technologies in development efforts, based on the 2000
ministerial declaration on the role of information
technology in the context of a knowledge-based
economy.
Following the impetus given by the Economic
and Social Council, a working group on information
and communication technologies was set up here at
United Nations Headquarters on 20 November last,
during a ceremony at which we had the honour and
privilege, Sir, of your presence.
We have been monitoring more closely the
implementation of policies by United Nations funds
and programmes in the context of their operational
activities and thus assisted the General Assembly in its
triennial consideration of operational activities.
The institutionalization of a debate on
humanitarian affairs, pursuant to resolution 52/12 B,
has made possible the consideration of broader general
policy issues in this field.
Globalization, and its various forms it takes, has
become one of the determining factors in decisionmaking processes at both the national and international
levels. Accordingly, the Economic and Social Council
has contributed to the creation of fresh opportunities
and new ways for the many stakeholders to become
involved in the promotion of development.
For instance, the Council has played a central role
in the promotion of cooperation with the Bretton
Woods institutions. Since 1998, a special high-level
meeting devoted to financing and development issues
has been held each year among representatives of the
Council and of the Bretton Woods institutions. This
year’s high-level meeting, held on 1 May, was
particularly useful. In the debates in plenary and at the
two round tables, participants engaged in a very broad
and deep exchange of views on urgent and painful
problems of development. A summary of that debate is
contained in the report.
Similarly, the Economic and Social Council
organizes an annual dialogue on general policy issues
with the heads of international financial and trade
institutions in order to take stock of the world
economic situation. The Council also organizes
thematic meetings with representatives of specialized

15

A/56/PV.86

agencies and meetings devoted to considering the
decisions adopted by the Administrative Committee on
Coordination.
The Council’s ability to bring together
representatives of Governments, bodies of the United
Nations system, civil society and the private sector to
discuss and debate economic and social issues is now
fully recognized. The Council’s preparation and
organization of high-level debates are exemplary in
that regard. The preparation for the high-level
segments include the convening of a series of
information meetings and round tables. In these
preparatory meetings, representatives of Governments
and the public sector participate alongside those of the
private sector, civil society and international
organizations.
At the 2001 substantive session, the Council was
confirmed in its conviction that, if its work is to result
in success, civil society as a whole must be involved.
Thus, the African Forum for Investment Promotion,
held in 2001 in parallel with the high-level segment,
brought together African ministers, representatives of
African private companies and trade unions, investors
and the representatives of United Nations specialized
agencies and of regional and subregional development
bodies.
The forum of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), which was also convened in parallel with the
high-level segment, brought together for the first time
an impressive number of organizations dedicated to
finding the best possible way for the international
community to assist Africa to achieving sustainable
development. The commitment of NGOs to the work of
the Economic and Social Council was reflected in the
recent convening in Dakar of the first seminar on the
implementation of the ministerial declaration adopted
in July 2001. This is an opportune moment to welcome
the imminent establishment in Tunis of informal NGO
networks to cover each of the major regions of the
world. These networks will allow all agencies of civil
society not only to be better informed of the
Organization’s work, but also and above all to
contribute to its success and perpetuation. The Dakar
seminar was eloquent testimony to that effect.
As can be seen, the Council has been able in
many respects to discharge its duties effectively.
However, it is aware that, due to a number of new
developments, it must continuously reconsider

16

substantive issues and procedures. Thus will it remain
at the forefront of the debate on world development.
Given these considerations, the Council decided to
follow up on the commitment made by the heads of
State and Government in the Millennium Declaration
to further strengthen itself and to capitalize on its
recent successes so as to play to the full the role
assigned to it by the Charter. That commitment will be
the subject of next year’s debate on coordination
questions.
Without wishing to pre-empt the conclusions to
be reached by the Council or the recommendations to
be made by the General Assembly following its
consideration of this item, I would mention certain key
concepts to guide the next phase of the strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council.
First of all, I would suggest that the Council play
an even more prominent role in the debate on
globalization
to
be
undertaken
by
the
intergovernmental bodies. Given its responsibility in
the economic, social and related spheres, we feel that
the Council is in a position to draw attention to all the
essential aspects of the debate on development. The
Council also plays a leading role in the follow-up to
United Nations conferences and is thus naturally in a
position to enhance that role over the next two years.
Members will recall that several highly important
conferences, in particular the International Conference
on Financing for Development and the World Summit
on Sustainable Development, are scheduled for that
period. Moreover, the Council’s role in the support to
be offered to the General Assembly with respect to the
development goals set forth in the Millennium
Declaration will have to be specified.
Secondly, I feel it necessary to suggest that the
Council consider in greater depth the socio-economic
aspects of conflict prevention, reconstruction, postconflict rehabilitation and peace-building not only to
strengthen the dialectic relationship between peace and
development, but also to ensure improved coordination
of work in that field. Such activities could also offer
new opportunities for interaction between the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council.
Thirdly, we must strive to increase the impact of
the Council’s work on all the intergovernmental bodies
of the United Nations system.

A/56/PV.86

The Council has proved to be a unique forum that
bring together senior officials and the heads of various
sectoral ministries to discuss issues of common
interest. However, additional arrangements should be
made to develop this dialogue and ensure that such
debates and exchanges of views, as well as their
conclusions, will also be at the centre of discussions
within intergovernmental bodies, such as the General
Assembly’s Second and Third Committees. This, of
course, should in no way reflect on the value of an
open and frank debate that does not necessarily lead to
the adoption of agreed conclusions.
More attention should also be given to our
relationships with non-governmental organizations, the
private sector and national bodies, in particular
national economic and social councils, so that the
Economic and Social Council will be able to fulfil its
guiding role with regard to development. As I said
earlier, the success of the African Forum for
Investment Promotion and the Conference of NonGovernmental Organizations has strengthened our
belief in the importance of the contribution of these
development actors to the United Nations in the new
millennium.
Fourthly, it is important not only to develop
policies coherently in the economic, social and related
fields, but also to ensure coordination, in particular
between the Council and its subsidiary bodies, the
development bodies of the United Nations system and
the other stakeholders, and also among the principal
organs of the Organization. The meetings of the
Bureaux of these organs, supported by the SecretaryGeneral, are certainly important but can in no way
replace Member States in the role of offering
constructive observations on the Council’s report.
In this regard, the Assembly’s consideration of
the Council’s report today is, in my view, of great
importance that is not only symbolic, because the
debate will be devoted to fundamental issues. This
consideration should confirm the usefulness of the
work of the Social and Economic Council, particularly
in 2001, and will be a valuable guide as we pursue
efforts to improve further the work of the Council and
identify new areas to explore.
These are the observations I felt duty-bound to
make as the General Assembly takes up for the first
time its consideration of the report of the Economic
and Social Council.

Mr. de Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU). The countries of Central and Eastern Europe
associated with the European Union — Bulgaria, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia — and the
other associated countries, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey,
associate themselves with this statement.
The General Assembly is called upon today to
debate the report submitted by the Economic and
Social Council contained in document A/56/3. The
Assembly does so in the spirit of one of the first of the
purposes and principles established by the Charter of
the United Nations, set out in Article 1, paragraph 3:
“To achieve international co-operation in
solving international problems of an economic,
social, cultural, or humanitarian character, and in
promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all
without distinction as to race, sex, language, or
religion”.
The Economic and Social Council is the key
United Nations body as regards sustainable economic
and social development, and therefore its report
deserves the closest possible attention. The EU fully
supported the approach adopted by Mr. Martin BelingaEboutou, President of the Economic and Social
Council, to have item 12 and the entire Council report
addressed in plenary. We welcome this new procedure,
which gives a somewhat higher profile to the status and
importance of the decisions taken by the Council.
Let me return briefly to the Council’s summer
session in order to highlight the salient points. First of
all, the European Union welcomes the fact that the
Economic and Social Council devoted its principal
debate to Africa, under the theme “The role of the
United Nations system in support of the efforts of
African countries to achieve sustainable development”.
The African continent is one of the European Union’s
priorities; indeed, the EU is Africa’s single largest
donor and its leading trading partner.
Some aspects of this African debate are being
pursued further in the General Assembly. The Union is
pleased that the African heads of State launched the
New African Initiative (NAI) this summer. We also
welcome the decision taken in October to incorporate
this initiative into the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development. Africa is on the way to taking better

17

A/56/PV.86

charge of its own development and its own future. The
EU will support these efforts.
We welcome the quality of the debate held in the
coordination segment last summer concerning
technologies and public-private partnerships. The
Assembly, under agenda item 39, was able to pursue
this dialogue on global partnerships, taking the
Council’s agreed conclusions into account. This
thematic interaction between the Council and the
General Assembly is a most promising development
and should be encouraged.
In another, equally fundamental area — the
operational activities segment — the Economic and
Social Council initiated a discussion on the triennial
review of the operational activities of the various
United Nations funds and programmes. This made for
an open-ended discussion with the heads of the
agencies concerned of the major trends and new ideas
connected with the triennial review. The EU believes
that the Economic and Social Council is the body best
placed to coordinate operational activities for
development, in particular on cross-sectoral or
thematic issues.
The humanitarian segment is an essential part of
the Council’s coordination mandate. The EU reaffirms
its full commitment to greater coordination of efforts in
order to improve the effectiveness of humanitarian
operations, whether in natural disasters or in response
to complex crises. The European Union attaches
particular importance to aid given to internally
displaced persons. Therefore, we welcome the
unanimous support of Council members for the
creation of a unit within the Secretariat to look after
their specific needs.
In this context, efforts have been made to
encourage and stimulate improved coordination and
communication between the major bodies involved in
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction, in
particular the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council. The goal is to ensure effective
support on the part of Member States for an integrated
approach to the problem. The International Peace
Academy recently organized a seminar on this subject
in which representatives of 30 Member States took
part. The conclusions of the seminar were officially
transmitted to the Assembly in document A/56/607.
The European Union believes that we must examine
more closely issues of closer interaction and improved

18

information-sharing between the two bodies so as to
promote an integrated approach to strengthening peace
and post-conflict reconstruction. We must do our
utmost to ensure for those affected by conflict that
there is an intergovernmental process here in New York
capable of having a real and positive impact on their
lives.
The European Union expresses its satisfaction
with regard to the way in which the Council’s human
rights activities evolved during the general segment.
The Council was able to adopt, without a vote, a series
of decisions taken in the Commission on Human
Rights. After lengthy negotiations, it was able to
respond, positively and by consensus, to the request of
the International Labour Organization (ILO) for a
debate on the question of Myanmar’s compliance with
the Forced Labour Convention (No. 29) of 1930. The
credibility of both the Council and the ILO were at
stake in that regard.
The European Union would like to take the
opportunity provided by today’s debate in plenary
meeting to call on the Assembly to respond in a
positive manner to the specific recommendation of the
Council for a fundamental review, in the General
Assembly, of the procedures for considering and
following up on major United Nations conferences
with regard to both format and frequency. The Council
adopted a consensus resolution on the integrated
follow-up to the major conferences and on the working
methods of the functional committees. This question
must also be discussed here in the General Assembly.
We therefore support the proposal to include the
question of follow-up to major conferences on the
agenda of the General Assembly at its fifty-seventh
session.
Next year, the Economic and Social Council will
consider the important issue of human resources for
development, in particular the measures to be taken in
relation to education and health. The European Union
is determined to make a constructive and positive
contribution to consideration of these problems.
The European Union remains deeply committed
to the process of revitalizing and gradually
strengthening the coordinating role of the Economic
and Social Council. The European Union supports the
initiatives aimed at ensuring coordination and
consistency between economic and social questions
during, for example, the special annual meeting

A/56/PV.86

between the Economic and Social Council and the
Bretton Woods institutions. As a major Charter body,
the Economic and Social Council must be in a position
effectively to discharge its lofty task. That was one of
the fundamental commitments undertaken last year in
the Millennium Declaration. In this connection, we
welcome the choice of the theme of the coordination
segment that has been selected for next year. It will
provide an opportunity to reconsider, in a substantial
manner, the working methods of the Economic and
Social Council.
Finally, the European Union regrets the fact that
work on a number of decisions and agenda items was
not finalized during the substantive session in July. It is
equally regrettable that the decisions and conclusions
of subsidiary bodies are sometimes called into
question. The Economic and Social Council is
responsible for coordinating the activities of the United
Nations system in the economic and social area; it is
not a court of appeal.
Mr. Šimonovič (Croatia): It is a great honour for
me to speak on the issue of the report of the Economic
and Social Council for 2001, given the fact that this is
the first time in the history of the United Nations that it
is being debated in plenary meeting in the General
Assembly. This is also a special occasion because, on
10 December — United Nations Human Rights Day —
the Secretary-General of the United Nations accepted
the Nobel Peace Prize — in recognition not only of the
role played by him and by the United Nations in the
past, but also of the role to be played in the future.
Speaking about perspectives, the Secretary-General
pointed out three key priorities for the United Nations
in this century: eradicating poverty, preventing conflict
and promoting democracy. Today, in discussing the
report of the Economic and Social Council, we must
consider its role in achieving those priorities, as well as
the role ascribed to it under the United Nations Charter.
There is no doubt that the Economic and Social
Council has gained in stature in recent years and that
the present international environment is conducive to
the further elaboration of its significant function.
Greater interest in, and the resurgence of the
importance of, the Economic and Social Council can be
attributed in part to its relevance in this era of
globalization and rediscovered global interdependence
since the tragedy of 11 September. More than ever
before, great benefits can be derived from a
multilateral approach to economic and social concerns.

The Economic and Social Council, as a principal
United Nations body, has an important role in this
regard, as well as comparative advantages which
should be better exploited in its future activities.
The broad system of subsidiary bodies and
functional commissions adds a particularly important
dimension of expert input to the work of the Economic
and Social Council. Consequently, my delegation
values the central role of the relevant functional
commissions in the review and follow-up processes of
major United Nations conferences, as well as the
coordinating dimension of the Economic and Social
Council. In this context, the decisions of the
substantive session, held in July, represent an important
component of the continuing process of assessing
progress and adjusting policy in the field of integrated
and coordinated follow-up to major United Nations
conferences and summits.
The increasing development of the Economic and
Social Council as a forum for policy dialogue was
again demonstrated by the special high-level meeting
with the Bretton Woods institutions held in May this
year. Following on from the first meeting of this type
within the United Nations system, held in 1998, the
idea has been developed further, in terms of better
organization, choice of theme, interactive round-table
format and participation.
Undoubtedly, this event provides a unique
opportunity for policy makers in finance, foreign
affairs and development cooperation to engage in a
meaningful dialogue. Furthermore, it serves as an
excellent forum for strengthening links between the
United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions.
However, we should not stop there. The
overriding task now is to enhance the effectiveness of
this interaction with the Economic and Social Council
so as to include all relevant stakeholders — such as the
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank,
the World Trade Organization (WTO), the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the private and civil
sectors — as the primary instruments for developing a
common vision in the economic and social fields.
As we look ahead, we hope that full use will be
made of the International Conference on Financing for
Development, to be held in Monterrey, Mexico, next
year, to build stronger and more efficacious

19

A/56/PV.86

cooperation, with a view to developing a strategic plan
of action for development. Indeed, a vital role could be
played by the Economic and Social Council in
coordinating a follow-up mechanism to Monterrey. It
could serve as the body that oversees not only the
substantive
engagement
and
monitoring
of
implementation of commitments made at the
Conference itself, but, more importantly, those derived
from the Millennium Declaration.
On the issue of reform, my delegation also
appreciates the steps taken to strengthen the role of the
Economic and Social Council and improving its
methods of work. We support further activities by the
Bureau and the membership of the Council towards the
full implementation of proposed reforms in the
economic and social fields. The success of the thematic
panels held during the year in preparation of the theme
of the high-level segment has confirmed the highest
level of professionalism and quality in choosing both
the themes and the panellists. This practice has also
contributed to transforming the Economic and Social
Council into a year-round working body, a trend that
should, in our view, be strongly supported.
Regarding recent developments in the field of
peace-building and peacekeeping worldwide, it is clear
that in a post-conflict environment there is a great
potential for further cooperation between the Economic
and Social Council and the rest of the United Nations
system. Therefore, a clearly defined role for the
Economic and Social Council, including its
cooperation with the other main bodies of the
Organization, will continue to be very important for the
efficient functioning of the United Nations system as a
whole.
In that context, I wish to reiterate the necessity of
cooperation between the two Councils — the Economic
and Social Council and the Security Council — which
should be guided by the principles of capacity-sharing.
Especially in the field of conflict prevention and peacebuilding, the expertise of the Economic and Social
Council regarding economic, social and cultural issues
is crucial for the identification and removal of causes
of potential conflict.
An important contribution to that end was the
round table discussion recently organized by the
International Peace Academy on the issue of the
respective roles of the primary intergovernmental
bodies of the United Nations and cooperation and

20

coordination between them in order to increase
effectiveness in peace-building. The discussion
suggested that the comparative advantages of the
Economic and Social Council lie in several areas: its
ability to bring together research and policy planning
with operational activities and civil society
participation, its link to the broader United Nations
system through the Administrative Committee on
Coordination, its special coordination role in relation to
subsidiary machinery and specialized agencies of the
United Nations system, its increasingly close
relationship with the international financial institutions
as part of the financing for development process, and
its responsibility as an institutional base for
coordination with respect to the executive boards of
United Nations funds and programmes. The functional
commissions of the Economic and Social Council
could also contribute to operations on the ground. The
conclusions of this discussion have been distributed
under this agenda item in a letter by the Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands.
Finally, my delegation wishes to pay tribute to the
President of the Economic and Social Council,
Ambassador Martin Belinga-Eboutou, for this initiative
to place the report of the Economic and Social Council
on the General Assembly’s agenda for the first time, as
well as for his guidance and successful completion of
the work of the Council in the year 2001. With his
wealth of experience and diplomatic skills, he has
greatly contributed to the strengthening of this
important body.
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to extend my sincere gratitude and
appreciation to the President of the Economic and
Social Council, Ambassador Martin Belinga-Eboutou,
whose outstanding leadership has enabled the Council
to successfully carry out its demanding tasks. My
appreciation also goes to the members of the Bureau
for their steadfast support and dedication. In our view,
the report of the Economic and Social Council and its
addenda, though concise, provide us with a complete
overview of all the proceedings and highlights of the
Council in 2001.
Serving as a member of the Economic and Social
Council, as well as of many of its subsidiary organs,
the Republic of Korea wholeheartedly supports the new
arrangements in the General Assembly for considering
the work of the Economic and Social Council in
plenary meeting. Given the magnitude and implications

A/56/PV.86

of the Council’s work for the entire United Nations
system and beyond, key policy issues in the socioeconomic fields need to be thoroughly scrutinized in
the plenary meetings of the General Assembly, and
feedback should be given to the Council if necessary.
In that regard, my delegation has been a strong
supporter of the Economic and Social Council’s
resolution 2001/21 — among others — which
recommends that the General Assembly examine the
effectiveness of the review mechanisms for the
implementation of the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits of the 1990s. The
resolution also decided to strengthen the Economic and
Social Council’s links with the General Assembly by
bringing to its attention overarching policy issues.
I would also like to refer to the high-level special
meetings of the Council with the Bretton Woods
institutions, which were initiated by General Assembly
resolution 50/227 with a view to revitalizing the role of
the United Nations in the economic and social fields.
This year’s special meeting was particularly
remarkable, as it was held against the backdrop of a
global economic slowdown. It is my sincere hope that
more of these high-level dialogues on key policies and
institutions will be further promoted.
Among the numerous achievements of the 2001
substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council, the Republic of Korea attaches great
significance to the outcome of the high-level segment,
which produced an excellent ministerial declaration on
the sustainable development of Africa. Given the
development targets set out in the Millennium
Declaration, including the overarching goal of halving
the proportion of people in extreme poverty by the year
2015, the theme and outcome of the high-level segment
was most appropriate.
It was particularly meaningful that, before the
high-level segment, African leaders heralded a
comprehensive strategy of new African initiatives,
which were later renamed the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development (NEPAD). I am confident that
the General Assembly will consider the ten-year review
of the United Nations New Agenda for the
Development of Africa in the 1990s (UN-NADF) while
taking into account, among other things, the outcome
of the high-level segment of the Economic and Social
Council on Africa.

The result of the coordination segment on the role
of information and communication technologies was
also commendable, as the agreed conclusion provides a
number of policy options to promote information and
communication technologies and to bridge the digital
divide. The Council also highlighted the difficulties
faced by developing countries in tapping the benefits of
globalization, and called for strengthening the catalytic
role of the United Nations in promoting access to
knowledge and the transfer of technology to
developing countries.
Many delegations have stressed the importance of
closing the widening gap in digital capacities between
developed and developing countries. In this context, I
would like to underscore the need for the General
Assembly to take up the issue of the digital divide,
through in-depth discussions, to pave the way for
substantive progress in this field.
I would like briefly to touch upon the work of the
Council in the field of humanitarian assistance. In the
light of the Economic and Social Council’s important
role in providing guidance to the United Nations
system on the coordination of humanitarian assistance,
it is quite regrettable that the Council has failed to
produce an agreed conclusion. I sincerely hope that this
will not set a precedent and that we will succeed in
formulating an agreed conclusion in 2002.
Bearing in mind that a well-coordinated approach
among the principal organs of the United Nations will
produce synergy, the Republic of Korea hopes that the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council will further explore avenues to enhance
cooperation and policy coherence in a mutually
reinforcing manner. In this context, I would like to
commend the arrangement by which the presidents of
the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council meet frequently to discuss and resolve pending
issues and to map out future directions for the causes
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Mrs. Shah (Nepal): At the outset, I would like to
express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the
Economic and Social Council for its 2001 report,
contained in document A/56/3 and its addenda. Nepal
attaches great importance to the work of the Economic
and Social Council and supports its activities, which
are aimed at promoting social and economic
development in the world and at improving the

21

A/56/PV.86

standard of living of the billions of poor people in the
world.
The Charter has mandated the United Nations to
promote high standards of living, full employment and
conditions of economic and social progress and
development, which are of foremost importance in their
own right. These endeavours assume even more
significance in view of the indissociable nexus between
development and peace and justice. While the
Economic and Social Council’s scope of work and its
relevance are global, the vast bulk of that work is
concentrated on the developing countries, where twothirds of the world population and the majority of the
poor live.
As the Economic and Social Council is the
leading organ for the coordination of all social and
economic activities under the auspices of the United
Nations, there is an undeniable imperative for it to
meet its responsibilities. This means that on the one
hand, the Council must try to meet the challenges
posed by its daunting scope of work, and, on the other,
there must also be a clear recognition of, and deference
to, its role in the United Nations system and beyond.
In this context, coordination between the
Economic and Social Council and other United Nations
agencies, and the mechanisms necessary to ensure it,
become critically important in the successful
implementation of the economic and social policies of
the United Nations. Moreover, this will also promote
synergy with respect to other areas of work, notably
international peace and security, in which other organs
of the United Nations might have the primary
responsibility.
Effective coordination is essential between the
Economic and Social Council and other international
organizations, such as the Bretton Woods institutions,
the World Trade Organization, regional banks, the
private sector and civil society. In today’s world, all of
these key stakeholders are the principal players in
reducing poverty, fostering development, expanding
fair trade, ensuring a stable and conducive external
environment and injecting external resources, all of
which are necessary to fulfil the Council’s mandate.
The Economic and Social Council cannot
conceivably discharge its growing responsibility with
the kind of Secretariat support that has been provided
to date. Therefore, Nepal strongly believes that the
Office of the President, as well as the secretariat of the

22

Economic and Social Council, should be strengthened
and provided with adequate financial and human
resources, so that it can carry out its mandated tasks
effectively.
Let me say a few words about the work of the
substantive session of the Economic and Social
Council. As in previous years, the Council, during its
substantive session in July this year, considered a
number of issues related to economic, social, cultural
and humanitarian affairs and adopted many important
resolutions in this respect. Of course, all of the issues
considered by the Council are very important in their
respective fields. However, my delegation finds
particularly notable issues such as sustainable
development, the global campaign for poverty
eradication and the role of the United Nations in
promoting development as well as the right to
development, to food and to education.
Indeed, today, at a time when knowledge and
technological development have become the principal
engine of social and economic transformation, access
to, and the transfer of, knowledge and technology must
be accorded high priority. However, since the majority
of the world’s population still lives in poverty and has
no access to the resources necessary to be connected
with this new world, it has not yet been able to reap the
full benefits of the information and communications
revolution.
In this context, my delegation is encouraged by
the adoption of the agreed conclusions of the
coordination segment of the Economic and Social
Council. The agreed conclusions recognize the
constraints I mentioned earlier and call for the
strengthening of the United Nations system so that it
can play a catalytic role in promoting the transfer of
technology and access to knowledge, which is critical
for developing countries and countries with economies
in transition. The agreed conclusions make various
suggestions to the United Nations system to that effect.
My delegation fully endorses these suggestions.
My delegation is also pleased to recall the threeday high-level segment of the substantive session, held
from 16 to 18 July 2001, which, at the end of the
segment, adopted a Ministerial Declaration on the role
of the United Nations in support of the efforts of
African countries to achieve sustainable development.
Though Africa-specific, the declaration is no less
relevant to other parts of the developing world, which
share the same problems and prospects in the

A/56/PV.86

consolidation of emerging democracies, regional
mechanisms for preventing conflicts and special
measures to address the challenges of poverty
eradication and sustainable development. Nepal fully
supports the content of the ministerial declaration.
To conclude, my delegation supports the work of
the Economic and Social Council in general and
encourages it to continue its efforts to uplift the socioeconomic status of the poorest and the neediest, with
particular focus on the least developing countries.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.
Programme of work
The President: I should like to remind members
that, as announced earlier, the General Assembly will
consider the reports of the Third Committee on
Wednesday, 19 December, in the morning.
Furthermore, as previously announced, the
General Assembly will take up agenda item 20 (f),
“Emergency international assistance for peace,
normalcy
and
reconstruction
of
war-stricken
Afghanistan”, together with agenda item 43, “The
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security”, on Thursday, 20
December, in the morning.
I should also like to inform members that
consideration of agenda item 40, “The situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina”, originally scheduled for
Tuesday, 18 December, in the morning, will now be
taken up, as the second item, on Thursday, 20
December, in the afternoon. As the first item for that
afternoon, the General Assembly will consider agenda
item 32, “Multilingualism”.
On Friday, 21 December, in the morning, the
General Assembly will consider the reports of the
Second Committee.
Announcement
The President: I should like to make an
announcement concerning the Consultative Process on
Ocean Affairs.

Members will recall that the General Assembly,
by its resolution 54/33 of 24 November 1999, decided
to establish an Open-ended Informal Consultative
Process in order to facilitate the annual review by the
General Assembly of developments in ocean affairs by
considering the Secretary-General’s report on oceans
and the law of the sea. It also decided that the meeting
of this process would be coordinated by two cochairpersons, who would be appointed by the President
of the General Assembly.
In this regard, the first and second meeting of the
Consultative Process were held at United Nations
Headquarters from 30 May to 2 June 2000 and from 7
to 11 May 2001. The two previous meetings were cochaired by the Permanent Representative Samoa to the
United Nations, Ambassador Tuiloma Slade, and
Mr. Alan Simcock of the United Kingdom, appointed
by my predecessor.
Members will further recall that the General
Assembly, by its resolution 56/12 of 28 November
2001, requests the Secretary-General to convene the
third meeting of the Consultative Process in New York
from 8 to 15 April 2002.
With regard to the co-chairpersons of the third
meeting of the Consultative Process next year, I have
conducted extensive consultations, both through the
chairs of regional groups and through a significant
number of individual delegations representing all
regions.
During these consultations, wide support was
expressed once again for the co-chairpersons of the
first and second meetings of the Consultative Process.
Both of them were highly praised for their excellence
as mediators and consensus builders.
It is therefore my pleasure to announce my
decision to re-appoint Ambassador Tuiloma Slade,
Permanent Representative of Samoa to the United
Nations, and Mr. Alan Simcock of the United Kingdom
as the two co-chairpersons of the third meeting of the
Consultative Process. I am confident that their
leadership will greatly contribute to achieving a
successful outcome to the meeting.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

23
