Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ment Organization, in accordance with section II,
paragraph 23, of resolution 2152 (XXI);
9. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to enter
into appropriate arrangements with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development in order to enable the developing countries
to derive increasing benefits from the generalized system
of non-reciprocal, non-discriminatory preferences.
1912th plenary meeting,
19 November 1970.
2640 (XXV). United Nations Institute for TrainIng and Research

The General Assembly,
RecaUing its past resolutions relating to the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, particularly resolution 2509 (XXIV) of 21 November
1969, and the resolutions of the Economic and Social
Council on the same subject,
1. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training and

Research; 18
2. Notes with satisfaction the increasing effectiveness

of the Institute in the discharge of its responsibilities;
3. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
greater and wider financial support.
1912th plenary meeting,
19 November 1970.

2641 (XXV). Review and appraisal of the objectives and policies of the International
bevelopment Strategy
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions contained in section D,
entitled "Review and appraisal of both objectives and
policies", of the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 11
COlfSidering that the International Development
Strategy should be viewed· in a dynamic context, involving continuing review to ensure its effective implementation and adaptation in the light of new developments,
1. Recalls its decision to carry out the over-all
appraisal of the progress made in implementing the
International Development Strategy;
2. Takes ncte of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1556 B (XLIX) of 31 July 1970;
3. Requests the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, the specialized agencies,
the regional economic commissions, the United Nations
Economic and Social Office at Beirut and other organizations of the United Nations family to continue to
review progress in their respective sectors according
to the procedures ~lready established and to be adapted
as necessary;
4. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the bodies and organizations of the United
Nations family and after ascertaining the views of the
Governments of States Members of the United Nations,
18 Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/8014).
'
11 Resolution 2626 (XXV).

to submit to the Economic and Social Council at its
fifty-first session a report outlining the details of a
system of over-all appraisal, with a view to enabling
the General Assembly to give consideration to this
matter and take a final decision thereon at its twentysixth session.
1912th plenary meeting,
19 November 1970.

2657 (XXV). United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2398 (XXIII) of 3 December 1968 and 2581 (XXIV) of 15 December 1969,
Noting with appreciation the steps that have been
taken by a number of specialized agencies and of
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to assist in the preparatory work for the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment,
Stressing the need to pursue vigorously the preparations for the Conference,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-Genera1,1s
Taking note of the report of the Preparatory Committee for the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment on its first session,19
Taking note also of Economic and Social Council
resolution 1536 (XLIX) of 27 July 1970,
Taking note with satisfaction of the appointment of
the Secretary-General of the Conference,~
Aware that the International Development Strategy
for the Second United Nations Development Decade21
calls for intensified national and international efforts
to arrest the deterioration of the human environment
and to take measures towards its improvement, and
to promote activities that will help to maintain the
ecological balance on which human survival depends,
Reaffirming that environmental policies should be
considered in the context of economic and social
development, taking into account the special needs
of development in developing countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
sec~>nd ses~ion of the, Preparatory Committee for the
Umted Nations Conference on the Human Environment
at Geneva from 8 to 19 February 1971 and the third
session in New York from 13 to 24 September 1971;
2. Recom~ends t~e inclusion in the agenda for the
second and third sessions of the Preparatory Committee
of one or more specific items relating to economic
and _social aspects m order to safeguard and promote
the mterests of developing countries with a view to
rec?ncil~g the national environmental policies with
therr nat10nal development plans and priorities;
. ~- Recommends that the Preparatory Committee,
m ~ts globaJ. and comprehensive preparations for the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environmen! in 1972, _consi?er, inter_ alia, t?e financing of
possible _a7tion m this field with ~ view to ensuring
that additional resources are provided to developing
18 Official Records of the General Assembly Twenty-fifth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 43, documents' A/8065 and
Add.I.
19 A/CONF.48/PC/6,
20 Mr. Maurice F, Strong was appointed Secretary-General
of the Conference on 16 November 1970
2 1 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
·

General A11embl:,-Twent7-fifth Se11lon

52

countries in the context of the protection of the
environment;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report of the Preparatory Committee on its second
session to the Economic and Social Council at its
fifty-first session for such comments, suggestions and
recommendations as the Council may wish to make;
S. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the progress of the preparatory
work for the Conference to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session, after the third session of
the Preparatory Committee.
1918th plenary meeting,
7 December 1970.

2658 (XXV). The role of modern 1clence and

technology in the development of nation■
and the need to 1trengthen economic and
technico-scientific co-operation among States

The General Assembly,
Convinced that science and technology constitute
one of the main pillars of economic and social development,
Bearing in mind the responsibilities of the United
Nations, particularly under Articles S5 and 56 of the
Charter, and taking into account the need for increased
international co-operation in bringing the benefits of
science and technology to all peoples of the world,
Recalllng paragraphs 60 to 64 of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade22 which, inter alia, make provision
for the measures to be taken by the developing and
developed countries and appropriate international organizations for international co-operation in science
and technology and for the implementation of a programme designed to promote the transfer of technology
to the developing countries,
Noting the contribution made in their respective
fields by the Advisory Committee on the Application
of Science and Technology to Development, particularly its various recommendations and its work in
formulating a World Plan of Action for the Application of Science and Technology to Development, and
the competent organizations of the United Nations
system to the promotion of international programmes
of scientific and technical co-operation,
Recalling its resolutions 2082 (XX) of 20 December 1965 and 2318 (XXII) of 15 December 1967 on
the strengthening of international co-operation in the
application of science and technology to the economic
and social development of the developing countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions 1454 (XLVII) of 8 August 1969 and 1S44
(XLIX) of 30 July 1970 on future institutional
arrangements for science and technology,
Recalling further Trade and Development Board
resolution 74 {X) of 18 September 1970 on the
transfer of technology, including know-how and
patents, 28
1. Recognizes the interest of all countries in benefiting from the achievements of modern science and
technology for the acceleration of their economic and
22 Resolution

2626 ( XXV).
Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/801S/Rev.1 and Rev.1/
Corr.I), part two, annex I.
28 Official

social development and in having access to the world's
intellectual and technical resources, taking into account
the special needs of the developing countries;
2. Calls upon Governments to give due attention
to the promotion of science and technology in their
national policies and to encourage increased international technical and scientific co-operation, both on
a bilateral and multilateral basis, in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and the agreement already reached on specific measures
in inter,overnmental forums, including those on a
more rational utilization of natural and human resources
in developing countries, and to look for new ways and
means to develop this co-operation;
3. Recognizes the importance of establishing direct
channels of co-operation amoni universities, research
institutes, laboratories and similar institutions, within
countries and among countries, irrespective of their
level of economic development and their political and
social systems;
4. Invites the competent organs and organizations
of the United Nations system, particularly the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the United Nations Development Programme,
and other appropriate organizations, to take further
action with a view to strengthening economic, scientific and technical co-operation within their existing
and contemplated programmes, and to support the
efforts of Member States, especially of the developing
countries, to utilize science and technology in furthering
the major objectives of their economic and social
development;
S. Recommends that the Economic and Social
Council, and particularly the Advisory Committee on
the Application of Science and Technology to Development, give special consideration to the long-term
economic and social implications of science and technology, having due reg,:rd to the special needs of the
developing countries;
6. Recommends to the Economic and Social Council
that the regional economic commismms and the United
Nations Economic and Social Office at fkirut intensify
their efforts to widen and diversify technical and
scientific co-operation among countries within the
various regions;
1. Recommends that the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and other ap.P.ropriate organizations continue and intensify, within
their competence, their efforts for the transfer of
operative technology to the developing countries, including assistance for the promotion of indigenous technology;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with Member States and the competent organizations
of the United Nations system, particularly the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, with the assistance of the Advisory Committee
on the Application of Science and Technology to
Development and taking into account its work on a
Wodd Plan of Action for the Application of Science
and Technology to Development, and with whatever
other collaboration may prove necessary, to prepare
a study which would:
(a) Evaluate the main implications of modem
science and technology, particularly for development,
and, on this basis, appraise the results achieved within
the framework of the United Nations system and the
