иНГЕЖР
HATIONS
General Assembly
Dietr.
GENERAL
A/RES/46/35
27 December 1991

Forty-sixth session
Agenda item 59
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BÏ THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Committee (A/46/672)]
46/35.

Chemical and bacteriological fbioloaical^ weapons
A
Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction

The General Assembly.
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective
prohibition of bacteriological (biological) and toxin weapons and to their
destruction.
Recalling also its resolution 45/57 B, adopted without a vote on
4 December 1990, in which it noted, inter alia, that, at the request of the
States parties, a Third Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction would
be held at Geneva in 1991 to review the operation of the Convention, with a
view to assuring that the purposes of the preamble and the provisions of the
Convention, including those related to the negotiations on chemical weapons,
were being realized.
Noting with satisfaction that, at the time of the Third Review
Conference, there were more than a hundred and fifteen States parties to the
Convention, including all the permanent members of the Security Council,
,

91-A2393

A/RES/46/35
Page 2

1.
Notes with satisfaction that, on 27 September 1991, the Third Review
Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction adopted by consensus a Final
Declaration;
2.
Stresses the importance, inter alia, of the solemn political
declaration of the Final Declaration of the Third Review Conference, and
welcomes with satisfaction the results of the Third Review Conference,
including in particular the expanded confidence-building measures related to
activities relevant to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons
and on Their Destruction, 1/ and the establishment of an ad hoc group of
governmental experts open to all States parties to identify and examine
potential verification measures from a scientific and technical standpoint;
3.
Calls upon all States parties to the Convention to participate in
the implementation of the recommendations of thé Third Review Conference,
including in the exchange of information and data agreed to in the Final
Declaration of the Third Review Conference, and to provide such information
and data in conformity with the standardized procedure to the
Secretary-General on an annual basis and not later than 15 April;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to render the necessary assistance
and to provide such services as may be required for the implementation of the
decisions and recommendations of the Third. Review Conference;
5.
Calls upon all signatory States that have not ratified or acceded to
the Convention to do so without delay, and also calls upon those States that
have not yet signed the Convention to join the States parties thereto at an
early date, thus contributing to the achievement of universal adherence to the
Convention.
.
65th Plenary meeting
6 December 1991
В
chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons: measures
to uphold the authority of the 1925. Geneva Protocol .
The General Assembly.
Reaffirming the importance and the continuing validity of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other
Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June
1925, 2./
Recalling its previous resolutions, and those adopted by the Security
Council, on the use of chemical weapons.
Reaffirming also, in particular, its resolution 45/57 С of 4 December
1990 on measures to upHold the authority of the 1925 Geneva Protocol and
1/

Resolution 2826 (XXVZ), annex.

2/

League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV(1929), No.2138.

a /r e s /46/35

Page 3

reaolution 45/57 A o f ,4 December 1990 urging the early conclueion of a
chemical weapons convention.
Deploring all threats, including especially those made most recently, of
use of chemical weapons, .
1.
Condemns vigorously all actions that violate or threaten to violate
the obligations assumed under the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in
War of Asphyxiating, 'Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods
of Warfare, and' other relevant provisions of international law;
2.
Renews its call to all States to observe,strictly the principles and
objectives of the Geneva Protocol, and reaffirms the vital necessity of
upholding its provisions;
3.
Welcomes, in this context, recent decisions, declarations and
initiatives of the United Nations and, in particular, the Security Council
aimed at upholding the authority of the Geneva Protocol and removing the
threat of chemical weapons use;
4.
Supports as well other similar activities of regional and
international disarmament conferences and parallel decisions by national
Governments, also aimed at hastening the conclueion of the chemical weapons
convention as a step towards the elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction.
65th plenary meeting
6 December 1991

Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons
The General Assembly.
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the complete and effective
prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling and use of all
chemical weapons and to their destruction,
•
Reaffizrmino the urgent necessity, particularly in the light of the past
use of. and recent threats to use chemical weapons, of strict observance by all
States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of
the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of
Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, 2/
Having considered the report of the Conference on Disarmament, 3/ which
incorporates, inter alia, the report of its Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical
Weapons, 4/ and taking note in particular of- the decision by the

3/
Official Records of the General Assembly. Fortv-sixth Session.
Supplement No. 27 (A/46/27).
4/

Ibid., para. 89.

A/RES/46/35
Page 4

Conference to mandate further this Committee to intensify, as a priority task,
the negotiations on a multilateral convention on the complete and effective
prohibition of the development, production, stockpiling and use of chemical
weapons and on their destruction with the view to striving to achieve a final
agreement on the convention by 1992, 5/
.
Noting with satisfaction that the States participating in the Third
Review Conference of the Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological'(Biological) and
.
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, held at Geneva from 9 to
.
27 September 1991, inter alia, declared themselves in favour of the early
conclusion of the negotiations on a iconvention banning chemical weapons.
Noting with appreciation the increasing number of States that have
declared their intention to be among the original signatories to the
convention, and in particular the statements made by the States participating
in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe on 21 November 1990
and the States signatories to the Mendoza Accord, 6/ on 5 September 1991, as
well as the statement by States of South-East Asia and the East Pacific, . .
assembled at Brisbane on 13 November 1990, inter alia, calling on all States
to be original signatories to the convention,
1.
Renews its call to all States to observe strictly the principles and
objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of
Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare;
. .
2.
Notes the progress made in the work of the Ad Hoc Committee on
Chemical Weapons of the Conference on Disarmament during its 1991 session, and
the results recorded in the Committee's report;
3.
Commends the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to intensify
further the negotiations on the complete and effective prohibition of the
development, production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons and on their
destruction with the view to striving to achieve a final agreement on a .
convention by 1992;
4.
Strongly urges the Conference on Disarmament, as a matter of the.
highest priority, to resolve in the forthcoming months outstanding issues so
as to achieve a final agreement during its 1992 session;
5.
Recruests the Conference on Disarmament to report to the General
Assembly at its forty-seventh session on the results of its negotiations;
6.
Stresses the particular significance and importance of declarations
made by. States on whether or not they possess chemical weapons and of further
international exchanges of data and other relevant information in connection
with the negotiations on such a convention;
7.
Welcomes those initiatives taken by States, and urges all States to
take further initiatives, measures and steps on a national, bilateral.

£/

Ibid., para. 89 (para. 2 of the quoted text).

6/

A/46/463, annex.

A/RES/46/35
Page 5

regional or multilateral baais to achieve rapid agreement in the negotiations
on,
and universal adherence to, such a convention;
8.Calls upon all States
to consider declaring their intention to
become original States parties to the convention so as to ensure, its early
entry into force, its effective implementation and its universal character;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-seventh
session the item entitled "Chemical and bacteriological (biological) weapons".
esth рЛвпауу (nesting
6 Becembe.r..Д99.1
