A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/123
23 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 101
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/623 and Corr.1)]
50/123. International migration and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Programme of Action of the International Conference on
Population and Development adopted at Cairo, in particular, chapter X on
international migration, 1/
Recalling also the relevant provisions contained in the Copenhagen
Declaration on Social Development 2/ and the Programme of Action of the
World Summit for Social Development 3/ and in the Platform for Action 4/
adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women,
Recalling further its resolution 49/127 of 19 December 1994 and Economic
and Social Council decision 1995/313 of 27 July 1995,
Recognizing the importance from an analytical and operational point of
view of identifying the existing linkages among the social, economic,
political and cultural factors related to international migration and
development, and of taking appropriate steps to intensify the analysis of
issues involved,

1/
See Report of the International Conference on Population and
Development, Cairo, 5-13 September 1994 (A/CONF.171/13/Rev.1) (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.95.XIII.18), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2/

A/CONF.166/9, chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.

3/

Ibid., annex II.

4/

A/CONF.177/20 and Add.1, chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.

96-76789

/...

A/RES/50/123
Page 2

Recognizing also the important role of the United Nations Population
Fund as the lead agency of the Inter-Agency Task Force on the Implementation
of the Programme of Action adopted at Cairo,
Recalling that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
should carry out their respective responsibilities, as entrusted to them in
the Charter of the United Nations, in the formulation of policies and the
provision of guidance to and coordination of United Nations activities in the
field of population and development,
Recalling also that the Economic and Social Council, in the context of
its role under the Charter vis-à-vis the General Assembly and in accordance
with Assembly resolutions 45/264 of 13 May 1991, 46/235 of 13 April 1992 and
48/162 of 20 December 1994, should assist the Assembly in promoting an
integrated approach to the implementation of the Programme of Action in
providing system-wide coordination and guidance in monitoring the
implementation,
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on international
migration and development, 5/ including the comments of Governments
regarding the objectives and modalities for the convening of a United Nations
conference on international migration and development;
2.
Urges Member States and the United Nations system to strengthen
international cooperation in the area of international migration and
development in order to address the root causes of migration, especially those
related to poverty, and to maximize the benefits of international migration to
those concerned and increase the likelihood that international migration has
positive consequences for the sustainable development of both sending and
receiving countries;
3.
Calls upon the international community to seek to make the option
of remaining in one’s country viable for all people; to that end, efforts to
achieve sustainable economic and social development, ensuring a better
economic balance between developed and developing countries, should be
strengthened;
4.
Invites the Commission on Population and Development to consider,
in 1997, in the context of the follow-up to the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development, in particular chapter
X, the interrelationship between international migration and development;
5.
Calls upon all relevant organs, organizations and programmes of
the United Nations system and other intergovernmental, regional and
subregional organizations to address the issue of international migration and
development, and invites them to submit their views to the Secretary-General;
6.
Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider at its
organizational session for 1997 including "International migration and
development" as a theme in the context of its agenda for 1997;
7.
Requests the Secretary-General to designate, within existing
resources, a clearly identifiable, qualified and competent focal point and to
prepare, following consultations with the International Organization for
Migration and the International Labour Organization and other relevant
organizations of the United Nations system and after soliciting the additional
views of Governments, a report to be presented to the General Assembly at its
fifty-second session containing concrete proposals on ways and means to

5/

E/1995/69.
/...

A/RES/50/123
Page 3

address, from cross-sectoral, interregional, regional and subregional points
of view, the issue of international migration and development, including
aspects related to objectives and modalities for the convening of a United
Nations conference on international migration and development;
8.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "International migration and development, including
the convening of a United Nations conference on international migration and
development".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995
