UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/47
25 August 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3419th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 August 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council considered the oral report of its fact-finding
Mission to Burundi which visited Bujumbura on 13-14 August 1994 and
subsequent briefing by the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
Council takes note of the observations and recommendations contained
therein.
"The Security Council welcomes the ongoing negotiations in Burundi
aimed at reaching an early agreement on presidential succession, overcoming
the long-lasting constitutional crisis and establishing stable democratic
institutions in the country. The Council urges all parties to these
negotiations to display maximum political will for a speedy settlement of
existing differences and to make every effort to accomplish this objective
by the scheduled date of 26 August 1994.
"The Security Council follows closely the current negotiations and
deplores the attempts of any party to block progress towards political
settlement which is essential for stability in the country and for the
prevention of outbreaks of violence.
"The Security Council reaffirms its condemnation of those extremist
elements who attempt to undermine the national reconciliation. The Council
calls upon all the parties in Burundi to reject any undemocratic or
extremist solutions in the settlement of their political differences.
"The Security Council considers that impunity from justice is one of
the most serious problems which contributes to the deterioration of the
security situation in Burundi. For this reason, it attaches importance to
the strengthening of the national judicial system. The Security Council
also attaches importance to the deployment in Burundi of civilian observers
responsible for monitoring the establishment of a more secure environment.

94-34233 (E)

250894

/...

S/PRST/1994/47
English
Page 2

"The Security Council is alarmed at the extent of the humanitarian
crisis in Burundi. It is concerned with recent attacks against foreigners
in Burundi, including those involved in humanitarian relief operations and
belonging to the diplomatic community. It calls upon the authorities and
all parties in Burundi to provide safety and security for all personnel
involved in the relief efforts and other international personnel.
"The Council encourages the Secretary-General to continue to keep
under close review ways and means of using available resources to sustain
and enhance the international humanitarian efforts in Burundi and to
promote national reconciliation there. It likewise encourages the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and Member States of the United Nations
to redouble their efforts in this regard, including through political
contacts.
"The Security Council commends the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative in Burundi, as well as the High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the High Commissioner for Refugees, for their tireless efforts
within their respective competences, to contribute to the resolution of
political, humanitarian and other problems of this country.
"The Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
