S/PV.8912*

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8912th meeting

Wednesday, 24 November 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Ousman
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Libya

*Reissued for technical reasons 13 December 2021.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-35365 (E)
*2135365*

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Libya to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya;
and Ms. Lamees Bensaad, Assistant Professor at the
University of Tripoli, political activist and member of
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Kubiš, Ambassador T.S. Tirumurti,
Permanent Representative of India, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
and by Ms. Bensaad.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: My briefing today comes at a crucial
time, with one month left until elections in Libya and
following the conference hosted by President Macron
in Paris on 12 November — co-chaired by Libya,
France, Germany, Italy and the United Nations — with
the participation of 30 Member States and regional
organizations, which represented an opportunity to
strengthen international consensus in support of the
implementation of a Libyan-led and -owned political
process, facilitated by the United Nations, leading to a
political solution to the Libyan crisis. The participants
in France, including the Libyan interim executive
authority, reiterated their backing for holding the longawaited presidential and parliamentary elections.
The final declaration agreed upon at the Paris
International Conference for Libya stressed the
importance of all Libyan stakeholders committing
unequivocally to the holding of free, fair, inclusive
and credible presidential and parliamentary elections
2/23

24/11/2021

on 24 December, as stipulated in the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum road map and endorsed in resolutions
2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021), as well as the conclusions
of the second Berlin Conference, of 23 June, and
accepting the outcomes of the elections. I echo the call
on all Libyan stakeholders and candidates to respect
their commitments towards holding the elections on
24 December, to publicly commit to respecting the
rights of their political opponents before, during and
after the elections, to refrain from using hate or revenge
speech and threats, incitement to violence and boycott,
to accept the results of the elections and to uphold their
commitment to the code of conduct prepared by the
High National Elections Commission.
The Conference highlighted the importance of
avoiding any vacuum of power and that the transfer of
power from the current interim executive authority to
the newly elected executive authority should take place
following the simultaneous announcement by the High
National Elections Commission of the final results of
both the presidential and the parliamentary elections.
In my most recent briefing, on 10 September
(see S/PV.8855), I informed the Security Council
that the Speaker of the House of Representatives had
transmitted to the High National Elections Commission
law No. 1/2021, setting the legal framework for the
presidential elections. On 4 October, the Speaker of the
House of Representatives transmitted law No. 2/2021,
concerning the parliamentary elections, which is largely
based on the electoral law of the 2014 parliamentary
election. Law No. 2/2021 stipulates that the House
of Representatives will determine the polling date
for the parliamentary elections to take place after 30
days from the first round of the presidential elections,
upon a proposal made by the High National Elections
Commission. The Elections Commission is expected
to propose the specific dates for the elections after
finalizing the list of candidates for the presidential
elections in early December following the complaints
and appeals adjudication process. It is necessary that the
House of Representatives promptly endorse the polling
dates for both the parliamentary and the presidential
elections, as proposed by the Elections Commission.
Following the failure of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum to agree on a constitutional basis
for a legal framework for the elections, and with the
aim of mitigating the risks around electoral disputes,
the Mission has continuously urged the House of
Representatives and other institutional and political
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

actors to address the concerns expressed by Libyan
stakeholders regarding the procedural and substantive
shortcomings of the electoral laws and to adjust
the electoral framework. We urged the House of
Representatives and the High Council of State to follow
the consultative process as prescribed by the Libyan
Political Agreement, and we urged holding inclusive
presidential and parliamentary elections simultaneously,
bringing it in line with the respective Security Council
resolutions. Throughout the months of October and
November, only some technical amendments requested
by the High National Elections Commission were issued
by the House of Representatives to both the presidential
and the parliamentary electoral laws.
Following the receipt of the amended electoral laws
by the House of Representatives, at a press conference
on 7 November the Chairman of the High National
Elections Commission announced the start of the
candidates’ registration process for the presidential
and parliamentary elections on the following day.
The process for the presidential elections closed on
22 November. This afternoon the Elections Commission
intends to announce a preliminary list of candidates
from among 98 candidates, including two women, from
across the country who registered for the presidential
elections. Thus far, 2,001 candidates, including 276
women, have registered for the parliamentary elections
in the ongoing registration process, which should
conclude on 7 December.
During the 7 November press conference, the
High National Elections Commission confirmed
the plan to hold the first round of the presidential
elections on 24 December, while the second round of
the presidential and the parliamentary elections would
take place approximately 50 days after 24 December
so as to accommodate the results tabulation and
possible electoral challenges and appeals. It also
stated that the final results of both elections would be
announced simultaneously.
In parallel, on 8 November the High National
Elections Commission started the nationwide
distribution of voter cards to more than 2.8 million
registered voters. To date, more than 1.84 million voter
cards have been distributed at 1,906 electoral centres
across the country in the ongoing process, by now
covering some 64.3 per cent of the total number of
registered voters.

S/PV. 8912

As of 5 October, the High National Elections
Commission has been accrediting domestic and
international observers and media. To date, more
than 3,200 domestic observers, 320 national media
representatives, 20 international media and nine
international
observation
organizations
have
submitted their applications to be accredited by the
Elections Commission for the upcoming elections.
I call on further domestic, regional and international
organizations to submit their accreditation applications
to the High National Elections Commission in time to
send observers for the December elections.
While I praise the continued efforts of the High
National Elections Commission to implement the
elections despite the technical challenges and the short
time frame, I must report that the political climate
remains heavily polarized. The number of candidates
for the presidential and the parliamentary elections,
as well as registered voters, confirm that the Libyan
people, from across the country, are eager to go to the
polls and democratically elect their representatives.
At the same time, vocal opposition to the holding
of elections on the basis of the existing legal framework
persist, as some leaders and constituencies continue
questioning the legality of the electoral laws issued
by the House of Representatives on different grounds
and thus the legitimacy of the whole process. They also
note less than desirable conditions for the holding of
the elections.
In addition, as the process moves forward, tensions
are rising over the eligibility of some high-profile
presidential candidates, along with fears of armed
confrontation or that the current framework may take
the country back to authoritarianism. I call on all those
that challenge the process or the candidates to channel
their challenges through the existing judicial mechanism
and to fully respect the verdict of the judicial authority.
At the same time, even those who oppose the
elections based on the current legislative framework
and constitutional basis, without a permanent
Constitution and in less-than-optimal conditions, agree
that Libya needs free and fair democratic elections. As
they said, the way towards a stable and united Libya is
through ballot boxes, not through ammunition boxes.
Those in favour of the elections stress that political
confrontations must not, and will not, turn into an
armed confrontation, that they will not follow that path

21-353653/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

and that Libyans will find solutions to their problems
among themselves if left without foreign interference.
I therefore echo the call on Libyan stakeholders
to take steps, including with the good offices of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
to increase mutual trust and build support for the
upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections and
the acceptance of the results, and for all relevant Libyan
authorities and institutions to provide the High National
Elections Commission with the required support to
deliver free, fair, inclusive and credible elections in a
safe and peaceful environment and with the full, equal
and meaningful participation and representation of
women and the inclusion of young people.
On the security file, while the ceasefire continues
to hold, the presence of foreign fighters, foreign forces
and mercenaries remains a cause of grave concern
for Libya and the international community, including
countries of the region, notably Libya’s neighbours.
However, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC)
has continued to make progress. With UNSMIL
support and facilitation, the 5+5 JMC convened in
Geneva on 8 October and developed an action plan
for the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters
and foreign forces in a synchronized, phased, gradual
and balanced way. The plan aligns with the ceasefire
agreement of 23 October 2020 and resolutions 2570
(2021) and 2571 (2021), as well as the outcomes of the
Berlin Conferences, and it should pave the way for the
initial stages of the withdrawals of mercenaries and
foreign fighters, taking into full account the needs and
concerns of Libya and its neighbours as a step towards
the full implementation of the ceasefire agreement and
resolution 2570 (2021).
The action plan was presented at the Libya
Stabilization Conference held in Tripoli on 21 October,
convened by the Government of National Unity, which
I welcome as the first such international gathering
held in Libya since the beginning of the crisis and
as an important testimony of Libyan ownership
and leadership of the political process towards the
unification and stabilization of the country.
Building on those positive developments, the
Arab Republic of Egypt hosted 5+5 JMC coordination
talks with Libya’s southern neighbours — Chad, the
Niger and the Sudan — in Cairo from 29 October to
1 November. Positive discussions among the four
countries concluded with an agreement on a concept
4/23

24/11/2021

for an effective communication and coordination
mechanism to support the implementation of the action
plan for the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters
and foreign forces from Libyan territory.
As we meet today, the 5+5 JMC and a high-level
African Union delegation are meeting in Tunis. I am
also pleased to report that the 5+5 JMC is welcome to
conduct similar consultations in Ankara and Moscow
and intends to consult with other countries in the
region, notably neighbouring ones. To complement and
support those positive steps, the first group of United
Nations ceasefire monitors was deployed to Libya on
10 October.
As we welcome that important progress, we are
mindful that, as elections approach, there is a risk that
entrenched political and institutional divisions will
turn into confrontation fuelled by uncompromising
attitudes, inflammatory rhetoric and fake news. In the
western region, and in particular in the capital, tensions
are high and could escalate further amid election-related
polarization. The fragmentation of the political context,
the lack of an inclusive and consultative political
and electoral process, the ensuing lack of trust and
consensus and continued controversies surrounding the
electoral process could undermine its implementation.
Some incidents affecting the electoral centres for
issuing voter cards were recorded. The Ministry of
the Interior established an electoral security cell to
ensure the security of polling stations and is committed
to addressing security incidents impeding access to
electoral centres. The activities of groups opposed to
the elections might result in cases where citizens are
prevented from collecting their voting cards and, later,
casting their votes. The ability to freely campaign in the
east, south and west is also at stake. Legal challenges
aimed at annulling the results of the elections might
revive an institutional and constitutional crisis following
the elections. Moreover, an increasing likelihood of
asymmetric activities perpetrated by violent extremist
organizations aimed at disrupting the stabilization
processes cannot be excluded.
The human rights situation in Libya remains
critical. In this pre-election period, restrictions on
fundamental freedoms through legislative measures
are of concern. Documented incidents involving the
targeting of journalists, civil society activists and
individuals expressing views against State agencies,
armed groups and political actors are increasing.
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

Measures to curtail civil society organizations
continue to be imposed. Civil society organizations
can be denied registration or dissolved by the executive
authority on overly broad grounds. I call on the Libyan
authorities to lift those restrictions and ensure a safe
civic space for all individuals and organizations and to
protect human rights defenders and activists.
I am also deeply concerned by the continuing use
of hate speech and incitement to violence, including
sexual violence, against civil society activists and
human rights defenders, particularly against politically
active women. Many have been targeted with violence,
abuse, social media vilification and threats, including
rape and other forms of sexual violence, and in some
instances with fatal consequences. Promoting women’s
rights and empowerment, together with addressing
violations and ensuring the protection of women, is
particularly important in the current political context
and with the upcoming elections.
High rates of arbitrary and unlawful detention in
Libya, as well as enforced disappearances victimizing
both men and women, continue to be reported and
documented. As members of the Council are aware, one
of the starkest reminders of the horrors of the Libyan
conflict was the discovery of mass graves on the
outskirts of Tarhuna following the recapture of the city
by pro-Government of National Accord forces in June
2020. As the exhumation progresses, Libyan authorities
have discovered yet more mass graves in the area. I
reiterate UNSMIL’s consistent calls for a thorough and
transparent investigation into those atrocity crimes and
for the perpetrators to be brought to justice.
The Mission is strongly concerned with the dire
situation of several thousand migrants and refugees who
were made homeless as a result of large-scale forced
evictions and destruction of their homes by security
forces using excessive and disproportionate force in
early October. The efforts of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
to provide humanitarian and protection assistance to
those refugees and asylum seekers at UNHCR premises
in Tripoli is being obstructed by groups of violent
individuals using threats and extortion against them.
I welcome the Government’s cooperation in
the resumption of the International Organization
for Migration- and UNHCR-facilitated voluntary
humanitarian flights of migrants and refugees out of
Libya. Humanitarian return flights represent one of the

S/PV. 8912

few options for irregular stranded migrants and refugees
in Libya at extreme risk of arbitrary detention, serious
human rights abuses and exploitation by smuggling and
trafficking networks and State actors.
I am pleased to report that the number of internally
displaced persons in Libya continues to decrease, with
just under 200,000 people still displaced, as compared
to 278,000 people at the start of the year. Still, those
numbers are huge. The humanitarian community is
working with Libyan authorities at the national and local
levels to accelerate the voluntary, safe and sustainable
return of displaced communities, including as part of
national reconciliation and stabilization efforts.
Libya continues to be at a delicate and fragile
juncture on its path to unity and stability through the
ballot box. While the risks associated with the ongoing
political polarization around the elections are evident
and present, not holding the elections could gravely
deteriorate the situation in the country and lead to
further division and conflict.
As demonstrated by the high number of registered
voters and candidates, the Libyan people are yearning
for an opportunity to elect their representatives and give
them a mandate to govern Libya through democratic
legitimacy. The aspiration and determination of the
majority of Libyans to participate in the presidential
and parliamentary elections as candidates or voters
must be fulfilled.
It is important that the international community
remain united in its support for elections as
demonstrated at the Paris Conference. At the same
time, pragmatic engagement is required to safeguard
the integrity of the electoral process and minimize
the risks of polarization and confrontation. We will
continue to make every effort to address concerns and
mitigate the risks of a disputed electoral process to
build consensus for holding the elections and dealing
with the post-election situation. The judiciary has the
final word regarding the objections raised about the
process, as well as some presidential candidates. Their
verdict must be respected.
The final decision is for the Libyan people, who will
be making their choice through the elections. It is the
Libyans that have their future and the future of Libya
in their hands. They should participate in the elections
and vote for those who are committed to a stable,
prosperous, united, sovereign and democratic Libya,
governed by the rule of law and committed to fighting

21-353655/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

corruption and pursuing national reconciliation, justice
and accountability.
It is high time that Libya, led by the authorities
and institutions with strong democratic mandates
derived through elections, liberate itself from external
interference. Libya cannot continue destroying itself by
continuing to offer itself as a playground for foreign
interests and ambitions.
In conclusion, in the light of the ongoing political
and security transitions, as well as the delicate and
complex electoral processes in Libya, the need for a
United Nations-mediated process and good offices
within Libya has intensified. It is therefore, in my view,
necessary to urgently relocate the Head of UNSMIL to
Tripoli, ideally based on a Security Council resolution
authorizing the return of UNSMIL to its previous
configuration. Just to note, from the very moment of
my appointment, I expressed support for splitting the
positions of the Special Envoy and the Head of Mission,
and for locating the Head of Mission in Tripoli. In order
to create conditions for this, on 17 November, I tendered
my resignation.
In my resignation letter to the Secretary-General, I
also confirmed my readiness to continue as the Special
Envoy for a transitional period — and that, in my
opinion, should cover the electoral period — to ensure
business continuity, provided that it is a feasible option.
I hope an appropriate solution will be found. In
response to my letter of resignation dated 17 November,
the Secretary-General in his letter dated 23 November
accepted my resignation, effective as of 10 December.
Therefore, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Security Council for all the
support provided to me and the mission in the past
period during my tenure of the Office.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for the information he has shared with us.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Tirumurti.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of
26 February 2011, I have the honour to report to the
Security Council on the work of the Committee
established by the same resolution. The report covers
the period from 11 September to 24 November, during
which time the Committee concluded its work using the
silence procedure.
6/23

24/11/2021

At the outset, I would like to note that, on
25 October, the Committee included an additional
individual on its sanctions list as subjected to the travel
ban and assets freeze measures: Mr. Osama Al Kuni
Ibrahim, the de facto manager of the Al-Nasr Detention
Centre in Zawiyah, Libya, was listed for engaging in,
or providing support to, acts that meet the sanctions
designation criteria.
With respect to the sanctions list, the Committee
also received a second communication from the
delisting focal point established pursuant to resolution
1730 (2006), in connection with the submission of
a delisting request by an individual. The focal point
process is still ongoing.
With regard to the arms embargo, the Committee
received a notification from Tunisia concerning the
transfer of light weapons and non-lethal equipment for
diplomatic protection. The Committee also received
two vessel inspection reports from the European Union
Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI.
In connection with the assets freeze, the Committee
received additional information from Switzerland on an
exemption notification submitted previously pursuant
to paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), to which
the Committee responded. Furthermore, no negative
decision was taken by the Committee in relation to
an exemption notification submitted by the United
Kingdom, also invoking paragraph 19 (a) of resolution
1970 (2011). The Committee also received a letter from
Libya transmitting a communication from the Libyan
Investment Authority, a listed entity, to which the
Committee responded.
With regard to the travel ban, the Committee
approved one request for exemption, invoking
paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011), submitted
by Libya on behalf of Mr. Abu Zayd Umar Dorda.
The Committee also received two travel notifications
from Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Ms. Safia Farkash
Al-Barassi, respectively, under a travel exemption
granted previously for unlimited travel within a sixmonth period for humanitarian purposes. The first
notification was received within the previous reporting
period, but after the text of my previous report had
already been shared among the Committee members.
On 22 November, the Panel of Experts on Libya
submitted to the Committee its interim report pursuant
to paragraph 13 of resolution 2571 (2021). The discussion
of the report will take place on 1 December.
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

Lastly, during the reporting period, the Committee
received four implementation reports — from Belgium,
Monaco, Switzerland and Thailand.
I would like to recall that the primary responsibility
to implement sanction measures rests with Member
States. The Committee is committed to facilitating
the implementation of those measures and seeks to
contribute to the promotion of peace and stability
in Libya.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Tirumurti for the information he has
shared with us.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bensaad.
Ms. Bensaad: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council as the
Libyan people prepare to embark upon our nation’s
first-ever direct presidential elections. As a women’s
rights activist, a member of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum and a candidate for the upcoming
parliamentary elections, it is a true privilege to join the
Security Council today.
Our meeting could not come at a more important
time. We are weeks away from elections that have the
capacity to be a true turning point for Libya, marking a
historic transition from a decade of instability, conflict
and war, to stability, democracy and peace. I cannot
overstate how significant a milestone these elections
are for people who have suffered not only a decade of
war, but also decades of brutal autocracy.
I am addressing the Security Council today from
Tripoli, where hopes are high as my fellow citizens
embrace the new practice of democracy. My fellow
countrymen and countrywomen are eagerly establishing
new political parties, defining electoral programmes
and running for office.
This historic moment would not have been possible
without the resolve of the Libyan people to achieve a
peaceful solution, the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations special mission in Libya and the difficult,
but necessary, compromises reached by all parties.
It is those combined efforts that led to the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum agreeing a national road
map, subsequently endorsed by the Security Council in
resolution 2570 (2021).
As a member of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum, I have a responsibility to the Libyan people

S/PV. 8912

to ensure that the upcoming elections deliver on their
hopes and aspirations. That means that the elections
must be conducted freely and fairly, in keeping with
the road map agreed in November 2020. We must all
do our utmost to ensure that the upcoming elections
contribute to — and do not detract from — the renewal
of legitimacy and national stability.
It is for that reason that I am concerned about the
upcoming elections. The elections, currently scheduled
for 24 December, should abide with the road map, which
set out a clear sequencing through which elections were
to be held on a constitutional basis.
Parliamentary and presidential elections were to
occur simultaneously on 24 December. Yet that plan
is not being respected. The current conditions are not
in line with either the Libyan road map or resolutions
2570 (2021) or 2571 (2021). Nor are they in line with the
second Berlin Conference on Libya. Just weeks ahead of
the elections, there is still no consensus among the key
stakeholders about the legal framework for the elections
to be held, and no confirmation from the parties that
electoral results will be accepted. That ambiguity
threatens the outcome of the electoral process.
Like so many of my fellow Libyans, I desperately
want to participate in free and fair elections. A
democratic process is vital for the future of my country.
Yet I fear that if steps are not taken now to strengthen the
electoral environment, these elections could exacerbate
geographic divisions and contribute to civil unrest.
The Libyan people do not wish to see a moment
meant to foster peace end in division and violence. War
has continued for far too long in Libya. Our people
deserve a free and fair democratic process. For the first
time in a long time, our people have hope that a genuine
solution may be in reach. We owe it to the Libyan people
to do everything we can to deliver an electoral process
that is worthy of their aspirations.
I therefore urge the Security Council to support
Libyans and help us move beyond the divisions and
paralysis that have stood in the way of peace for too
long. There is so much more the Council can do to
secure the electoral process in Libya and protect a free
and fair process.
First, it is critical that the Security Council ensure
that parliamentary and presidential elections are held
simultaneously with no delay, as stipulated in the road
map.

21-353657/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

Secondly, international observers must be present
to ensure that elections are free and fair and that there
is no electoral fraud, coercion, discrimination or
intimidation of voters, candidates or political parties.
The Council can do more to insist that such observers
are in place ahead of the elections.
Thirdly, security must be maintained throughout
the electoral process to ensure no intimidation or
coercion takes place. Security guarantees must be
provided to ensure the electoral process is not used as
an excuse to foment violence and civil unrest or to cast
doubt on Libya’s democratic experiment.
Fourthly, we need to insist on firm public
guarantees by all parties that they will accept the
results, win or lose. For that reason, I strongly urge
the Council to call on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to exercise its mandate and mediate
between all parties, which includes responding to the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum’s repeated requests to
convene a meeting in which differences between the
parties can be addressed and basic consensus on the
legal framework forged.
Fifthly, the Council should insist on the active
participation and representation of women in the
electoral process. At present, only 32 out of 200
parliamentary seats have been earmarked for women.
That falls far short of the 30 per cent quota set out in
the road map. Although domestic legislation continues
to fail Libyan women, we still see powerful examples of
women’s determination. For the first time in our history,
we have female candidates running for the presidency.
In conjunction with the International Day for
the Elimination of Violence against Women and the
beginning of the 16 days of activism against genderbased violence, I pay tribute to all of the brave women
who have lost their lives raising their voices and
acknowledge the courage of those who continue to risk
their lives for change.

24/11/2021

community as a whole to do their utmost to secure
Libyan democracy and help us deliver free and fair
elections.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Bensaad for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Special Envoy Kubiš and Ms. Bensaad for
briefing the Council today, as well as Ambassador
Tirumurti for his update from the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya. In particular, I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to Mr. Kubiš for
all his work throughout his tenure as Special Envoy.
We are grateful to Ms. Bensaad and to all other women
peacebuilders for their work in Libya.
As Mr. Kubiš said, we have now entered a crucial
period that will determine the path towards stability in
Libya. I would like to make three points today.
First, I would like to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s
full support for the Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
process that has gotten us to this stage. We are clear
that the elections must be free, fair and open, and
that they allow for the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women and youth. The United Kingdom
strongly urges all Libyan actors to respect the electoral
calendar, refrain from actions that would disrupt the
process and resolve any disputes through legitimate
pathways. Actions that undermine the electoral process
only risk a return to conflict and entrenched divisions
within Libya. We should not hesitate to use all the
tools available, including sanctions, against those who
attempt to undermine the process.

Finally, I strongly urge the Council to support
a process of national reconciliation and transitional
justice that will promote societal healing and lead to
sustainable peace.

Libya’s leaders now have an opportunity to begin
a new chapter for the country. To avoid instability,
the candidates for the presidential election must work
together in good faith before, during and after elections.
It is crucial that there be a smooth, peaceful transfer
of power following the elections. After a decade of
conflict, it is time that Libya’s political class put the
interests of the Libyan people first.

Libya is at an inflection point. A historic electoral
process with the potential to bring a new era of stability,
democracy and independence has begun. It is therefore
imperative that the process not be aborted or spoiled.
I urge the Security Council and the international

Secondly, I welcome the comprehensive action
plan from the 5+5 Joint Military Committee for the
withdrawal of foreign forces and mercenaries and the
deployment of United Nations ceasefire monitors to
support the Libyan ceasefire monitoring mechanism.

8/23

21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

The onus is now on international actors to deliver on
the withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries
without delay. The ceasefire monitoring mechanism
should monitor and verify that process.
Finally, I would like to express the United
Kingdom’s concern about recent attacks by armed
groups on the National Oil Corporation. Such attempts
to control Libya’s natural resources at the expense of
the Libyan people are unacceptable. It is now more
important than ever that Libyan authorities safeguard
the integrity of their financial institutions so that the
political process benefits all Libyans.
The United Kingdom stands ready to work with
Libya, the United Nations and all our international
partners to build a more peaceful, stable and prosperous
future for the Libyan people. To that end, we welcome
the unity of the international community in support
of the Libyan elections, as expressed by the Paris
declaration and the presidential statement that we will
adopt today.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Ján Kubiš for
his briefing on the situation in Libya, as well as the
Permanent Representative of India, Mr. Tirumurti, for
his statement as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
We will also listen very carefully to the representative
from Libya.
Given his announced intention to resign as Special
Envoy, we would like to thank Mr. Kubiš for his efforts
to stabilize the situation in and around Libya. He
assumed the post at a time when the direction had to be
sustained and strengthened. Many issues in the political
process have been resolved thanks to his contribution.
Clearly, there are still many challenges on this path.
In that regard, we note that ongoing United Nations
support during such an important pre-election period
for Libya remains crucial.
In general, we assess the situation in Libya as
stable. We believe that the main challenge at this
stage of the political process is to organize the
presidential and parliamentary elections. The House
of Representatives adopted the relevant laws, thereby
establishing the necessary legal framework for holding
the national election.
We note the robust process for nominating
candidates for the presidential election. In that regard,

S/PV. 8912

we emphasize the fact that there are candidates from all
political groups and regions, including representatives
of the former Government, among those who have
declared their intentions to run for the post of President.
We believe that such a scenario merits our common
support and increases the chances of successfully
holding the upcoming elections. We are convinced
that a successful political process can be ensured
only if it is truly inclusive. We trust that, on that
basis, Libyans will be able to overcome the persistent
tensions and grievances, which will contribute to
national reconciliation.
At the same time, we note that some voices are
still being heard, including in Libya itself, in favour
of postponing the electoral process. We believe such
a development could threaten serious repercussions
for the fragile peace and might deepen the internal
divisions in the country.
We also note some progress on the military
track. From 6 to 8 October this year, at a meeting in
Geneva, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission agreed an
action plan for the phased, balanced and synchronized
withdrawal of all mercenaries, foreign fighters and
foreign forces from Libya. The integrated approach
on which it is based is in line with our position. We
have also consistently advocated such a withdrawal
of non-Libyan armed groups and military units.
Otherwise, there is a risk of undermining the balance
that has maintained the ceasefire in Libya for more than
a year. We await the details of the agreed mechanism
for implementing that withdrawal.
We believe that the Libyan National Army, whose
leaders have very valuable knowledge and experience
for the development of the country, has an important
role to play in strengthening the Libyan armed forces.
For our part, we encourage all Libyan forces to work
together constructively.
We intend to continue to participate actively in
international efforts to promote a political settlement
in Libya, both through targeted work with the Libyan
parties themselves and in multilateral formats. We
are grateful to our French colleagues for organizing
the Paris International Conference for Libya on
12 November. The outcome document is in line with
previous conferences on the Libyan issue. The main
thing in those decisions is the call to follow the timetable
for the political process, including the elections, which
they themselves agreed a year ago.

21-353659/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

Mr. Ousman (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Libya, and Ambassador T.S. Tirumurti, Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for their briefings. I reiterate
my delegation’s congratulations to them on their
commitment to stabilization in Libya. I also commend
Ms. Lamees Bensaad, member of the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum, for her perspective.
The Niger welcomes the significant progress
made since the previous Security Council meeting
on 10 September (see S/PV.8870), in particular the
decision taken on 1 November by the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission, whereby the representatives of
Chad, the Niger and the Sudan agreed to establish an
effective communication and coordination mechanism
to support the implementation of an action plan,
endorsed in Geneva on 8 October, for the withdrawal of
mercenaries, fighters and foreign forces from Libya in
a gradual, balanced, synchronized and phased process.
Coordination with Libya’s neighbours and
addressing their concerns remain crucial to a
sustainable and successful withdrawal of mercenaries
and foreign fighters. That will also be a crucial step
in implementing the ceasefire agreement of 23 October
2020 (2011), in line with resolutions 2570 (2021) and
2571 (2021).
My delegation also welcomes the adoption of the
electoral law governing the legislative elections at
the beginning of October, which fills the legislative
gaps to pave the way for the presidential elections on
24 December, for which key figures in the process have
already announced their candidacies.
Those elections, which we want to be free, fair,
inclusive and credible, are a key step in Libya’s path
towards stability. All stakeholders have a historic
responsibility to do their utmost to bring the process
to a successful conclusion in a peaceful manner and in
compliance with the commitments that they have made.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s encouragement to the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya for its tireless efforts to assist
the Libyan authorities, and I reaffirm that the Niger
supports the recommendations of its strategic and
independent review.
In that context, I would like to recall that the Niger
remains steadfast in its commitment to working for a
10/23

24/11/2021

lasting political solution to the Libyan crisis, as well as
to fully playing its part in helping the brotherly Libyan
people to recover from the effects of the decade of
conflict that has scarred the country.
In that regard, my delegation reiterates its support
for the declaration adopted at the Paris International
Conference for Libya, held on 12 November, which calls
for an inclusive and consultative electoral process. We
also affirm our support for the High National Elections
Commission, the stakeholders and all Libyan candidates
in honouring their commitments to hold elections on
24 December and refrain from any statements that
could jeopardize the ongoing electoral process. It is
also important that those actors publicly commit to
respecting the rights of their political opponents before,
during and after the elections, and accept the results.
In addition, we condemn any acts of foreign
interference and violations of the arms embargo and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, as well as the
commitments made during the two Berlin Conferences
by some actors involved in the crisis in Libya.
The continued implementation of the ceasefire
agreement remains crucial. We therefore welcome the
recent reopening of the coastal road linking eastern and
western Libya.
On the humanitarian front, while we welcome
the overall improvement since the ceasefire was
established, the situation remains worrisome. Despite
recent efforts by the Government, the provision of
basic social services still falls short of the country’s
humanitarian needs. The effects of the crisis on the
health system also continue to make it difficult to
control and vaccinate against the coronavirus disease
pandemic in the country.
The humanitarian issue cannot be addressed
without mentioning the appalling and inhumane
living conditions of migrants and refugees in Libya.
It is high time to take the necessary measures to put
an end to the abuses and violations to which they are
continually subjected.
Finally, the Niger recalls that, as matters stand, the
repatriation and deportation of migrants rescued at sea
to Libya violates international humanitarian law. Those
vulnerable people rescued at sea need protection, not to
be brought back to Libya, where they will be subjected
to arbitrary detention and other abuses by jailers who
are often outside of Government control.
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I also thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy for Libya,
and Ms. Lamees Bensaad for their comprehensive
briefings, as well as Mr. T. S. Tirumurti, Permanent
Representative of India, for the forty-second report of
the Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I
also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya,
Ambassador Taher Elsonni, to this meeting.
Libya is at an important historic juncture. Exactly
one month from today, Libyans are expected to
hold their inaugural parliamentary and presidential
elections, which we hope will be conducted in an
inclusive, free, fair and credible manner, with the full
participation of women. We welcome Libya’s impressive
achievements in recent months leading towards these
important elections, including last month’s Libya
Stabilization Conference.
The constructive efforts of the United Nations, in
particular the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
and those of the African Union, the League of Arab
States, the European Union and other international
partners in accompanying Libya’s political process
remain crucial. Accordingly, we welcome the recent
declaration of the International Conference for Libya,
which was held in Paris. The international community
must continue to support Libya, within the parameters
of the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We commend the technical preparatory work of
the High National Elections Commission to facilitate
a smooth electoral process and wish to implore
the relevant Libyan authorities to ensure that all
the necessary arrangements on the electoral legal
framework will be concluded for Libyans to exercise
their franchise. Elections remain a first and significant
step towards Libya’s democratic transition and ought to
be conducted in a safe environment.
That brings me to my next point — the security
situation. Approximately one year following the
signing of the ceasefire agreement, the progress in its
implementation is minimal. We welcome the ongoing
efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission (JMC)
and applaud the agreement reached on the action plan
for the withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign fighters
from the country. The importance of the action plan
cannot be overstated given the repeated calls by the
Security Council for mercenaries and foreign fighters
to depart Libya in a supervised and orderly manner.

S/PV. 8912

We therefore hail the recent 5+5 JMC meeting held in
Egypt, with the participation of Chad, the Niger and the
Sudan, on establishing an effective communication and
coordination mechanism to support the implementation
of the action plan. We also underscore the need for the
strict implementation of the arms embargo.
The quickening pace of the on-rushing global
challenges, including the coronavirus disease pandemic,
have made it pellucidly clear that Libya’s many-sided
challenges need to be addressed effectively and through
durable parallel solutions. The need to prioritize the
unification of Libya’s institutions is central, and we note
with satisfaction the ongoing work on the economic and
financial tracks, including the international financial
audit of the Central Bank of Libya. Those efforts
should serve to unite Libya’s Central Bank, while also
ensuring that important mechanisms be established to
address socioeconomic and humanitarian challenges
and delivering basic services to the Libyan people.
We therefore take this opportunity to reiterate the
importance of preserving Libya’s natural resources for
the sole benefit of Libyans.
Equally, we encourage greater efforts to address
human rights challenges, especially the challenges
facing groups made most vulnerable, including
refugees and migrants, internally displaced persons,
youth, women and girls. Once more, we endorse the
Secretary-General’s assertion that Libya remains an
unsafe port for the disembarkation of migrants and
refugees and repeat our call for their full protection and
safety, especially those in detention centres. We also
agree with him that States need to revisit policies that
support interception at sea and the return of refugees
and migrants to Libya.
Over the past decade, we have witnessed the painful
experience of our Libyan brothers and sisters, who have
paid the high and awful price of external intervention
and the scourge of war. From the lessons of history,
we know that peace and prosperity are indivisible, and
reconciliation is necessary for rebuilding processes.
In that vein, we are satisfied with the commitment of
the African Union in support of the Libyan national
reconciliation process.
Libyans have endured and suffered enough, and
through their own resolve and willingness, have decided
they need peace and stability. Like all independent and
sovereign nations, they deserve to live in peace. They
deserve a future that offers prosperity. In that regard,

21-3536511/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

we underscore the plea made by Ms. Bensaad earlier
today. Let us continue to accompany and support Libya
during this important stage and beyond, to ensure our
brotherly country returns to its rightful path of peace,
stability and sustainable development.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Kubiš for his briefing, as well as
Ambassador Tirumurti for his update regarding the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I also want
to thank Ms. Bensaad for her heartfelt messages. Her
appetite to participate in free and fair democratic
elections was well understood in this Chamber, and I
want to say that we have an obligation to help Libya
to deliver on that aspiration, as she has asked us to
do. As this will be the final briefing by Mr. Kubiš to
the Security Council in his capacity as Special Envoy
for Libya, I would like to thank him sincerely for his
dedicated service. I also want to welcome our friend
and colleague Ambassador Taher Elsonni to our
meeting today.

24/11/2021

inclusivity and national unity. It is also incumbent
upon all Libyan stakeholders to foster mutual trust and
build consensus at this particularly sensitive juncture,
including through an inclusive legal framework. The
role of regional and international observers will, of
course, be crucial.
A Libyan-owned process must also mean one
owned by Libyan women. I echo the remarks of
Ms. Bensaad earlier on that critical issue. The
meaningful participation of women as well as young
people in these elections is fundamentally important
to the goal of achieving an inclusive and sustainable
peace in Libya. As elections draw near, we also call
on the Libyan authorities to guarantee a free, safe and
independent civic space for all. Ms. Bensaad reminded
us that today we are on the eve of Orange the World,
the International Day for the Elimination of Violence
against Women. I want to emphasize how critical it is
that women in Libya — all women — be spared the
gender-based violence they have faced. It can end, and
it must be prevented.

We meet today precisely one month from Libya’s
scheduled presidential and parliamentary elections,
as stipulated by the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
road map and Council resolutions. The elections mark a
crucial stage in the work of securing a peaceful, stable
and prosperous future for all Libyans. We say to the
people of Libya that the future of the country is in their
hands — as it should be — and we assure them that the
international community continues to support them on
the path to peace. For our part, Ireland will certainly
keep faith with that.

Ireland welcomes progress made to date in
implementing the provisions of the October ceasefire
agreement, and we reiterate our call for fulfilling all
remaining provisions. The Libyan ceasefire monitoring
mechanism is vital to ensuring that the hard-won gains
of the agreement are preserved. Ireland was encouraged
by the deployment of the first United Nations ceasefire
monitors in October, a positive if long-awaited step.
It is now critical that a gender perspective also be
streamlined into the work of the monitoring mechanism
and that it inform the important work going forward.

We welcome the recent successful International
Conference for Libya, convened in Paris and co-hosted
by France and Libya, with Germany, Italy and the United
Nations. The outcome was clear: the Libyan authorities
and the international community are committed to the
holding of free and fair elections on 24 December.

The continued presence of foreign fighters,
mercenaries and forces poses a grave threat to Libya’s
fragile peace and stability and risks furthering
insecurity in the region. Everyone at this table knows
that is true. I therefore welcome the adoption last month
of an action plan by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
and the subsequent announcement that will see the plan
operationalized through departures under a United
Nations-supervised disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process in the coming weeks. We want
to see all efforts made to sustain this momentum and
to ensure the full implementation of the action plan,
while also taking into account the needs and concerns
of Libya’s neighbours.

We know that the electoral process must be Libyanled and Libyan-owned. We commend the work of the
High National Elections Commission, and we welcome
the progress achieved to date. Ensuring that presidential
and parliamentary elections take place simultaneously
will be key to preserving the integrity of the process.
We believe that it is incumbent upon the authorities in
Libya to meet the challenge of ensuring an inclusive and
consultative electoral process with the wide acceptance
of all Libyan stakeholders in a spirit of cooperation,
12/23

Finally, with all eyes now on Libya’s political
and military transition, we must not lose sight of the
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

human rights situation. The most recent report of the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya was deeply
concerning. The ill treatment of vulnerable individuals,
such as migrants in detention, is quite simply abhorrent.
In that regard, we welcome the addition of an individual
to the sanctions list in October. National peace and
reconciliation in Libya will require that the human
rights and dignity of all the Libyan people — men,
women and children — be upheld and respected. We
call on the authorities and all parties to comply with
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. It is also key that the
authorities work to ensure accountability by holding all
those responsible for violations of international law to
account, including through fulfilling their obligations
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I wish to thank
Mr. Kubiš, Special Envoy for Libya, for his briefing,
and Ambassador Tirumurti for the periodic report of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. I also
want to thank Ms. Lamees Bensaad for her insightful
briefing today.
Let me start by reiterating the need for both
presidential and parliamentary elections to be held as
planned on 24 December. That is the expectation not
only of the international community — including the
Security Council — but also, as we heard, of the Libyan
people themselves. It is essential that their voices be
heard. We commend the efforts of the High National
Elections Commission to prepare the technical aspects
of the elections. With 2.8 million voters already
registered, we are concerned that a delay of the elections
may lead to increased violence and instability and
prolong the divisions in Libyan society. The ceasefire
is already fragile, and Libya’s institutions have been
divided for too long, creating serious security and
economic consequences. It is critical that the transfer
of power be facilitated in a way that minimizes the risk
of a vacuum. The plans to announce the results of the
presidential and parliamentary elections simultaneously
are important in that regard.
My final point on the elections is to reiterate the
importance of women’s full, meaningful and equal
participation in the elections. As was underscored by
Ms. Bensaad, Libyan women have the right to play an
equal role in shaping their country’s future, both as
voters and as candidates.

S/PV. 8912

Norway fully supports the declaration from the
12 November Paris International Conference for Libya.
It is in line with the clear expectations expressed by
the Council and is a strong signal of the international
community’s commitment to Libya’s democratic
process. We are encouraged by the fact that Libya — with
both Mr. Dbeibah and Mr. Al-Menfi — co-hosted the
conference. That is essential to secure and highlight the
Libyan ownership of the political process. We sincerely
hope that the Council will continue to speak with one
voice to support the political process in Libya.
Furthermore, we continue to urge the full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement of October
2020, where the Libyan parties themselves agreed
that foreign fighters and mercenaries should leave the
country. While we are seeing reports of some fighters
leaving, the large majority are still in Libya. That poses
a challenge for Libyan sovereignty and the unification
of Libyan security institutions. Also, acknowledging
the concerns of neighbouring countries, we reiterate
the need for a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process for armed groups returning to
countries in the region.
In the last weeks we have witnessed migrants being
arrested in the streets of Tripoli. We have also heard of
the reported crimes and violence in detention centres,
including sexual and gender-based violence. Norway
is deeply concerned, and we call for an immediate
and unconditional release of vulnerable groups,
including children.
Finally, as Special Envoy Kubiš will be resigning
from his post, as we heard, on 10 December, let me
take this opportunity to sincerely thank him for his
efforts to move the political process forward and for his
dedicated work with the Libyan parties in preparing for
the elections.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): We thank the
Special Envoy for Libya for his briefing. We commend
the role of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), which is supporting Libya on the path to a
political solution. We reiterate Tunisia’s commitment to
continue to provide help and support to UNSMIL and
its mandate. We also thank the Ambassador of India,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning
Libya, for his briefing on the Committee’s activities.
Furthermore, we thank Ms. Lamees Bensaad for her
briefing, and we welcome the participation of the

21-3536513/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

Permanent Representative of Libya, Mr. Taher Elsonni,
in today’s meeting.
Libya has promoted its national interests and has
upheld dialogue and consensus. That is how the country
has managed in the past two years to move from conflict
and military escalation to a peaceful political process
that is led and monitored by Libyans themselves,
guaranteeing that the Libyan people can achieve their
aspirations of democracy and stable institutions, within
a framework of freedom, transparency and equality.
The participation of women is crucial. Today we are one
month from the Libyan elections, which are scheduled
for 24 December, and we very much hope to see the
people of Libya build a new era for their country. In that
regard, Tunisia welcomes the exceptional efforts made
to allow the parliamentary and presidential elections
to be held on time, according to the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum road map and pursuant to resolution
2570 (2021).
Tunisia calls on the international community to
redouble efforts during this crucial period to promote
a political settlement in Libya, support Libyans so that
they can meet their challenges and help Libya overcome
various shortcomings and create conditions that are
conducive to successful elections. In that regard, we
welcome the Libya Stabilization Conference held in
Tripoli as well as the Paris International Conference for
Libya. The role of neighbouring countries is crucial.
Tunisia reiterates the importance that all the
parties respect Libya’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity and refrain from any interference
in its domestic affairs. We therefore renew our call to
all the parties to respect the full implementation of
the provisions of the ceasefire agreement as agreed
on 23 October 2020, in particular on speeding up the
withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign fighters from
Libya. Measures must be taken for a disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process to promote
stability in Libya and protect any neighbouring
countries from security repercussions. In that regard,
Tunisia welcomes the efforts of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission. We also welcome efforts by the United
Nations via UNSMIL and hope those efforts will be
reinforced by the deployment of the first group of United
Nations ceasefire monitors. We stress the importance
of respect by all parties of the arms embargo imposed
on Libya.
14/23

24/11/2021

With our mandate on the Security Council coming
to an end, we would like to highlight the commitment of
all Council members to supporting efforts for security
and stability in Libya and to safeguarding peace and
stability in the region. We also welcome the attitude
and positive approach that has been taken on the Libyan
dossier, as Tunisia shares a common fate with Libya
in terms of security, stability and development. We
are certain that unity within the Council on Libya, in
particular on the various aspects of the Libyan dossier,
will help to drive progress towards a holistic political
settlement and national reconciliation in Libya.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates its commitment
to the aspirations of the Libyan people as they
move beyond this period of transition and towards
reconstruction, with the help of the United Nations
and regional and international organizations. We are
certain that the wisdom of our brothers and sisters in
Libya will support national interests, movement out of
this transition phase and allow the national deadline to
be maintained so that Libya can re-establish its stability
as well as its place among nations.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy for Libya,
Mr. Tirumurti, Permanent Representative of India, and
Ms. Bensaad for their briefings today. The efforts of the
team of the Special Envoy to guide the Libyan people
on the road to elections beginning on 24 December have
been noteworthy, and we appreciate his perseverance in
engaging Libyan political figures, generating dialogue
on the electoral process and encouraging progress on
the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
As others have highlighted already, we are
now just 30 days from the beginning of elections
in Libya. The High National Elections Commission
has made real progress in planning for the elections.
Millions of Libyans have registered to vote, and many
candidates have registered to stand for presidential
and parliamentary elections. We see strong signals of
increased Libyan ownership of the electoral process.
We will support a Libya-led process that reflects the
maximum consensus achievable in the time allowed.
The Paris International Conference for Libya on
12 November was an unambiguous demonstration
of international support for Libya and a clear call
for progress. We must hold Libyan leaders to their
commitment to elections while helping them implement
their election plan. Democracy is a competition of ideas
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

in service of the people. We call on all Libyan leaders
to embrace and participate in the democratic process
while adhering to electoral regulations. The threat of
boycotts by factions claiming systemic bias will not
serve the Libyan people, advance peace or help achieve
prosperity. We remind those who would interfere with
Libya’s elections or stoke violence that the Security
Council may impose sanctions on anyone — Libyan or
otherwise — who obstructs or undermines the elections
as planned for in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum
road map. The Council must target election spoilers to
promote accountability if need be.
The Libyan authorities were clear during the
21 October Libya Stabilization Conference in Tripoli:
they reject foreign interference in Libya and seek
the withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and
foreign forces. We commend the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission and its comprehensive action plan for
the withdrawal of the armed groups. With over 20,000
foreign fighters in Libya, it is essential to continue
discussions on implementing the withdrawal of foreign
forces. We welcome Special Envoy Kubiš’ update on
the deployment of the first ceasefire monitors to Libya
and next steps in implementing the action plan. We
call on all States, including those on the Council, to
adhere to resolutions 2570 (2021) and 2571 (2021) and
to support the withdrawal of foreign forces.
We take note of the Special Envoy’s decision to
resign and the reports that the Secretary-General has
accepted his resignation. We thank him sincerely for his
service. As with all Head of Mission nominations, we
will await the Secretary-General’s decision on whom he
will nominate to serve as the Special Envoy. We impress
upon all Council members the importance of facilitating
a quick and smooth transition of responsibilities during
this critical juncture. In the interim, we will continue
to work with the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya and all United Nations leadership to advance
progress toward elections on 24 December and the
implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy for Libya, for his
briefing. I would also like to thank him for his work in
promoting the political process. I wish also to thank
Mr. Tirumurti, Permanent Representative of India and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for his briefing. I welcome the presence of Mr. Elsonni,
Permanent Representative of Libya, at this meeting.

S/PV. 8912

For some time now, the ceasefire in Libya has
been generally maintained. The political process
has continued to advance. The Libya Stabilization
Conference and the Paris International Conference for
Libya were recently held. Those conferences expressed
a unified message in support of elections to be held as
scheduled and the full withdrawal of foreign forces and
mercenaries, which we welcome.
There is only one month left before the elections.
China supports the parties in Libya, on the basis of
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum road map, to
hold simultaneously, as scheduled, presidential and
parliamentary elections that are fair, inclusive and
transparent in order to usher in a new phase of national
development. All parties in Libya should put the
interests of the country and the people first, commit
to dialogue and consultation, strengthen unity and
cooperation and resolve differences emerging during
the election process by peaceful means so as to avoid
affecting the hard-won peaceful situation.
Libya has made great efforts to prepare for the
elections and has made noticeable progress. However,
to keep the elections on schedule, much remains to be
done. China encourages the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to continue, in line with its Council
mandate, to provide the necessary support for the
elections. The international community should respect
Libya’s sovereignty, independence and their territorial
integrity and abide by the principle of non-interference
in internal affairs.
The presence of foreign forces and mercenaries
in Libya is one of the main obstacles to achieving
durable peace and stability in the country. In October,
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission agreed upon an
action plan for the full withdrawal of foreign forces
and mercenaries, reflecting the unanimous will of all
parties and the will of the Libyan people. China looks
forward to progress on the implementation of the action
plan as soon as possible. All countries with forces in
Libya should cooperate actively in that regard. There
can be no exceptions. The departure of foreign forces
and mercenaries should be guided by the need to
avoid negative impacts on the security situation in the
Sahel and the surrounding areas. China welcomes the
strengthening of communication between Libya and its
neighbours on that point, including the launch of the
quadripartite border management mechanism, jointly
staffed by Libya, the Sudan, Chad and the Niger.

21-3536515/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

The coronavirus disease pandemic exacerbated the
issue of livelihoods in Libya. In the implementation of
the Security Council sanctions against Libya, caution
must be exercised to avoid negative impacts on the
country’s economy and the well-being of the people.
The Security Council should actively explore effective
ways to use Libya’s frozen assets for the country’s
reconstruction and respond in an appropriate manner to
Libya’s legitimate concerns with regard to its losses as
a result of the frozen assets.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy for Libya,
for his briefing and to wish him all the best in his
future endeavours. I also thank Ms. Lamees Bensaad,
member of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, for her
insightful remarks. I also welcome the presence of our
colleague the Permanent Representative of Libya.
We are approaching the date of 24 December,
which was set by the Libyan people for presidential and
parliamentary elections. That was an objective that was
endorsed subsequently by the Security Council. There
is a sense of cautious hope that the political momentum
will be sustained towards holding simultaneous
presidential and parliamentary elections in a free, fair,
inclusive and credible manner exactly one month from
now. In that regard, we welcome the outcomes of the
Paris International Conference for Libya, including
its commitment to the success of the Libyan political
process and to the full implementation of the 23 October
2020 ceasefire agreement, and look forward to the
holding of presidential and parliamentary elections on
24 December.
The security scenario also calls for optimism from the
international community. We have noted the 8 October
agreement on the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
action plan for the departure of mercenaries, foreign
fighters and foreign forces from Libyan territory, and
subsequent developments in that regard, including
meetings conducted with representatives of Chad, the
Niger and the Sudan with regard to the implementation
of the action plan.
At the same time, we also note from the briefing
of the Special Envoy that challenges remain, including
impediments to the holding of elections in a free,
fair, inclusive and credible manner. The involvement
of external forces in the internal affairs of Libya has
negatively impacted the progress on the political track,
and terrorist forces have been raising their heads
16/23

24/11/2021

once again in Libya. Continued violations of the arms
embargo are equally alarming, as repeatedly reported
by the Panel of Experts.
As Libya embarks on its journey towards peace
and stability, it is incumbent upon the international
community, and the Security Council in particular, to
continue to provide the necessary support to the country
so that the political progress achieved in the country is
not whittled away. In that regard, I would like to make
the following suggestions.
First, the most important priority for Libya is the
holding of elections as planned on 24 December in a
free, fair, inclusive and credible manner. The efforts by
the High National Elections Commission to advance
preparations for the elections are to be commended.
Secondly, the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Libya needs to be safeguarded.
The peace process must be fully Libyan-led and Libyanowned, with no imposition or external interference. We
also encourage all Libyan parties to continue to make
concerted efforts towards the unification of all national
institutions.
Thirdly, the provisions of the ceasefire agreement
and successive Security Council resolutions need to
be respected. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission
action plan is an important step, which also shows the
commitment of the Libyan parties to the withdrawal of
foreign forces and mercenaries. It is important that the
call of the Libyan parties be honoured.
Fourthly, we must ensure that terrorist groups and
affiliated entities are not allowed to operate unchallenged
in Libya. The continued presence and activities of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya is of serious
concern, including due to the potential cascading effect
it is already having throughout the Sahel region. It is
unfortunate that the issue is not drawing the attention
it deserves. The international community must speak
with one voice against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations.
Fifthly, we need to plan for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups and
non-State actors. We appreciate the fact that the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya is prepared to render
assistance to Libya in that process.
Sixthly, an inclusive and comprehensive national
reconciliation process is the need of the hour. We hope
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

that the forthcoming elections will be an important step
in that direction.
In conclusion, India has traditionally enjoyed close
and mutually beneficial bilateral ties with Libya, and
we remain committed to supporting Libya and the
Libyan people in their endeavour to bring about lasting
peace in the country.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the briefers
for their comprehensive overviews on the latest
developments in Libya. I would like to express
Estonia’s full support for the work and the mediation
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), and I thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Envoy
for Libya, for his work.
Libya today stands at a critical juncture. The
planned and highly anticipated presidential and
parliamentary elections are exactly one month away.
While important progress has been made in preparation
for the elections, including on voter registration, there
are still a number of issues that need addressing. We
urge all Libyan parties to work together to ensure the
holding of free, fair, inclusive and credible elections on
24 December that would pave way for a lasting peace
in Libya.
For the longer-term stability and the success of
the electoral process, it is essential to ensure the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women and the
inclusion of youth at all stages of preparation as well
as in the elections themselves. In that connection, we
highly value the presentation by Ms. Bensaad. It is quite
apparent that women face a multitude of hurdles in
participating in the electoral process, and that requires
our continued attention. Women need to be able to
participate in all aspects of political life, as candidates,
activists and voters, without fear of retaliation.
On the military track, Estonia welcomes the
progress on the implementation of the 23 October 2020
Libyan ceasefire agreement. We commend the important
steps that the 5+5 Joint Military Commission has taken,
with the participation of UNSMIL and together with
the neighbouring countries, in moving forward with the
action plan on the withdrawal of all foreign forces and
mercenaries. It is essential that all outside actors leave
Libya without delay.
Estonia welcomes the deployment of the first
group of United Nations monitors to support the
Libyan-led ceasefire monitoring mechanism. We

S/PV. 8912

look forward to the further operationalization of the
international support team to the Libyan Joint Military
Commission monitors.
The human rights and humanitarian situation in
Libya remains extremely concerning. It is important
to ensure adequate access for humanitarian aid and
humanitarian workers to all those in need. It is crucial
to end the arbitrary detentions and exposure to violence,
including sexual and gender-based violence, of migrants
and asylum seekers. All alleged violations and abuses
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law by all parties in Libya need to be
thoroughly investigated. Combating impunity and
ensuring accountability will pave the way to restoring
trust in society.
Estonia welcomes the important work of the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, including
its October report (A/HRC/48/83), and calls for the
Mission to be granted full, safe and unhindered access
to all Libyan territory to fulfil its mandate.
Finally, Estonia welcomes the declaration of the
Paris International Conference for Libya held on
12 November. It is important to reiterate that the United
Nations-led mediation efforts within the framework of
the Berlin process remain the basis for international
efforts in support of achieving peace and stability
in Libya.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Envoy for his briefing, and in particular
for his commitment from the start of his mandate to
achieving peace in Libya. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of India, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), and Ms. Bensaad for
their briefings.
We are on the eve of a crucial deadline for the future
of Libya. The holding of parliamentary and presidential
elections, to begin on December 24, offers a unique
opportunity to set the country firmly on a sustainable
path to peace and stability. Libyans have very clearly
signalled their desire for elections. More than 2.8 million
Libyans are registered to vote, and 1.7 million have
collected their voter cards. Ninety-eight candidates
have registered for the presidential elections, and 1,766
candidates for the legislative elections. That is proof
that inclusive elections comprising the participation
of all components of Libyan society are within reach.

21-3536517/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

France encourages the participation of women in the
electoral process.
With a view to meeting those broad civil society
expectations, President Macron took the initiative to
co-chair — with Germany, Italy, Libya and the United
Nations — the Paris International Conference for
Libya on 12 November. The conference reaffirmed the
international community’s support for the electoral
process to proceed under the auspices of Libya’s High
National Elections Commission. The international
community demonstrated its commitment to the
process by unanimously supporting the holding of
elections according to the timetable set by the High
National Elections Commission. France welcomes the
endorsement of the outcomes of the Paris Conference in
the presidential statement to be adopted by the Council
this afternoon. Libya’s co-chairing of the Conference
also confirmed the commitment of Libyan actors
to holding elections in accordance with the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum road map and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We must now work to implement the commitments
made in Paris. Together with its European partners,
France is working to deploy election observers to ensure
the transparency and credibility of the process and that
all stakeholders accept the outcome of the election.
We continue to extend our full support to the electoral
process led by the High National Elections Commission
and to the electoral calendar it will soon issue. We urge
all actors to do the same and to commit to accepting
the election results. France will strongly condemn any
attempts to disrupt the election process or to call into
question its results. The Sanctions Committee may
designate any individual or entity that hinders the
electoral process.
The Paris Conference also demonstrated the
international community’s support for the action plan
agreed on by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission for the
withdrawal of mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign
forces. The adoption of the action plan, in early October
at Geneva, was an essential step in implementing the
ceasefire agreement signed on 23 October. By endorsing
the action plan in the presidential statement that we will
adopt today, we will all assume the responsibility to
help implement Libya’s request. In that regard, France
welcomes the announcement of the withdrawal of 300
African mercenaries from Libya, which constitutes an
important first step towards that implementation.
18/23

24/11/2021

We call for continued coordination with countries
in the region, particularly Egypt, to facilitate similar
withdrawals, with the assistance of the United Nations.
In that regard, France urges Libyan actors to set
deadlines for the implementation of those withdrawals
as soon as possible. We encourage the United Nations
to support the process, including by strengthening its
ceasefire monitoring mechanism. France recalls that we
are all bound to strictly comply with the arms embargo.
Achieving progress on these political and security
fronts is the only way for us to consolidate a stable
and sovereign Libya, to unify all Libyan institutions
and to put an end to human rights violations, to which
migrants are particularly vulnerable. France will
continue to take action against impunity for those
crimes. Elections are the key to the fair, equitable and
transparent distribution of resources for the benefit of
all Libyan people. France will remain fully engaged
with its partners and in the Council in anticipation of
the crucial start to the election period.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Envoy Kubiš
and Ambassador Tirumurti for their comprehensive
briefings. I also thank Ms. Bensaad for sharing her
thoughts and assessment. I welcome the participation
of the Permanent Representative of Libya in
today’s meeting.
The people of Libya are approaching a new chapter
in realizing their hope and determination for long-term
peace, stability and development. We commend the
progress made on the political and security tracks in
recent weeks, particularly the commitments made by
the Libyan parties to holding the presidential elections
on 24 December and the action plan agreed regarding
the withdrawal of foreign mercenaries and fighters. At
the same time, the ongoing challenges related to those
crucial processes require strengthened and consistent
efforts by all parties and support from the international
community. In that connection, I wish to highlight the
three following points.
First, we call on the relevant parties in Libya
to expedite all necessary arrangements, including
legislative, administrative and logistic measures,
for the holding of presidential and parliamentary
elections successfully and in a timely manner. The
post-election period will also need adequate attention
in order to ensure sustained progress. It is imperative
to promote dialogue and facilitate reconciliation and
confidence-building measures among the different
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

parties in order to resolve the current difficulties at this
critical time.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and regional and
international actors over the past weeks to foster and
support dialogue among the Libyan parties, particularly
through the Paris International Conference and the
Libya Stabilization Conference. The role of the United
Nations, neighbouring countries and regional and
international partners will remain crucial in supporting
the Libyan-led and -owned political process during the
coming period.
Secondly, it is crucial to maintain a security
environment conducive to the preparation and holding
of the elections and the continuation of the political
process in the post-election period. We call on all
relevant parties to fully uphold the provisions of the
October 2020 ceasefire agreement, including the
implementation of the ceasefire monitoring mechanism,
with the support of UNSMIL. We call on all relevant
parties to fully respect and implement the action plan
regarding the withdrawal of foreign mercenaries and
fighters from Libyan territory, which we commend.
The arms embargo in line with the relevant resolution
on Libya must continue to be upheld.
Thirdly, strengthened efforts are needed to
further tackle the humanitarian challenges in Libya
and promote reconstruction in the country. We share
the concern on the increasing challenges related to
migrants and refugees in Libya. We call on international
partners to continue to provide support for the country,
especially to address the needs of, and challenges faced
by, vulnerable groups, especially women, children,
migrants and refugees. In addition, we commend the
continued efforts to protect civilians in Libya from the
risk of mines and explosive remnants of war, with the
support of the United Nations Mine Action Service.
In conclusion, Viet Nam stands in solidarity with
the people of Libya in this critical period. We reaffirm
our support for the work of UNSMIL. I would like to
take this opportunity to express our gratitude for the
tireless efforts of Mr. Kubiš in promoting peace in
Libya over the past months. We wish him all the best.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Envoy of the Secretary General for Libya, for
his briefing and his service to the people of Libya. I also
thank Ambassador Tirumurti, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution

S/PV. 8912

1970 (2011), and Ms. Lamees Bensaad, member of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, for their briefings.
I welcome the presence of our colleague Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of Libya.
Kenya acknowledges the important role played
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) in support the peace process, especially
at this critical time. We also acknowledge the great
support that neighbouring States, other States and
regional organizations have lent in that regard.
During yesterday’s briefing on Libya (see
S/PV.8911), we reminded the Security Council of
the need for all of us to remember the genesis of the
conflict. We welcome all members of the Council and
the international community at large to undertake their
own assessments of the past decade in Libya to identify
the lessons we need to learn to avoid a repetition of
the blunders and self-interested interventions that
have characterized the international community’s
interaction with Libya and the region. Notwithstanding
that history, commendable progress has been made
to resolve the political conflicts that have generated
so much violence and suffering. The people of Libya
have conveyed their resoluteness to rebuild and restore.
The first international Libya Stabilization Conference,
hosted by the Government of National Unity on
21 October in Tripoli, is testament to that.
To secure the gains achieved so far, foreign
interference in Libya must end. Such interference is
also characterized by the continued presence of foreign
fighters and mercenaries, with a destabilizing effect,
not only on Libya but also on the broader region. Kenya
therefore welcomes the comprehensive action plan for
the gradual, balanced and sequenced withdrawal of
mercenaries, foreign fighters and foreign forces from
Libya, signed by the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
on 8 October, and we emphasize the importance of its
implementation. We urge the international community
to strongly support that.
We also welcome the arrival in October in Tripoli
of the first group of United Nations monitors to support
the Libyan ceasefire monitoring mechanism, and
we re-emphasize the need to guard that process as a
truly Libyan-led and -owned one. We call for support
from Member States, regional organizations and the
United Nations to the requisite corresponding security
sector reforms and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts.

21-3536519/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

As Libyans move closer to 24 December, we
commend the work that has already been done, and
that is ongoing, in preparation for the elections, such as
voter registration and the registration of candidates for
the presidential elections. However, we note that there
remains a deep divergence of views regarding the legal
framework for the elections. Additionally, campaign
seasons easily give rise to inflammatory and divisive
comments and speeches, some which in this case have
already been spewed out. We call on Libyans to draw
from the importance of dialogue and the national
reconciliation process to resolve those contentions
with a view to attaining the country’s common good.
As always, we want to remind African countries,
of which Libya is one, that elections do not bring
countries together; however, they must be held while
always paying heed to the process of reconciliation that
is required.
We must not forget or abandon the thousands of
migrants who are suffering intolerable treatment as
they seek to reach the shores of Europe. As I make
this statement in the aftermath of the disappointing
outcomes in Glasgow, we can conclude only, as has
been done often in the last few days, that unless there
are determined efforts to invest in climate adaptation
in the Sahel and in West Africa, the boats in the
Mediterranean will continue to fill with desperate
refugees. Intercepting migrants or aiding their
interception at sea and return to Libyan ports will in
the end become an even bigger global crisis. We call for
greater responsibility in taking actions in response to
the link between climate change and the political and
economic crises it produces, which lead to the growing
number of African climate refugees seeking to traverse
the Sahel, the Sahara, Libya and the Mediterranean.
We supported the proposed Security Council
presidential statement, as it constitutes the muchneeded Council voice in support of Libyans. We
also look forward to the substantial renewal of the
UNSMIL mandate to reflect the gains so far, signal
the Security Council’s support and pave the way
for the implementation of improvements under the
mandate. We recall that all of Libya’s frozen assets are
to be preserved and eventually returned to, and for the
benefit of, the people of Libya. We therefore emphasize
the need to consider appropriate reviews in that respect.
We also encourage the implementation of the sanctions,
in liaison with Libyan authorities, and welcome relevant
discussions in that regard.
20/23

24/11/2021

Finally, Kenya continues to express solidarity with
the people of Libya and calls for respect of Libya’s
territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Mexico.
I thank the Special Envoy and Ms. Bensaad for
their briefings. I also thank our colleague Ambassador
Tirumurti, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), for
his briefing on the work of the Committee. I wish to
underscore my appreciation to Mr. Ján Kubiš for the
work he has accomplished for the people of Libya
as Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and wish him every success in his
future activities.
With exactly one month to go before the presidential
and legislative elections in Libya, my delegation
believes that the international community should focus
all of its efforts on creating the best possible conditions
for the electoral process. In that regard, we welcome the
results of the Paris International Conference for Libya,
held on 12 November, and call for the implementation
of its conclusions. We urge all Libyan political actors to
act responsibly to resolve the outstanding issues with
the help of UNSMIL. We urge them in particular to
work collectively to finalize the legal framework for
the electoral process.
We also reiterate the importance of respecting the
parameters that were agreed by the Libyans themselves
in the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum framework and
endorsed by the international community through the
two Berlin Conferences. It is important to remember
that the road map agreed in Tunis this past year provides
for women to occupy at least 30 per cent of leadership
positions. In that regard, Mexico notes Ms. Bensaad’s
comments with the deepest of interest. We salute the
courage of the Libyan women who have decided to
run in the elections and encourage the authorities to
continue working with the UNSMIL team towards the
adoption of the law to combat violence against women.
We also welcome the adoption within the framework
of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission of an action plan
for the withdrawal of mercenaries and foreign fighters.
We urge that the countries of origin of those forces
commit to implementing the action plan and hope that
the ceasefire monitoring mechanism will contribute to
that end.
21-35365

24/11/2021

The situation in Libya

On the other hand, Mexico regrets that, despite the
Council’s continued calls to address the situation of
migrants in Libya, we continue hear reports, such as
those we have heard today, of inhumane treatment of
migrants. Those incidents, including one that occurred
in recent days in which at least 75 people perished while
attempting to cross the Mediterranean, are the result
of the lack of comprehensive attention to the migration
phenomenon. We therefore urge that concrete measures
be taken to protect the lives and rights of migrants.
Finally, my delegation draws the attention of the
Council to the report of the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya published in October (A/HRC/48/83),
which documents serious violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. The report states
that the proliferation of weapons was one of the factors
that led to the deterioration of the situation in Libya.
It is therefore essential that the arms embargo be fully
respected in order to prevent weapons from fuelling
conflicts in neighbouring countries. The information
gathered by the Mission must be used to ensure
accountability. No political or electoral consideration
can take precedence over the justice to which the
victims are entitled.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to recall the content of presidential
note S/2017/507, which encourages participants to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on Libya, and Mr. Ján Kubiš
for his briefing. It is regrettable to know that he has
tendered his resignation at a critical moment. However,
we understand the personal reasons behind that
resignation and call on the Secretary-General and the
Security Council to clarify the alternative plans for the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL)
during this sensitive time. I would also like to thank
Mr. Tirumurti for delivering the report of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, and Ms. Lamees
Bensaad for her valuable briefing. My statement today
is very important, and I have a great deal to say. Please
excuse me, therefore, if I take more time.

S/PV. 8912

We meet today at a pivotal juncture in the crisis,
following years of my country suffering division,
differences and wars. We meet today with a glimpse
of hope of exiting the dark tunnel that we have been
in for so long, thanks to God’s mercy and the efforts
of loyal Libyans. In that context, we appreciate all
international initiatives with genuine intentions to find
a peaceful resolution to the Libyan crisis. In that regard,
we thank France for organizing the recently held Paris
International Conference for Libya, as well as Germany
for having held the two Berlin Conferences. We also
thank all sisterly and friendly countries for their
various efforts.
At the same time, we must stress that national
initiatives constitute the basis on which we can work to
resolve the crisis and achieve stability, for there is no
alternative to a Libyan-owned and -led political process
to lead the country to that stability. We must ensure that
the Libyan State exercises its sovereignty throughout
its entire territory. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of the National Unity Government therefore launched
the ministerial-level Libya Stabilization Conference,
which took place this past month in the city of
peace — the capital, Tripoli — with the participation
of nearly 30 countries, as well as international and
regional organizations. That is a clear indication that
Libya is now present and that it should lead, and not
be led.
In that regard, on the topic of stability, we would
like to commend the work of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission (JMC) and its outcomes. We reiterate the
need to respond to the sovereign demand of the Libyan
people, that is, to put an end to any form of foreign
presence on Libyan territory, regardless of labels or
categories, in accordance with the action plan and
timetable of the JMC. There is a need for Libya to have
a seat all negotiating tables, and there must be respect
the will of Libyans to protect their national security and
define their interests with whomever they want and any
way that they choose, without guardianship.
Libya’s current executive authority, represented
by the Presidential Council and the Government of
National Unity, remains committed to implementing
its road map, which stipulates that presidential and
parliamentary elections be held simultaneously and on
time, and provides for all the resources necessary to
ensure their success. It also states the need to transfer
power to the elected bodies in a democratic and civil
manner, without leaving a political vacuum, as provided

21-3536521/23

S/PV.8912

The situation in Libya

24/11/2021

for by the road map, the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the outcomes of various international
conferences, the most recent of which was the Paris
International Conference for Libya. It was a national
and historical choice to end the conflict of legitimacy
and political rivalries.

The elections must be a means to achieving our true
objectives: a permanent and consensual constitution
and an end to fragile transitional phases. They should
not fulfil the desires of some to usurp authority, and
neither should they end the dream of a civil State and
the peaceful transfer of power.

The Council has noted the significant number of
candidates registered and the high level of participation
in the elections. We must ensure free and fair elections
with a wide range of international monitoring, with the
participation of all stakeholders, without exclusion or
marginalization, in line with fair legal criteria. There
must be simultaneous presidential and parliamentary
elections, with a clear timetable, and their results must
be accepted. The objective of such elections is to take
us from chaos to peace and stability. They should not be
used by some as a means to fuel conflict and bring back
the spectre of war and infighting. But is there any way
that can be guaranteed?

Yesterday, during the briefing by the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court on the situation
in Libya (see S/PV.8911), we outlined our country’s
position on human rights issues. We reiterated that
our specialized national institutions, especially the
Libyan Attorney General’s Office, in cooperation with
the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya of the
Human Rights Council, are working in accordance with
their mandates to conclude the necessary investigations
into the crimes that have been committed over the
past years in Libya, especially war crimes and crimes
against humanity, to ensure accountability and end
impunity. As we have said before, those crimes have no
statute of limitations. The mass graves will always be a
dark part of our history.

We are all well aware that there are no ideal solutions
to the current crisis; however, it is also important to
make every effort possible to ensure a minimum
level of national consensus. Therefore, although there
are many who call for elections to be held no matter
what happens, the Council must also understand the
legitimate concerns of a large segment of Libyans about
the uncertain future, as well as their sincere desire to
not fall into the same traps of the past.
Members of the Council have all followed the
different and divergent opinions in Libya and the legal
and constitutional debate that has taken place over the
past days and months, which is basically the result
of a crisis of confidence that has built up over years.
Now, in the absence of an agreed-upon constitution or
a consensual constitutional basis, the elections could
ultimately prove vulnerable, their legitimacy may be
questioned, and their results might not be accepted.
That could lead to violence and chaos. We do not want
to revert to that stage.
Today we heard a briefing from Ms. Bensaad, who
represents quite a large segment of Libyans. We have
gleaned hopes and aspirations for the election from her
briefing, but we also heard concerns and challenges.
We do not want to make the elections an obstacle. We
have to listen to everyone.
We call on everyone to transform the elections
into a means of stability and an end to the crisis. They
cannot be a means to an end or the start of a new crises.
22/23

The discussion at this meeting leads us to the
problems regarding frozen Libyan assets and funds.
The state of those funds — which belong to the Libyan
people — is very dire. Unfortunately, the freezing of
assets, which began as an apparent attempt to protect
Libyan money, has become a politicized mechanism
aimed at enabling some to seize the wealth of the Libyan
people. That was made clear when our repeated requests
to allow the Libyan Investment Authority to manage
its frozen assets were met with rejection. And we were
not calling to unfreeze them, rather only to manage and
preserve them in these difficult circumstances and the
volatile global economic situation.
In that context, I regret to inform the Council
that we are being blackmailed again, and the same
country’s name has come up: Belgium. After its first
failed attempt in February to seize €50 million worth of
Libyan assets was thankfully rejected by the Sanctions
Committee, we were surprised by the Public Prosecutor
of Belgium’s recent issuing of a memorandum to launch
an investigation of the head of the Libyan Investment
Authority, without communicating with the Libyan
authorities to clarify the matter or respect the relevant
diplomatic channels. That came after the Belgian
authorities seized approximately €15 billion from the
Authority’s frozen accounts, which was treated like a
suspect in a criminal case, without any explanation of
21-35365

24/11/2021

S/PV. 8912

The situation in Libya

the reason. This step could lead to the unlawful arrest
of the head of the institution.

have uncovered all the conspiracies that were and are
being engaged against them.

In his turn, the Prime Minister announced his
total rejection of this escalation and attempts to tamper
with the money of the Libyans, in deviation from
any diplomatic norms, stressing that any dispute and
settlement must take place between Governments, and
not through blackmail or by subverting the money and
institutions of Libya’s sovereign and threatening its
citizens. We therefore call on Belgium to stop taking
such provocative measures and to cooperate with the
Government to find a diplomatic and practical solution
to the crisis. We also call on the Security Council
and the Sanctions Committee to work to fulfil their
obligations and promises to preserve these assets and
warn all countries not to touch them or seize them
under any justification, which is in clear violation of
the resolutions of the Council. We have sent a letter
to the Council and to the Committee with regard to
that matter.

The Council has also seen genuine national
reconciliation, synergy and the start of the end to
a painful chapter in the history of Libya. That is
best evidenced by the participation of all political
movements, regardless of their affiliations, in the
current democratic process. Do not belittle us. The
Libyan people will recover from this crisis. We will
become stronger than before. But we ask only that those
who interfere in our internal affairs stop. And as we say
in the Libyan dialect, “Leave us alone and our situation
will be fixed.” Despite all the challenges, Libya will
remain steadfast, together as one and united. That is the
secret of our strength, no matter what.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that this
important juncture requires that we work to ensure the
success of the political process and counter any local
or international spoilers who stand in the way of the
aspirations of the Libyan people to self-determination
and to express their will. Today’s briefings to the
Council addressed Libya and told us what we should
do. However, members of the Council should also
heed us and correct the mistakes they have made to
the detriment of the Libyan people. Council members
have a moral responsibility for the developments in
my country over the past 10 years. Libyan citizens,
especially young people, have become more aware and

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Council has
before it the text of a statement by the President on behalf
of the Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank
the Council members for their valuable contributions to
this statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among the members of the Council, I shall take
it that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2021/24.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I thank
this meeting.

Ms.

Bensaad

for

participating

in

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.15 p.m.

21-3536523/23
