S/PV.8184

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8184th meeting

Tuesday, 20 February 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sheikh Al Sabah . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tileuberdi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Clay
Mr. Miller

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq
Seventeenth report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security
Council resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/40)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2018/42)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04561 (E)
*1804561*

S/PV.8184

The situation concerning Iraq

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.

“[i]n a world where unfortunately good news is
scarce, and in the region where unfortunately we see
many situations getting worse, the fact that Iraq is
on the right track and the fact that the international
community has shown its confidence in Iraq is a
very important piece of good news.”

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation concerning Iraq
Seventeenth report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 of Security Council
resolution 2107 (2013) (S/2018/40)
Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2018/42)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Iraq to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Ján Kubiš,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/40, which contains the seventeenth
report of the Secretary-General pursuant to paragraph
4 of Security Council resolution 2107 (2013), as well as
to document S/2018/42, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to resolution 2367 (2017).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kubiš.
Mr. Kubiš: This Security Council meeting is
taking place just days after the Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, so generously co-hosted by
His Highness the Amir of Kuwait, thereby showing
once again his and his country’s commitment to the
humanitarian, peace and development cause in the
region and in the world. The Conference was attended
by more than 70 Member States and international
organizations and 2,000 private-sector companies. It
mobilized nearly $30 billion to support reconstruction.
That massive regional and international response is
extraordinary proof of the continuous solidarity with,
and confidence in, the Government and the people
of Iraq. In his concluding remarks, the SecretaryGeneral stated,
2/11

20/02/2018

As the security forces continue to clear out remnants
of Da’esh, Iraq is increasingly focusing on the upcoming
parliamentary elections on 12 May. Many Iraqi political
forces decided to form cross-sectarian, cross-ethnic
coalitions across the political spectrum. It is indeed
essential that the elections will confirm the vision of
Iraqis working together across the sectarian and ethnic
divides in pursuit of the needed political, economic and
social reforms based on the principles of citizenship
with equal rights, justice and opportunity for all and
good governance, devoid of the compromised quota
system and corruption. Only a new Government, based
on such approach, will guarantee the future of Iraq as
a united, democratic, fully sovereign and independent
federal State and as a factor of stability, cooperation
and prosperity for its people and the region.
The Independent High Electoral Commission has
steadily continued its preparations for the parliamentary
elections. The Commission has registered 205 political
parties, and 27 political coalitions have been approved
to contest the elections. Yet a number of challenges
remain. The voluntary and dignified return of
internally displaced persons (IDPs), under conditions
of safety and security, is an critical issue for the success
and credibility of the elections. In the months ahead,
the Government expects that as many as 2 million
of the 2.5 million who are still displaced will return
home. I am also encouraged by the decision of the
Government to establish voluntary return committees
with humanitarian representatives in each governorate
to oversee the return process.
The Iraqi security forces providing an environment
of security, which would enable voters to exercise
their right to vote in safety, free from terror and fear
of intimidation, is an overriding concern. Although
Da’esh’s so-called caliphate has been defeated, the
terrorist organization and its sleeper cells, including
among IDPs, continue to pose a threat. On 18 February,
in the course of a counter-terrorism operation in Hawija
and surrounding areas, a special force from the popular
mobilization forces was ambushed and over 20 fighters
were martyred.
18-04561

20/02/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

In addition, the new electronic ballot counting
system, including the customization and development
of the software for results tabulation, continues
to be a work in progress and requires accelerated
support, including from the United Nations and other
international partners, in order to ensure the envisaged
enhanced integrity and credibility of the elections.
Observation of the elections, both domestic and
international, will be a vital component in fostering
credibility and acceptance of the results. I strongly urge
domestic observer groups, as well as the international
community, to participate in observing the elections,
and the international community in providing the
necessary support. Credible and acceptable elections
with high voter turnout, including in the liberated
areas and in the Kurdistan region of Iraq, with specific
measures to facilitate women’s participation, will
empower the new Government to implement reforms,
improve accountability and promote inclusiveness and
reconciliation among various components and groups
in Iraq.
I am encouraged by the recent positive
developments in relations between Baghdad and Erbil.
Prime Minister Al Abadi confirmed days ago that
the federal and regional Governments are in the final
stages of negotiations with regard to some concrete
areas that would address urgent needs and concerns of
the people of the region, beginning with the payment of
salaries and the re-opening of the airports in Erbil and
Suleimaniyah. Such steps are urgently needed.
I

commend the Iraqi federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government for their
concerted efforts and strong coordination aimed at the
implementation of the national action plan on women
and peace and security. With elections looming, we
urge Iraqi senior political leaders to broaden women’s
political space and appoint them to leadership positions
within political parties, as well as ensure their
meaningful participation in all electoral processes,
including participating in negotiations leading to the
Government’s formation following the holding of
national elections.
I welcome the Government’s willingness to
work with the United Nations country task force on
monitoring and reporting to develop an action plan
to address violations committed against children in
times of conflict. To that end, Prime Minister Al
Abadi has endorsed the establishment of the national

S/PV. 8184

inter-ministerial senior committee for monitoring and
reporting on children affected by the armed conflict.
The Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization
(FFIS) of the United Nations Development Programme
has continued to scale-up its efforts to stabilize newly
liberated areas of Iraq. The FFIS is now cleared to
work in 31 of the more than 40 cities and districts that
have been liberated by Iraqi security forces. Since we
last reported to the Security Council (see S/PV.8112),
360 projects have either been completed or are under
development, thereby bringing the total number of
stabilization projects to 1,887. In Mosul alone, nearly
600 stabilization projects are under way.
Despite the strong support demonstrated by
Kuwait and the commitment to its international and
humanitarian obligations shown by Iraq, the full
normalization of relations will take place only once all
outstanding issues concerning Kuwaiti missing persons
and property have been resolved. The Government of
Iraq, in particular its Ministry of Defence, is making
proactive efforts to re-animate the search for missing
Kuwaiti persons. I deeply regret that the past 13 years
have not yielded tangible results. During the latest
meeting of the tripartite mechanism, which took
place on 6 February in Kuwait, tripartite members
meaningfully acknowledged the review project of the
International Committee of the Red Cross that would
serve to streamline and prioritize work, re-orient
activities and guide the mechanism.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on the
international community to consider ways in which it
could support the search for missing Kuwaiti persons,
including through the procurement of field equipment
and providing forensic, DNA and anthropological
training and capacity-building for the Iraqi and Kuwaiti
technical teams. Those Member States in possession
of satellite imagery from 1990-1991 are particularly
encouraged to come forward and provide analysis and
information that could help in identifying burial sites
to the Government of Iraq. I also reiterate my call on
Iraq and Kuwait to come to an agreement on the swift
repatriation of located Kuwaiti academic textbooks that
have been awaiting an official handover for more than
a year.
In conclusion, allow me to take this opportunity
to thank my outgoing Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, who is also Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq and Resident

18-045613/11

S/PV.8184

The situation concerning Iraq

Representative of the United Nations Development
Programme, Ms. Lise Grande, for the truly outstanding
work in her over three years in Iraq. When we praise
major achievements in the areas of stabilization
and when we applaud the hard work and significant
outcomes achieved in the humanitarian area, including
the civilian-military cooperation that succeeded
so well in the protection and for the benefit of the
affected civilian population, notably during the
Mosul liberation campaign, we need first of all to
recognize the leadership and achievements of Deputy
Special Representative Grande, who, together with her
colleagues, made it happen.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Kubiš
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the State of Kuwait.
First of all, I would like to highly commend
the efforts of the United Nations in assisting the
Government and the people of Iraq at such a sensitive
and difficult juncture, in particular following the
liberation of all Iraqi territories from Da’esh. I also
thank the United Nations for its work and coordination
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) with the Iraqi Government pursuant
to resolution 2367 (2017). I reiterate as well Kuwait’s
support for Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMI, and his
Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs in
Iraq, Ms. Alice Walpole. We also appreciate the work
of her predecessor, Mr. Busztin.
I once again congratulate the Government and the
people of Iraq on their historic victory in liberating
their territories from Da’esh. At the same time, we
highly commend the sacrifices of our brotherly Iraqi
people, which embody the ideal of heroism in combating
terrorism. We hope that the Iraqi Government will
successfully hold accountable perpetrators of these
criminal acts, in coordination and cooperation with the
international mechanism pursuant to resolution 2379
(2017), in order to strengthen the country’s relevant
national judicial capacities.
We recognize the challenges facing Iraq following
the defeat of Da’esh. His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah called for holding an
international conference on the reconstruction of Iraq,
which took place in Kuwait last week. It was co-hosted
4/11

20/02/2018

by Kuwait, the Republic of Iraq, the United Nations,
the European Union and the World Bank, and aimed
at helping Iraq overcome its current sensitive and
critical phase. Pledges at the conference amounted to
almost $30 billion from participating States, the private
sector and civil society organizations. They were made
in the form of investment loans and credit facilities
that would improve the livelihoods of Iraqis, develop
infrastructure and provide the basic services needed to
establish a secure environment in the liberated areas of
Iraq. The State of Kuwait announced its contribution
of $1 billion in the form of loans within the framework
of the Kuwaiti Fund for Arab Economic Development,
and an additional $1 billion earmarked for investing in
projects in Iraq. Two years ago Kuwait also contributed
more than $200 million in voluntary assistance at the
governmental and public levels in response to the
humanitarian impact caused by Da’esh’s invasion of
Iraq. Last week, Kuwait also hosted the ministerial
meeting of the Global Coalition to Defeat Da’esh
to ensure the ongoing coordination of international
counter-terrorism efforts and the implementation of the
strategy developed by the Coalition to put an end to that
criminal organization.
With regard to international obligations and
humanitarian issues related to missing Kuwaiti citizens
and third parties, as well as missing Kuwaiti property,
including the national archives, we will continue
to honour our obligations and monitor the periodic
reports of the Secretary-General and the briefings of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Iraq, pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2107 (2013).
I again call upon everyone to make a greater effort,
devise an innovative approach to meet obligations
with regard to Kuwait in order to make progress on the
issue, given the importance and historic value of such
archives, in accordance with resolution 2107 (2013),
and end the suffering of the families of prisoners and
of those who have been missing for more than 27 years.
In conclusion, we hope that cooperation will
continue in the same amicable spirit with Iraq. We would
like to honour the remaining obligations of the tripartite
mechanism and its technical committee headed by the
International Committee of the Red Cross, according
to the relevant Security Council resolutions, with the
aim of achieving substantial and tangible results. I
would again like to commend the efforts of UNAMI.
We reiterate that we will cooperate fully with UNAMI
in order to complete its mandate to the fullest.
18-04561

20/02/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those other Council
members who wish to make statements.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to welcome Sheikh Sabah Khalid Al Hamad Al Sabah,
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the State of Kuwait, who is presiding over
today’s meeting of the Security Council. We thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš, for his briefing. We
appreciate and support his efforts in carrying our the
duties entrusted to him. Similarly, my delegation thanks
UNAMI for its important and outstanding efforts in
discharging its mandate. We encourage it to continue to
foster dialogue and coordinate efforts to strengthen the
process for peace and reconciliation in Iraq.
We begin by commending the Iraqi security forces
on their victory over Da’esh, which was announced
by Iraq’s Prime Minister, Mr. Haider Al Abadi, on
9 December 2017. We reiterate our sincere gratitude
to the Iraqi security forces and to the entire Iraqi
population for their courage, sacrifice and resolute
fight against terrorism on our behalf. That significant
achievement should lead to greater unity among all
sectors in society. To that end, political actors and the
Government must focus on eliminating sectarian and
divisive rhetoric, and call for unity and reconciliation in
an effort to achieve stability and reconstruction in Iraq.
In addition, we underscore that, in line with
the mandate outlined in resolution 2379 (2017), the
Secretary-General and the Government of Iraq agreed
on the terms of reference to establish an investigative
team to determine those responsible for atrocities
committed by Da’esh and bring them to justice before
Iraqi courts. We firmly believe that the establishment
of an investigative team, led by a special adviser, is
crucial to combat impunity, make amends to the victims
and bolster reconciliation efforts.
Similarly, amid efforts to rebuild Iraq, we
underscore Kuwait’s support and willingness to
cooperate, as demonstrated by its hosting of the
International Conference for Reconstruction of Iraq
on 12 to 14 February. We hope that the pledges will
improve the plight of the Iraqi people by prioritizing
their development, stability and prosperity. Nonetheless,

S/PV. 8184

in spite of such progress, we regret that asymmetrical
attacks that claim the lives of innocent civilians still
occur. During the reporting period, at least 108 people
were killed and more than 240 wounded, including
women and children. The plight of more then 1,500
Yazidi women and children still under the control of
Da’esh remains a concern that must be addressed as
soon as possible.
We take note of the electoral calendar adopted
by the Council of Representatives. We hope that the
legislation and legal mechanisms required for the
electoral process in May this year will be developed in
a participatory and inclusive manner by and for Iraqis,
with a view to holding orderly, peaceful and transparent
elections. We believe that we must step up efforts to
ensure the dignified and safe voluntary return of more
than 6 million internally displaced persons, and enable
them to return to their homes, regain control of their
lives and participate freely in the electoral process.
The clearing and removal of explosive remnants
of war is essential, as the security of the population
is indispensable to the process of reconstruction.
Once again, we underscore the efforts of the United
Nations Mine Action Service in Iraq. We call upon the
international community to support its work and unite
efforts to effectively implement resolution 2365 (2017).
With regard to efforts conducted by Iraq to identify
areas where mass graves might be located and to recover
and return Kuwaiti property, we take note of the remains
founds in Basra and Najaf, and we the support role of
the International Committee of the Red Cross. We call
upon the international community to provide support to
build capacity within the Iraqi Government to identify
mass graves and increase and enhance technical skills
for improved forensic testing.
Finally, we encourage the parties involved to
redouble their efforts to deliver tangible results and
give continuity to the process of reconciliation in Iraq
and Kuwait.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš, has just
provided a succinct briefing to update us on the
situation in Iraq and the latest developments there. We
thank him for his briefing and excellent work in Iraq as
Head of UNAMI. Likewise, we congratulate the entire
UNAMI team.

18-045615/11

S/PV.8184

The situation concerning Iraq

As the report of the Secretary-General pursuant
to resolution 2367 (2017) (S/2018/42) highlights, on
9 December last year the Government of Iraq declared
victory over the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). This turn of events put an end to several years
of indescribable indignity committed against the Iraqi
population by this terrorist group, which during its
occupation starting in 2015 came to control two thirds
of the territory of Iraq, committing atrocities of every
stripe, with thousands of deaths, millions of internally
displaced persons, the massive levelling of all types
of infrastructure and the destruction of the economic
fabric of the country.
As this is the first time I have taken the floor on the
situation in Iraq, I would like, on behalf of the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea, on the one hand, to express
our congratulations to the Iraqi Government and the
coalition of forces of the international community
that made the defeat of ISIL and the total liberation
of Iraqi territory possible, and, on the other hand, to
demonstrate to the Government and the people of Iraq
the solidarity of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in
the face of the enormous loss of human life and for all
the atrocities and suffering that group inflicted on the
Iraqi population as a whole. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea also commends the unity of the Iraqi people,
which has greatly contributed to this victory.
Furthermore, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
welcomes the convening in Kuwait of the International
Conference for the Reconstruction of Iraq a few days
ago, with the aim of obtaining the necessary funds to
undertake the reconstruction of the country. In this
regard, we commend Kuwait for its support and the
decisive role it has played in holding this conference,
at which donors pledged to disburse some $30 billion
for the commencement of this reconstruction work. To
this end, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on the
international community to show great solidarity with
the Government of Iraq by supporting it in the arduous
task of completely rebuilding the country.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends and
greatly appreciates the two-year initiative launched
by Secretary-General António Guterres at the donor
conference — the Iraq Recovery and Resilience
Programme — to address the country’s many
challenges. One of these challenges is the persistent
tension between the central Government of Iraq and
the Kurdistan Regional Government, as well as the
constant risk that ISIL may continue to launch attacks
6/11

20/02/2018

such as the one that took place in northern Baghdad
on 13 January. Faced with these situations, we appeal
to the Government and the people of Iraq to remain
united, overcome their differences and remain vigilant,
so that the victory achieved over ISIL is irreversible.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the greatest challenges now facing the Government and
the Iraqi people are the holding of the parliamentary
elections on 12 May and the resolution of the very
worrying humanitarian situation in the country and
the human rights situation, as expressed by Ms. Agnès
Callamard following her visit to Iraq in November
last year and by Ms. Liz Throssell, spokesperson for
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights during the presentation of her report on
15 December 2017.
I conclude by expressing the hope that the
international community in general and the United
Nations in particular will resolutely support the
Government and the people of Iraq in overcoming
all the foregoing challenges, in order to completely
normalize the situation in the country, so that the next
legislative elections can be held in an atmosphere of
peace and unity for all Iraqis.
Mr. Tileuberdi (Kazakhstan): We highly appreciate
the comprehensive update by Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš. Kazakhstan values
highly the efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq aimed at promoting political dialogue
and reconciliation. We also appreciate the efforts of
the entire United Nations system aimed at providing
critical services to the population of Iraq.
We welcome the initiative of the State of Kuwait
aimed at providing financial assistance for the postwar regional reconstruction in Iraq. In this context,
Kazakhstan welcomed the holding in Kuwait of the
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq following its liberation from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) from 12 to 14 February.
The international community’s generous financial
pledges and contributions at that conference, designed
to rebuild Iraq, gives us hope for a better future for the
Iraqi people, who survived terrible adversity during the
recent war.
We support the decision of the Iraqi Government
to hold national and provincial council elections on
12 May, which will help democracy, State-building
processes, consolidation of the Constitution and the
18-04561

20/02/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

introduction of reforms by fully including all ethnic
and religious groups, especially those in the northern
regions of the country. Indeed, reducing violence in the
liberated territories is very significant politically. At
the same time, we call for the participation of all Iraqi
citizens in determining the future of their country,
particularly in the forthcoming parliamentary electoral
campaign and the elections that will follow.
Kazakhstan welcomes the inter-Iraqi agreements to
extend the ceasefire regime until the parties agree on
the joint management of disputed territories, including
border points. We trust that the Government and the
local authorities located in the northern part of the
country will conduct a constructive dialogue that rejects
military action. We stand for more meetings, such as the
one held on 20 January between Haider Al Abadi, Prime
Minister of Iraq, and Nechirvan Barzani, head of the
Regional Government of Iraqi Kurdistan. We consider
very useful and timely the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General’s meetings in January and February
with political leaders in Baghdad and Erbil in order to
bring the positions of the parties closer.
We are heartened to learn that civilian returns
to Iraq’s newly accessible areas continue to increase
since the conclusion of major counter-ISIL military
operations late last year. We are pleased that Mosul, Tal
Afar, Al-Hawija, Akashat, Al-Qaim and Rawah were
liberated from the Islamic State, while western Anbar
province will come completely under Government
control. These trends indicate the need for the counterterrorism mechanisms in Iraq to be enhanced and for
security measures at the borders to be strengthened. We
consider it expedient that, under the leadership of an ad
hoc committee headed by the Prime Minister of Iraq,
the transfer of all weapons arsenals of various small
tribes and other armed groups operating internally
in the country be organized. Accordingly, it is
necessary to disband all armed groups so as to prevent
further internal political conflicts and favour a move
towards stability.
Lastly, we must unhesitatingly endorse and mobilize
support for Special Representative’s commitment to
engaging with all sectors and communities of Iraqi
society in order to advance inclusive political dialogue
even further. Finally, we also need to improve the
delivery of public services, laying the foundations for
Statehood, peace, progress and national development in
a post-1S1L Iraq.

S/PV. 8184

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kuwait for presiding over today’s
meeting and extend our appreciation to Mr. Ján Kubiš
for his briefing on the situation in Iraq.
Peru is closely following developments in Iraq
and welcomes the losses inflicted on Da’esh and its
expulsion from the country. We commend the support
displayed by broad segments of Iraqi society and stress
the importance of international support, in particular
that of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), in attaining this important objective.
Nevertheless, as stated in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/42), there is a need to remain vigilant
as to potential terrorist regroupings and fresh terrorist
attacks. We regret that in November and December
2017 terrorists were able to take more than 60 lives.
We highlight the need to promote the rule of law and to
ensure accountability for the atrocities committed by
Da’esh, in line with resolution 2379 (2017), adopted by
the Council last September.
We support United Nations efforts to facilitate
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil. This new phase
should be strengthened and translate into a fluid,
complementary relationship between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government.
We believe it necessary to continue to strengthen and
sustain peace in all its aspects, which means that we
must rebuild the country and especially strengthen
its institutions, in particular its capacity to defend
itself, provide security and protect the human rights of
its people.
To that end, it is therefore critical that there be
an increase in professional civilian staff across all
regions of the country, which would help the process of
national decentralization. It is also important to tackle
corruption and to promote tolerance and reconciliation,
as well as work towards the socioeconomic development
of the country and the establishment of initiatives
and investment and development projects that offer
opportunities for all Iraqis, especially its young people.
In this connection, we welcome initiatives such as
the United Nations recovery and resilience programme
in support of the national development plan launched
by the Secretary-General, and the recent international
conference convened by Kuwait at which pledges of
$30 billion were made to rebuild Iraq. These initiatives
point to the growing confidence of the international

18-045617/11

S/PV.8184

The situation concerning Iraq

community in the future of the country. We believe,
therefore, that we must continue to build on this so that
we can effectively address the needs of the 3.4 million
persons in highly vulnerable situations and the
3.2 million internally displaced persons.
We eagerly await the national elections slated for
12 May and believe it is key to ensure that all citizens
participate, especially women and youth, and that
internally displaced persons can vote too. We must
ensure the credibility and transparency of the process
and of the technology to be used.
In all of the areas I mentioned, UNAMI must
continue to provide advice and assistance to the
Government and the people of Iraq. Peru supports the
recommendations made by the external advisory team,
which recently proposed a new operational framework
and a more efficient use of the Mission’s resources that
is commensurate with its functions.
We therefore support the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ján Kubiš and
his entire team. My country continue to follow closely
the Iraqi process, which we believe will continue on
this path, which has enabled it to overcome the Da’esh
terrorist threat.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes, like other speakers, to thank Mr. Ján
Kubiš, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), for his high-quality briefing on the
situation in Iraq.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the proclamation by the
Iraqi Government of its army’s victory over the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant after several years of fierce
combat. We further welcome the decisive support of
the international coalition for the Iraqi army, which
made it possible to overcome the Da’esh terrorist group,
which posed a genuine threat to international peace
and security.
My country hopes that the international mobilization
that made possible the rout of the Islamic State in
Iraq will continue so as to support reconstruction and
rebuilding efforts in the country. In this regard, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the holding from 12 to 14 February
of an international conference for the reconstruction
of Iraq and expresses its gratitude to the Kuwaiti
authorities for this laudable initiative.
8/11

20/02/2018

We further welcome the momentum gained
as well as the considerable pledges announced by
States, development funds and other international
non-governmental organizations for the rebuilding and
recovery of Iraq. We applaud in particular the launch
during the conference by the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, of the United Nations recovery
and resilience programme for Iraq and expresses its
support for the nine key areas of action set forth in
the programme.
The time has come for the Iraqi Government, with
the assistance of the international community, to seek
to bring about a lasting peace in the country through
credible democratic institutions and an inclusive
national reconciliation process. My country also is of
the view that everything possible needs to be done to
facilitate the voluntary, safe and dignified return of
displaced persons. This requires expedited efforts to
rebuild in conflict-affected areas and the establishment
of basic administrative and social services.
My delegation is of the view that all stakeholders
in Iraq must, in an atmosphere of calm, set the stage
for the peaceful conduct of inclusive, democratic
legislative elections on 12 May. We welcome the
deployment in Iraq of an electoral needs assessment
mission to assist in priority areas of action where the
United Nations can provide support. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
his good offices vis-à-vis women’s representation and
participation in political and electoral processes and in
the reconciliation efforts under way.
My delegation remains troubled at the security
level by the sporadic asymmetrical attacks staged by
the Da’esh terrorist group, which retains a considerable
capacity to do harm. It exhorts the international
community to support the Iraqi Government so as to
do away with this residual terrorism and provide the
Iraqi people with the conditions for lasting stability
and security.
Côte d’Ivoire also encourages the Iraqi authorities
to launch the security-sector reform programme to
ensure that there are professional security forces who
will respect the rule of law and human rights.
Finally, my delegation calls upon the Iraqi authorities
to duly consider the UNAMI-supported draft law on the
creation of a specialized court for international crimes
committed in Iraq. We also commend the Mission and
encourage the Special Representative to persevere in
18-04561

20/02/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

his efforts to win support for the reconstruction of Iraq
and the strengthening of its institutions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the sisterly State
of Kuwait on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month and to thank it for its
efforts. I also thank the Republic of Kazakhstan for its
efforts during its presidency last month. In addition, I
highly appreciate the efforts deployed by the outgoing
countries Ukraine, Japan, Italy, Egypt, Uruguay and
Senegal. I also wish every success to The State of
Kuwait, the Netherlands, Poland, Peru, Equatorial
Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire. We hope to cooperate with
these countries during their term in the Council to
achieve the common interests of all States Members of
the United Nations.
I wish also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Ján Kubiš,
for his briefing and for the efforts he has undertaken
together with his team.
The security forces of all categories were able to
establish their full dominance on the international IraqiSyrian border, from the Al-Walid border crossing to the
Rabia border crossing, and managed to liberate Mosul
and Ramadi islands and establish full control over all
areas along the border with Syria. The whole of Iraqi
territory has thus been freed from the grip of Da’esh
terrorist factions. Iraq is now at the threshold of a new
phase that will involve implementing comprehensive
Government reforms on the political, economic and
social fronts.
The Government and people pf Iraq would like
to thank all the States that have participated in the
international coalition, particularly the United States
and the European Union countries, as well as all the
friendly countries that were not part of the coalition but
have combated terrorism, supplied Iraq’s security forces
with military and logistical support and worked in
coordination with them while respecting our country’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. These national and
international efforts have achieved historic victory over
those criminal factions.
One of the priorities of the Government of Iraq is
building a lasting peace, which is a challenge that is as

S/PV. 8184

significant as that of guaranteeing our citizens a decent
living. Iraq belongs to the Iraqi people, regardless of
their affiliation or views. The Government has adopted
a national strategy for an interfaith dialogue that is
founded on the principles of civil harmony and fostering
unity among Iraqis which have helped us to achieve a
historic victory against Da’esh terrorist factions.
In order to respond to the Iraqi people’s desire to
succeed in the international campaign to bring Da’esh
to justice for the crimes it has committed in Iraq, in
particular genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, Iraq, through negotiations with the United
Nations Secretariat and with the help of friendly states,
has been able to put together an acceptable mandate that
ensures full respect for its sovereignty and jurisdiction
in the task of collecting criminal evidence for crimes
committed by Da’esh. We hope to see a head appointed
for this team, in accordance with the mandate, and we
call on Member States to provide it with short- and
long-term financial and logistical support.
With the aim of rebuilding our liberated cities
and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals by
2030, which will enable us to significantly improve
our citizens’ daily lives and tackle our development
challenges, the relevant Iraqi authorities, together with
our partners from the international organizations, have
formulated many plans and strategies we need to make
progress in the post-Da’esh phase in Iraq, most important
of which is the national development and poverty
reduction plans 2018-2022, a strategy for eradicating
slums in Iraq, a plan for a social development fund and
a strategy for developing the private sector 2015-2030.
We are also putting together a national framework
document for the reconstruction of liberated cities
2018-2027. Our National Development Plan 20182022 is characterized by including new concepts such
as promoting administrative decentralization; the
revitalization of the private sector; focus on human
capital; economic recovery; investment in the education
and health sectors and the provision of basic services;
the empowerment of women and young people and
of vulnerable groups and their involvement in the
country’s economic life; and job creation for the very
poor and support for small and medium enterprises.
The Iraqi Government expects the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to play a vital
role in establishing mechanisms that will coordinate
the efforts of all United Nations agencies operating in

18-045619/11

S/PV.8184

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq, especially in the areas of assistance, the sharing of
expertise and social and economic capacity-building,
which directly affect our citizens’ daily lives. The
Mission’s work during post-Da’esh phase must respond
to the challenges, circumstances and needs of the Iraqi
people. My Government believes that the Mission can
play a coordinating role focusing on the following
pressing issues: first, promoting good governance,
strengthening administrative institutions, fighting
corruption and improving the country’s economic
growth and diversification; secondly, tackling
environmental issues, addressing sandstorms in Iraq
and providing high-quality essential services; thirdly,
investment in human capital and reducing youth
unemployment; fourthly, delivering humanitarian
assistance to internally displaced persons and enabling
them to return to their liberated cities; and fifthly,
rebuilding cities liberated from Da’esh, assisting the
victims of terrorism and combating violent extremism.
With regard to the report of the independent review,
after studying the summary submitted by the United
Nations pertaining to the team’s recommendations for
the Mission’s new mandate, the Government of Iraq
believes that those recommendations do not distinguish
between the Mission’s political mandate, which permits
it to respond to Iraq’s general needs, and internal
issues that are governed by the provisions of the Iraqi
Constitution and our established laws. For that reason,
Iraq does not support the recommendations related
to the mandate, specifically conflict prevention, the
empowerment of women and minorities, and relations
between the central Government and the Kurdistan
Government. Those recommendations come under the
purview of the Iraqi Government, its constitutional
authorities and its internal affairs.
Iraq was not in a state of conflict. It was a war
that Iraq waged against an international terrorist
organization whose members come from 120 different
States Members of the United Nations, some of which
have helped to finance them. We believe that national
reconciliation should be comprehensive and not limited
to a particular ethnic or religious sector to the detriment
of another. Rather, it should encompass every sector of
society while respecting the Constitution, legal and
judicial system and Iraqi unity.
With regard to the empowerment of women,
the Iraqi Constitution accords women all rights and
ensures their representation in Parliament, where they
hold 25 per cent of seats. In accordance with resolution
10/11

20/02/2018

1325 (2000), our Council of Ministers has created an ad
hoc department for the empowerment of Iraqi women.
We have also established a high commission to promote
Iraqi women’s status that is the national entity involved
in international Iraqi commitments to issues concerning
the empowerment of women, and in follow up with
the relevant national parties. The official authorities
work with international organizations, such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and others,
to establish small enterprises for women and boost their
participation in economic and political life. They issue
recommendations to improve the legal and economic
status of women in Iraq and to provide assistance to
Iraqi women through the social care system which is
financed from the general budget.
Iraq does not support any UNAMI mandate related
to what the report calls “minorities”. Our Constitution
identifies such groups as integral components because
we are racially and religiously a diversified country. All
of our constitutionally recognized components make
up the distinct Iraqi identity. The groups of the Iraqi
components — including Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks,
Sabaean, Feylis, Sunnis and Shiites of Arab, Kurdish
or Turkmen origin — are indigenous peoples that
have built the Iraqi civilization. They are represented
in the general elected Government, which consists of
all components and cares for all specificities. This
Government, since its establishment and under the
aegis of Prime Minister Haider Al Abadi, has sought to
unite the Iraqi people and to ensure their safety and a
decent life on the basis of the rule of law.
Our Government also aspires to rebuild all of our
country’s cities so as to enable its components to live in
harmony together after being liberated from terrorism.
In this regard, Iraq appreciates the role of the United
Nations agencies working in Iraq, especially the United
Nations Development Programme, which, alongside
the relevant Iraqi ministries and authorities, delivers
effective assistance to all liberated areas, thereby
enabling an equal delivery of assistance so as to avoid
discrimination. That also helps to foster hope for the
residents of the liberated areas, all of whom suffered
from the crimes committed by Da’esh.
The Iraqi Government, with the assistance of
partners and international organizations, has managed
to implement programmes for the return of refugees
expelled by Da’esh terrorist factions. They are now
able to return to the liberated cities. The Government
has established an integrated programme to achieve
18-04561

20/02/2018

The situation concerning Iraq

stability, deliver necessary services and preserve
religious and ethnic diversity in those cities, while
securing the State’s exclusive right to possess weapons.
We call on the international community to contribute
to rebuilding the cities that have been destroyed. We
commend the continued commitment of the European
Union to assisting Iraq in the short and long terms by
adopting a special strategy to meet Iraq’s current needs.
The delegation of my country appreciates the
efforts of the Secretariat to honour the requests of the
Independent High Electoral Commission in Iraq and
deliver assistance to strengthen our national capacity.
The Iraqi Council of Representatives has set forth a
timetable for elections to be held on 12 May, seeking
to ensure that it will be a historic day for a modern
Iraq in which Iraqi people participate in the legislative
election process.
In order to build on the democratic political process,
the Iraqi Government intends to ensure the participation
of internally displaced persons in the upcoming
parliamentary elections by securing protection for all
voters and guaranteeing the transparent outcome of the
elections so that they will be deemed successful and
contribute to entrenching democracy and the peaceful
exchange of power.
My delegation thanks the State of sisterly Kuwait
for the efforts it has undertaken with the World Bank
and the European Union, as well as the United Nations
in Iraq, in preparation to host the Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, which was held in Kuwait
from 12 to 14 February. Iraq places great hope on the
outcome of that Conference and its implementation
mechanisms. We are grateful to all States that attended.
The goals of the Conference pertained to investments
and development, based on studies that assess the

S/PV. 8184

damage wrought in Iraq with respect to infrastructure
and the delivery of basic services.
The Government of Iraq reaffirms its commitment
to undertaking greater efforts in order to make progress
on the matters of the disappeared Kuwaiti citizens and
Kuwaiti archives. Our national and joint commissions
are sparing no effort to determine the fate of the
disappeared Kuwaiti persons and others. The Ministry
of Defence, in conjunction with the International
Committee of the Red Cross in Baghdad, has been
conducting field investigations in Shakhat and ‘Ayn
Tamr in Karbala, Salman Pak in Baghdad, Khamisiyah
in Dhi Qar, Salman Road in Al-Muthanna, Al-Razi
Street in Diali and other places. It holds regular meetings
on a quarterly basis with the participation of UNAMI to
inform all stakeholders about recent developments. The
Ministries of Foreign Affairs and of Defence are also
stepping up efforts and are engaged in media campaigns
and field visits to find new witnesses and collect new
information to achieve tangible results and identify the
whereabouts of Kuwaiti detained and missing persons,
including Kuwaiti materials and records to be returned
to Kuwait.
To conclude, we thank Mr. Ján Kubiš, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and his team
for advising the Iraqi Government and conducting the
activities of the Mission with a view to achieving a
united and stable Iraq, free from terrorism. I also thank
the Deputy Special Representative of UNAMI, Ms. Lise
Grande, and we wish her every success.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

18-0456111/11
