A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/182
2 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]
49/182.

Respect for the universal freedom of travel and the
vital importance of family reunification

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are
universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 1/
Stressing that, as stated in the Programme of Action of the
International Conference on Population and Development, held at Cairo from 5
to 13 September 1994, 2/ family reunification of documented migrants is an
important factor in international migration, and that financial remittances by
documented migrants to their countries of origin often constitute a very
important source of foreign exchange and are instrumental in improving the
well-being of relatives left behind,
1.
Calls upon all States to ensure the universally recognized freedom
of travel to all foreign nationals legally residing in their territory;
2.
Reaffirms that all Governments, particularly those of receiving
countries, must recognize the vital importance of family reunification and
promote its integration into their national legislation in order to ensure the
protection of the unity of the families of documented migrants;

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

A/CONF.171/13, chap. I, resolution 1, annex.

95-77071

/...

A/RES/49/182
Page 2

3.
Calls upon all States to allow, in conformity with national
legislation, the free flow of financial remittances by foreign nationals
residing in their territory to their relatives in the country of origin;
4.
Also calls upon all States to discourage and reverse legislation
that adversely affects the family reunification of documented migrants and the
transfer of financial remittances;
5.
Requests the Commission on Human Rights to consider this issue at
its fifty-first session.
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
