4

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

non-weapons purposes under effective international
control;
( c) The reduction of stocks of nuclear weapons
through a programme of transfer, on an equitable and
reciprocal basis and under international supervision,
of stocks of fissionable material from weapons uses to
non-weapons uses;
( d) The reduction of armed forces and armaments
through adequate, safeguarded arrangements ;
( e) The progressive establishment of open inspection with ground and aerial components to guard
against the possibility of surprise attack;
(f) The joint study of an inspection system designed to ensure that the sending of objects through
outer space shall be exclusively for peaceful and scientific purposes ;
2. Requests the Disarmament Commission to reconvene its Sub-Committee as soon as feasible for
this purpose ;
3. Requests the Disarmament Commission to invite
its Sub-Committee to establish, as one of its first
tasks, a group or groups of technical experts to study
inspection systems for disarmament measures on which
the Sub-Committee may reach agreement in principle
and to report to it within a fixed period ;
4. Recommends that any such technical group or
groups be composed of one expert from each of the
States members of the Sub-Committee and one from
each of three other States Members of the United
Nations which shall be designated by the SecretaryGeneral in consultation with the Sub-Committee;
5. Invites the States concerned, and particularly
those which are members of the Sub-Committee, to
consider the possibility of devoting, out of the funds
made available as a result of disarmament, as and when
sufficient progress is made, additional resources to the
improvement of living conditions throughout the world
and especially in the less developed countries ;
6. Requests the Sub-Committee to report to the Disarmament Commission by 30 April 1958 on the progress achieved.
716th plenary meetin_q,
14 November 1957.
1149 (XII). Collective action to inform and
enlighten the peoples of the world as to the
dangers of the armaments race, and particularly as to the destructive effects of
modern weapons
The General Assembly,
Considering that the armaments race, owing to advances of nuclear science and other modern forms of
technology, creates means whereby unprecedented devastation might be inflicted upon the entire world, and
that peoples of all countries should be made to realize
this,
Considering that any agreement, whether partial or
general, on the regulation of armaments necessarily implies adequate international control,
Considering consequently that public opinion must
be made aware both of the effects of modern weapons
of all kinds and of the necessity of reaching a disarmament agreement providing effective measures of
control,
Considerin.o that it is therefore desirable to seek ways
and means of organizing an effective and continuing

publicity campaign on a world-wide scale, under the
auspices of the United Nations and disregarding all
ideological or political considerations,
1. Requests the Disarmament Commission to make
recommendations on the nature of the information
to be disseminated and requests the Secretary-General
to report to the Commission on the means available
for conducting such an international campaign;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Disarmament Commission whatever assistance it may
request for this purpose ;
3. Invites Member States to communicate to the
Disarmament Commission or to the Secretary-General
in good time any views they may see fit to submit as
to the scope and content of the proposed campaign.

716th plenary meeting,
14 November 1957.
1150 (XII). Enlargement of the membership of
the Disarmament Commission1

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 502 (VI) of 11 January
1952 establishing the Disarmament Commission,
1. Decides to enlarge the Disarmament Commission
by the addition of fourteen Member States which, for
the first year, from 1 January 1958 to 1 January 1959
shall be: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Burma,
Czechoslovakia, Egypt, India, Italy, Mexico, Norway,
Poland, Tunisia and Yugoslavia;
2. Transmits to the Disarmament Commission the
records of the proceedings of the First Committee during the twelfth session of the General Assembly at
which disarmament was discussed.
719th plenary meeting,
19 November 1957.
1180 (XII). The Korean question

The General Assembly,
Having received and noted the report of the United
Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea,2
Recalling its resolutions 195 (III) of 12 December
1948, 498 (V) of 1 February 1951, 811 (IX) of 11
December 1954, 910 (X) of 29 November 1955 and
1010 (XI) of 11 January 1957,
Noting that the Armistice Agreement of 27 July
19538 remains in effect,
1. Reaffirms that the objectives of the United
Nations are to bring about by peaceful means the
establishment of a unified, independent and democratic Korea under a representative form of government,
and the full restoration of international peace and security in the area;
1
This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assembly after consideration of
the report of the First Gommittee. For the text of the report,
see Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, a,genda item 24, document A/37'19.
• Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. 13 (A/3672).
• 0 fficial Records of the Security Council, Eighth Year, Supplement for July, August and September 1953, document S/3079,
appendix A.

5

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

2. Urges that continuing efforts be made to this
end;
3. Calls upon the communist authorities concerned
to accept the established United Nations objectives in
order to achieve a settlement in Korea based on the
fundamental principles for unification set forth by
the nations participating on behalf of the United
Nations in the Korean Political Conference held at
Geneva in 1954, and reaffirmed by the General Assembly;
4. Requests the United Nations Commission for the
Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea to continue its
work in accordance with the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to place the Korean question on the provisional agenda of the thirteenth session of the General Assembly.

724th plenary meeting,
29 November 1957.

1184 (Xll). The question of Algeria4
The General Assembly,
Having discussed the question of Algeria,
Recalling its resolution 1012 (XI) of 15 February
1957,
1. Expresses again its concern over the situation
in Algeria;
2. Takes note of the offer of good offices made
by His Majesty the King of Morocco and His Excellency the President of the Republic of Tunisia;
3. Expresses the 'Wi,sh that, in a spirit of effective
co-operation, pourparlers will be entered into, and
• This resolution was submitted directly in plenary meeting
and adopted by the General Assemhly after consideration of
the report of the First Committee. For the text of the. report,
see 'Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 59, document A/3772.

other appropriate means utilized, with a view to a solution, in conformity with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.

726th plenary meeting,
10 December 1957.

1236 (XII). Peaceful and neighbourly relation!!
among States
The General Assembly,
Considering the urgency and the importance of
strengthening international peace and of developing
peaceful and neighbourly relations among States irrespective of their divergences or the relative stages
and nature of their political, economic and social development,
Recalling that among the fundamental objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations are the maintenance of international peace and security and friendly
co-operation among States,
Realizing the need to promote these objectives and
to develop peaceful and tolerant relations among States,
in conformity with the Charter, based on mutual respect
and benefit, non-aggression, respect for each other's
sovereignty, equality and territorial integrity and nonintervention in one another's internal affairs, and to
fulfil the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Recognizing the need to broaden international cooperation, to reduce tensions and to settle differences
and disputes among States by peaceful means,
Calls upon all States to make every effort to strengthen international peace, and to develop friendly and cooperative relations and settle disputes by peaceful
means as enjoined in the Charter of the United Nations and as set forth in the present resolution.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
