Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

10. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Im-

plementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, appropriate measures for the co-ordination of the policies
and activities of the specialized agencies in implementing the relevant General Assembly resolutions;
11. Invites the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to assist the specialized agencies
and international institutions concerned in working out
appropriate measures for implementing the present
resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
( b) To obtain and transmit to the Special Committee for its consideration information on the action
taken by the specialized agencies and international
institutions concerned in accordance with the provisions
of the present resolution;

12. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
examine the question and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session.

I 831 st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
2556 (XXIV). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2423 (XXIII) of 18 December 1968,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training
facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories16 under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX)
of 22 November 1954,
1. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;

2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to

inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;

3. Reaffirms its resolution 2423 (XXIII) with
respect to the granting of scholarships to inhabitants of
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Invites the administering Powers concerned to
provide all the necessary facilities to enable students
to avail themselves of offers by Member States of study
and training facilities;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present
resolution.

1831st plenary meeting,
12 December 1969.
111 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda items 63,
70 and 71, document A/7744.

71

2557 (XXIV). United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2349 (XXII) of 19 December 1967 by which the special educational and training
programmes for South West Africa, the special training
programme for Territories under Portuguese administration and the educational and training programme for South Africans were consolidated and
integrated, and its resolution 2431 (XXIII) of 18
December 1968 by which, inter alia, the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to establish
an advisory committee of Member States to assist him,
among other things, in strengthening and expanding
the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, rn
Recalling paragraph 14 of its resolution 2507
(XXIV) of 21 November 1969 concerning the question
of Territories under Portuguese administration, in which
it invited the Secretary-General to develop and expand
training programmes for the inhabitants of those
Territories, and the relevant section of the report of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, 17
Noting that, although the financial situation has improved during 1969, available funds are still far from
adequate to meet the objectives of the Programme,
Welcoming the establishment of the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa 18 in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 2431 (XXIII),
Strongly convinced that the provision of assistance
for the education and training of persons from the
Territories concerned is essential and that it is therefore
desirable further to strengthen and expand the Programme,
l. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
contributed to the United Nations Educational and
Training Programme for Southern Africa;
2. Appeals anew to all States, organizations and
individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee on the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa within the terms of paragraph 2 of General
Assembly resolution 2431 (XXIII), to take all possible
measures for the promotion of adequate contributions
to the Programme;
4. Decides that, as a further transitional measure,
provision shall be made, under section 12 of the regular
budget for the financial year 1970, for an amount of
$100,000 to ensure the continuity of the Programme
pending the receipt of adequate voluntary contributions;
16 Ibid., document A/7735.
17 Ibid., Twenty-fourth Ses.fion,

Supplement No. 24 (Al
7624/Rev.l ), paras. 49-56.
18 The Ad:>isory Committee is composed of representatives
of the following Member Sta~es: Ca!1ada, Dem~cratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, India, Umted Republic of Tanzania,
Venezuela and Zambia (see Official Records of thP General
Assembly, Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda items 63.
70 and 71, document A/7496).
