United Nations

A/RES/70/227

General Assembly

Distr.: General
1 March 2016

Seventieth session
Agenda items 126, 127 and 128

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2015
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/70/L.39)]

70/227. International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January and 31 December 1994
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the letter dated 22 December 2015 from the President of the
Security Council to the President of the General Assembly drawing the attention of
the President of the Assembly to the text of Council resolution 2256 (2015) of
22 December 2015, 1
1.
Welcomes the completion of the judicial work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genoc ide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994, following delivery of its last judgement, on
14 December 2015, and the impending closure of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda set for 31 December 2015;
2.
Acknowledges the substantial contribution of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda to the process of national reconciliation and the restoration of
peace and security, and to the fight against impunity and the development of
international criminal justice, especially in relation to the crime of genocide;
_______________
1

A/70/661.

15-16981 (E)

*1516981*

Please recycle

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide
and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

A/RES/70/227

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

3.
Reiterates its request to the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 to complete its
work and facilitate the closure of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia as expeditiously as possible, with the aim of completing the transition to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and expresses its
continued concern over repeated delays in the conclusion of the work of the
Tribunal, in the light of Security Council resolution 1966 (2010) of 22 December
2010, in which the Council requested the Tribunal to complete its trial and appeals
proceedings by 31 December 2014;
4.
Underlines that States should cooperate fully with the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as well as with the International Residual
Mechanism;
5.
Decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent and ad
litem judges at the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, who are
members of the Trial Chambers and the Appeals Chamber, until 31 March 2016 or
until the completion of the cases to which they have been or will be assigned, if
sooner:
Mr. Jean-Claude Antonetti (France)
Mr. Melville Baird (Trinidad and Tobago)
Mr. O-gon Kwon (Republic of Korea)
Ms. Flavia Lattanzi (Italy)
Mr. Howard Morrison (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland)
Mr. Mandiaye Niang (Senegal)
6.
Also decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent
judge at the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, who is a member of
the Appeals Chamber, until 30 June 2016 or until the completion of the cases to
which he has been or will be assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Koffi Kumelio A. Afande (Togo)
7.
Further decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent
and ad litem judges at the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, who are
members of the Trial Chambers, until 31 October 2016 or until the completion of the
cases to which they have been or will be assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Guy Delvoie (Belgium)
Mr. Burton Hall (Bahamas)
Mr. Antoine Kesia-Mbe Mindua (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
8.
Decides to extend the term of office of the following permanent judges at
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, who are members of the Trial
Chambers and the Appeals Chamber, until 31 December 2016 or until the
completion of the cases to which they have been or will be assigned, if sooner:
Mr. Carmel A. Agius (Malta)
Mr. Christoph Flügge (Germany)
Mr. Liu Daqun (China)

2/5

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide
and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

A/RES/70/227

Mr. Theodor Meron (United States of America)
Mr. Bakone Melema Moloto (South Africa)
Mr. Alphonsus Martinus Maria Orie (Netherlands)
Mr. Fausto Pocar (Italy)
9.
Also decides to reappoint Mr. Serge Brammertz as Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, notwithstanding the provisions of
article 16, paragraph 4, of the statute of the Tribunal related to the length of office
of the Prosecutor, for a term with effect from 1 January 2016 until 31 December
2016, which is subject to an earlier termination by the Security Council upon the
completion of the work of the Tribunal;
10. Renews its call upon the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia,
in the light of Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), to redouble its efforts to
review its projected case completion dates with a view to shortening them as
appropriate, and to prevent any additional delays;
11. Requests the Office of Internal Oversight Services to carry out an
evaluation of the methods and work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, in the context of the implementation of the completion strategy pursuant
to resolution 1966 (2010), and to submit its report by 1 June 2016, and requests the
Tribunal to report thereafter on the implementation of any recommendations of the
Office in the next biannual report to the Security Council of its President and
Prosecutor on progress towards implementation of the completion strategy of the
Tribunal;
12. Commends those States that have accepted the relocation to their
territories of acquitted or convicted persons who have completed serving their
sentences, and reiterates its call upon all States to cooperate with and render all
necessary assistance to the International Residual Mechanism with respect to
increased efforts towards the relocation of acquitted or convicted persons who have
completed serving their sentences;
13. Urges all States, especially States where fugitives are suspected to be at
large, to intensify their cooperation with and render all necessary assistance to the
International Residual Mechanism, in particular to achieve the arrest and surrender
as soon as possible of all remaining fugitives indicted by the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda;
14. Urges the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
transfer Mr. Ladislas Ntaganzwa for trial without delay or conditions;
15. Urges the International Residual Mechanism to continue to monitor the
cases of Mr. Laurent Bucyibaruta, Mr. Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, Mr. Jean
Uwinkindi and Mr. Bernard Munyagishari, which were referred to national
jurisdictions;
16. Emphasizes that, in view of the substantially reduced nature of the
residual functions, the International Residual Mechanism was established to be a
small, temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and size would diminish
over time, with a small number of staff commensurate with its reduced functions,
and, recognizing in this regard the full commitment to these elements expressed by
the Mechanism, urges the Mechanism to continue to be guided by them in its
activities;
3/5

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide
and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

A/RES/70/227

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

17. Welcomes the report of the International Residual Mechanism 2 and the
supplementary information submitted by the Mechanism to the Security Council
pursuant to the statement by the President of the Council of 16 November 2015, 3 for
the purpose of reviewing the progress of the work of the Mechanism, including in
completing its functions, as required in paragraph 17 of resolution 1966 (2010);
18. Takes note of the work of the International Residual Mechanism to date,
in particular the development of a legal and regulatory framework, procedure s and
working practices consistent with the statute of the Mechanism 4 and drawing on
lessons learned from and best practices of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and other tribunals,
including its implementation of the double-hatting of personnel, use of rosters to
ensure that judges and staff are utilized only when required, enabling judges and
staff to work remotely to the maximum extent possible, and minimizing the need for
full-bench participation in pretrial and pre-appeal hearing-related work, in order to
produce substantial reductions in the costs of judicial activities compared with those
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and commends the Mechanism on its efforts to
produce such reductions;
19. Also takes note of the views on and the recommendations made with
regard to the work of the International Residual Mechanism by the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals, as reflected in the present
resolution, and requests the Mechanism to take into account those views and
implement those recommendations, and to continue to take steps, such as those
referred to in paragraph 18 above, to further enhance efficiency and effective and
transparent management, in particular full implementation of the outstanding
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services; production of more
focused projections of completion timelines and disciplined adherence theret o,
including by making the best use of the diverse approaches of common law and civil
law systems; enhancement of the geographical diversity and gender balance of staff,
while ensuring continued professional expertise; implementation of a human
resources policy consistent with its temporary mandate; and further reduction of
costs, including through, but not limited to, flexible staff engagement;
20. Requests the International Residual Mechanism to include in the biannual
reports to the Security Council information on progress achieved in implementing
the present resolution, as well as detailed information on the staffing of the
Mechanism, respective workload and related costs, with breakdown by division, and
detailed projections of the duration of residual functions based on available data;
21. Takes note of the conclusion of the review by the Security Council of the
progress of the work of the International Residual Mechanism, including in
completing its functions, during its initial period, pursuant to re solution
1966 (2010);

_______________
2

S/2015/896.
S/PRST/2015/21.
4
Security Council resolution 1966 (2010), annex 1.
3

4/5

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide
and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

A/RES/70/227

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

22. Recalls, with a view to strengthening independent oversight of the
International Residual Mechanism, that, as set out in the statement by the President
of the Security Council of 16 November 2015, future reviews carried out pursuant to
paragraph 17 of resolution 1966 (2010) shall include evaluation reports sought from
the Office of Internal Oversight Services with respect to the methods and work of
the Mechanism;
23. Encourages the International Residual Mechanism and the Government
of Rwanda to collaborate on matters related to the legacy of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda with respect to reconciliation and justice in Rwanda,
including in respect of access to archives.
82nd plenary meeting
23 December 2015

5/5
