S/PV.8630

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8630th meeting

Thursday, 3 October 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Matjila/Mr. Mabhongo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(South Africa)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2019/783)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-30031 (E)
*1930031*

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.

overture was welcomed by all of the Heads of State I
met in the region, who assured me of their commitment
to supporting the momentum in cooperation. In that
regard, tripartite and quadripartite meetings, held
thanks to the good offices of the Congolese President
and the Angolan President, led to a rapprochement
between Uganda and Rwanda, with the signing of a
memorandum of understanding between those two
brotherly countries.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region
(S/2019/783)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Huang Xia,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/783, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Huang Xia.
Mr. Huang Xia (spoke in French): I have the honour
to brief the Security Council on the report (S/2019/783)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I begin my statement with a hint of optimism
because the Great Lakes region is, more than ever,
firmly committed to its path towards stability.
Significant steps have been taken in the implementation
of the Framework agreement, thanks in particular
to the peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the restated willingness of
the region’s leaders to face together the challenges that
hinder its development.
After taking up office, Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
pledged to work closely with his peers to restore peace
and security in the east of the country. That diplomatic
2/19

03/10/2019

I would like to commend here the Government
of Uganda and the Government of Rwanda for their
commitment to easing tensions and restoring brotherly
cooperation between them. I must also commend
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for their determination to promote dialogue and the
peaceful resolution of disputes among the countries
of the region. I call on the Council to encourage the
continuation of those efforts.
The desire for cooperation in the area of security
has recently led to consultations among the security
and defence services of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and those of neighbouring countries, in
particular Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda, held with
a view to strengthening their cooperation in fighting
armed groups operating in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those initiatives underline the
relevance of a holistic regional approach to addressing
the security threat.
Given the observations I have made thus far, I can
assure members that there is considerable opportunity
to address the root causes of insecurity. Enhancing
regional cooperation is therefore of the utmost
importance to enable people to benefit from their
region’s wealth. To that end, development programmes
must be strengthened and regional integration improved.
It is by understanding the correlation between peace
and security that are guaranteed, on one hand, and
development and prosperity that are more evenly
distributed, on the other, that the region will succeed in
changing its current approach, which remains focused
on conflict management. Indeed, many challenges
remain. The insecurity caused by the presence and
activism of foreign and local armed groups in the east
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains a
major concern. Moreover, the illegal exploitation of,
and trade in, natural resources fuel an illegal economy
that sustains those armed groups.
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Forced population displacements caused by
insecurity remain frequent. In addition, greater efforts
are needed to protect and promote human rights in order
to ensure greater justice, equality and respect for the
dignity of individuals. In that regard, allow me to share
with the Council some initiatives led by my Office,
together with the other guarantors of the Framework
agreement, to support the signatory countries.
With regard to security cooperation for the
purposes of neutralizing negative forces, the guarantors
of the Framework agreement, together with the national
monitoring mechanism in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, facilitate consultations among the heads of
the intelligence services of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Uganda, Rwanda and Tanzania.
That initiative is a follow-up to the guidelines of
the most recent summit of the Regional Monitoring
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region and seeks to strengthen the climate
of trust and promote a common approach in the fight
against foreign armed groups operating in the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In that context, my Office has undertaken
consultations with the countries concerned on the
issue of non-military measures that could complement
military operations. Although the military option
remains crucial, complementary programmes must
be put in place, with the support of the international
community, to facilitate the voluntary disarmament,
repatriation and reintegration of those groups in their
countries of origin, as well as the rehabilitation of
affected communities.
Furthermore, cross-border projects that create
employment for young people must be implemented.
Regional cooperation and integration are being
revitalized. The Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda have expressed their
interest in initiating a political conversation on the
issue of natural resources, with a view to using them
as a springboard for bringing about shared prosperity.
My Office is also supporting preparations for the
second iteration of the Great Lakes Investment and
Trade Conference, to be held in Kigali in March 2020.
The Rwandan President, Mr. Paul Kagame, assured
me of his firm commitment to holding the Conference.
I call on the members of the Council to support that

S/PV. 8630

initiative, which will enable highlighting the role of the
private sector in the search for lasting peace.
Judicial cooperation and the fight against impunity
have been strengthened thanks to the adoption of the
Nairobi Declaration on Justice and Good Governance
by the Ministers of Justice of the Great Lakes region in
May. Follow-up measures were undertaken to ensure
their implementation, including by the strengthening
judicial cooperation among the signatory countries.
Promoting the role of women, youth and civil
society is one of my priorities. In partnership with UNWomen, the African Union, FemWise-Africa and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, my
Office is leading joint solidarity and advocacy missions
to encourage women’s participation in decision-making
bodies and political and peace processes, as well as a
definitive rejection of the culture of impunity, above all
with regard to gender-based violence.
My Office is also working closely with civil
society for a concerted and inclusive approach towards
bringing peace and development of the region. To
that end, consultations between the guarantors of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework and
civil society took place in Nairobi in September and
led to recommendations for improving civil society’s
involvement in political processes and the achievement
of gender parity.
It is fitting to note that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo will succeed Uganda at the helm the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region and that the next summit
of the Mechanism will be held in Kinshasa.
There is more hope than ever, and we must redouble
our efforts to support the region on the path it has
embarked upon towards positive change.
In conclusion, I thank Council members for their
valuable guidance dating back to the very beginning
of my mandate. I duly remain at their disposal so that
together we can support the countries of the region
in their drive towards achieving lasting peace and
shared prosperity.
The President: I thank Mr. Huang Xia for
his briefing.
I would to acknowledge the presence of the
members of Committee of Experts of African Union

19-300313/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Peace and Security Council and welcome them in the
Chamber today.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank Mr. Huang Xia very much for
his briefing.
For several months, the Great Lakes region has seen
a new dynamic, energized by President Tshisekedi and
the support of President Lourenço and the commitment
of Presidents Museveni and Kagame. Such resolve
to reduce insecurity has already allowed for tangible
progress. The meetings held in Kinshasa on 31 May
and in Luanda on 12 July and 21 August led to the
signing of a memorandum of understanding between
Rwanda and Uganda intended to improve their political
and economic relations. The decision of the Southern
African Development Community to strengthen its
cooperation with the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region is also a part of that momentum.
The situation in the region, however, continues
to be unfortunately all too often characterized by the
tensions and insecurity that have been on the rise over
the past months in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It has also been characterized
by the deteriorating humanitarian situation and the
forced displacement of populations. Foreign armed
groups and various militias are carrying out illicit and
criminal activities in violation of the most basic rights.
We commend the continuous efforts in the eastern part
of the country by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which faces that situation on a daily basis.
In his effort to address those challenges, I commend
the announcements made by President Tshisekedi with
regard to combating impunity, improving the capacities
of the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo and managing natural resources. I hope
that those announcements will soon be translated into
action, and I encourage the neighbouring countries to
implement similar initiatives.
The development of good-neighbourly relations
and the strengthening of border cooperation are vital
to achieving the shared goal of bringing peace to the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is necessary to address the root causes of regional
instability at the same time, first by stopping all forms
4/19

03/10/2019

of trafficking and the efforts of those who finance
them, and developing economic opportunities based
on the legal and beneficial use of natural resources for
all, with a view to achieving genuine development of
the region.
Those root causes must also be addressed
by encouraging a reconciliation process among
communities so that everyone can enjoy their civil
and political rights, as well as economic opportunities,
including fair access to land; by supporting the fight
against impunity and respect for human rights — as
Mr. Huang Xia said earlier — as well as by maintaining
full humanitarian access to ensure the provision of
assistance to those most vulnerable; by addressing land
conflict resolutions to allow for peaceful co-existence
among the various communities; and by implementing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
for armed groups to allow for the effective reintegration
of former combatants within their countries and
their communities.
Such mechanisms have been initiated for the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and
the Mouvement du 23 mars. Progress has been made,
which France commends, and it must lead to its
natural conclusion. In Ituri the process began with
the Congolese group known as the Force de résistance
patriotique de l’Ituri. That is encouraging, and the
process must be rapidly pursued in order to avoid any
relapse into conflict. Time is not on our side.
In other instances it will require a combination of
military and police action underpinned by incentives
for demobilization and cooperation among countries of
the region. The handing over of Rwandan rebels by the
Burundian authorities to the Kigali authorities in April
represents such an example.
Lastly, we must respond decisively to the
humanitarian and health crisis affecting hundreds of
thousands of people in the region owing to conflicts
and the Ebola, malaria, measles and cholera epidemics.
In that regard, France calls on all international partners
to take action to respond to the latter. Only 30 per cent
of the funds required for the humanitarian response
plan for the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
been provided. That is grossly inadequate.
The Special Envoy of the Secretary-General has a
crucial role to play in all of those aspects through his
support for the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Republic of the Congo and the Region and its Oversight
Mechanism. France reassures him of its full support,
as well as reaffirms its solidarity with the Great Lakes
region and its support for reconciliation and regional
development. France will remain faithful to the
commitment made in 2013. We share the common goal to
help forge long-term regional stability. We stand ready
to work with the region to overcome current challenges.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): First of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Huang Xia for his first briefing to the Security Council.
I would like to focus on three key points.
First, I will focus on economic development as a
key factor. As the Special Envoy rightly underscored,
development and economic cooperation are important
drivers of peace and development in the Great Lakes
region, as elsewhere, provided that they are based on
respect for human rights and the environment. That
priority, which we also fully support, has been reiterated
numerous times by the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo himself. This also requires the
creation of a level playing field for investments and
economic opportunities in the region. The activities
and reforms undertaken to address corruption must be
sustained, and there must be increased transparency
in the financial and mining sectors, for instance,
which would make it possible, among other things,
to encourage international financial institutions to
re-engage.
Secondly, our most important message — important
because it underpins success in all other areas — concerns
the security, political, humanitarian and human rights
situation in the Great Lakes region. We welcome
the new regional momentum, driven in large part by
Presidents Tshilombo Tshisekedi and Lourenço. Of
course, while the overall situation in the Great Lakes
region remains a subject of concern and deserves our
full attention, the latest regional initiatives have the
potential to substantially tip the balance in the fight
against the various armed groups.
On another track, we hope that future presidential,
legislative and local elections in Burundi will be
credible, transparent and inclusive, and place in a
peaceful atmosphere in which the rights and security of
all political actors are guaranteed.
Turning to humanitarian issues, the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2019/783) is particularly

S/PV. 8630

worrying. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we remain concerned by conflicts among communities
in Djugu, Mahagi and Irumu. Nor must we forget that
aside from the Ebola epidemic, which continues to
afflict the region, malaria and cholera are still claiming
many lives. We also continue to pay close attention to
the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
stated, respect for human rights and the restoration of
the rule of law are essential.
It is worrying to note that many incidents of sexual
violence — 41 per cent, according to the most recent
report — continue to be attributed to State actors. This
only strengthens our conviction that professionalizing
the security forces and combating impunity must
remain priorities. President Tshilombo Tshisekedi’s
proactive approach is creating a better environment for
carrying out the reforms that have long been awaited by
the Congolese population in this particularly important
area. This proactive attitude, which has included
several preliminary measures, should be encouraged
and supported by the international community so that
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
can continue their efforts with determination. The
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
as mandated by the Council, has a role to play here and
will remain crucial in this respect.
My third point concerns strategic thinking on the
Great Lakes region. Before the end of the year, we will
focus on the future of MONUSCO, while elections
in Burundi are planned for next year. It will be vital
to devise, as quickly as possible, a United Nations
approach to the Great Lakes region — a concerted
approach that provides even greater coherence and that
will be decidedly forward-looking.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful for the holding of this briefing
and congratulates Mr. Huang Xia, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
for his outstanding briefing on the implementation of
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
the implementation of political processes in certain
countries of the Great Lakes region, in particular the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the
Central African Republic. In the Democratic Republic

19-300315/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

03/10/2019

of the Congo, my country welcomes also the setting up
of national institutions in the wake of the most recent
elections, specifically the Parliament, as well as the
appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation
of the new Government. It urges the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue along
this path through the implementation of the Government
programme that was adopted on 6 September by the
Parliament in order to meet the pressing needs of
the population.

Concerning the health sector, my country remains
alarmed by the spread of the Ebola virus, which,
despite the stepped-up efforts of the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the international
community, remains a threat to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the broader region. In that respect,
we call for ongoing support from all stakeholders to
tackle this disease and strengthen preventive measures
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
well as on the borders with neighbouring countries.

Concerning Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire takes note
of the advanced state of the preparations under way
for the 2020 elections and encourages all Burundian
stakeholders to re-engage in a political dialogue and to
pool their efforts in order to ensure the holding in 2020
of inclusive, credible and peaceful elections.

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would recall that the
Addis Ababa agreement represents the cornerstone of
lasting peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region. It therefore
urges the countries of the region that are signatories to
the agreement to strengthen their cooperation in various
sectors of common interest in order to collectively
meet the ongoing security, health and humanitarian
challenges facing the region.

Regarding the Central African Republic, my
delegation welcomes the formation of an inclusive
Government and of the progressive restoration of State
authority in the interior of the country following the
signing on 6 February of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation. We call upon all signatories
to that agreement to respect their commitments by fully
implementing all the provisions of the agreement in
order to bring about stability and the strengthening of
peace in the country.
These positive signs lead us to hope that the
effective implementation of the Addis Ababa
Framework agreement by all stakeholders will make a
significant contribution to the restoration of peace and
stability as well as to development in the countries of
the region. However, this headway must not cause us to
lose sight of the security, humanitarian and health-care
challenges facing the Great Lakes region, particularly
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On the security front, my delegation remains
concerned by the continued activities of armed groups,
which are destabilizing the provinces of the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and forcing
the civilian population to flee to safer areas, thus
exacerbating the humanitarian crisis in the country.
We call on the countries of the region and international
partners to further support the initiatives of the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
aimed at neutralizing negative forces and stabilizing
that part of the country.
6/19

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Huang Xia for
his briefing.
The Dominican Republic commends the progress
that has been made in the implementation of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, and we also very
much welcome the positive progress that we are seeing
in the region, particularly in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo following the peaceful transition of power
and the formation of the new Government.
We have seen progress in terms of the representation
of women and the forging of new commitments to
regional cooperation and integration. We also very
much welcome the fact that in the Sudan an agreement
was reached between the Transitional Military Council
and the opposition coalition, Forces for Freedom
and Change, to establish a civilian-led transitional
Government with African Union mediation.
We are concerned about the fragile security
situation, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, where armed groups continue to intensify
their attacks against the civilian population, the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
resulting in the death of hundreds of civilians, including
women and children.
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Such activities have a negative impact on peace
and stability across borders and throughout the region.
We therefore urge the affected countries to combine
their efforts to dismantle armed groups, control the
illegal trafficking in natural resources and eradicate
the illegal trade in arms and ammunition. Development
plans that include young people affected by armed
conflict are needed in order to develop their skills
and meet labour demands by providing relevant
educational opportunities.
The climate of insecurity adds to the worrying
humanitarian situation. We note with great dismay the
increasing number of refugees, asylum seekers and
internally displaced persons. The millions of internally
displaced persons and refugees in South Sudan
and other countries of the region registered during
the reporting period highlight the need to continue
encouraging positive developments in the political
situation in the region. In the case of Burundi, while
some 75,000 refugees have returned to their homes, the
400,000 Burundian refugees dispersed in the region are
of great concern.
We believe in the importance of convening
the upcoming Great Lakes Investment and Trade
Conference, with a focus on cross-border investment
as a critical enabler for economic integration and
sustainable development, as well as the steps taken
towards economic development.
A joint review of problems and opportunities is
needed to address the existing challenges. It should
focus on achieving regional solutions through dialogue
and cooperation by fulfilling the commitments made
in support of peace, security and socioeconomic
development in the Great Lakes region.
In conclusion, we highlight the role played by the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region and MONUSCO, among others,
through their efforts and cooperation in pursuit of
peaceful and stable coexistence in the region.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Envoy Huang Xia for his briefing. The
Great Lakes region is located at the heart of the African
continent. It has abundant resources, vast territories and
huge development potential. The Great Lakes region
has long been plagued by discontent and conflict,
a difficult security situation, a lack of development
and a grim humanitarian outlook. Recently, thanks to

S/PV. 8630

the joint efforts of the international community and
countries of the region, the Great Lakes region has
made many positive developments in its political and
security situation. We are encouraged by that.
The new Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo smoothly completed its formation. Since
assuming office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi has
actively sought to improve relations with countries in
the region, which has given new momentum to regional
cooperation. The situation in Burundi has remained
calm. Active preparations for the general elections in
May 2020 are under way.
The President of South Sudan, Mr. Kiir Mayardit,
recently met opposition leader Mr. Machar in Juba,
which laid the groundwork for accelerating the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. A new transitional Government was established
in August and is actively working to achieve economic
development and to relaunch the peace process.
Since the start of his term in April, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General Huang Xia has actively carried
out good offices and made focused visits to countries
in the region, including the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Uganda and Rwanda, to call for
improved relations in the region and to strengthen
regional cooperation and integration process. He has
done a great deal of work to support the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
by the countries of the region. China commends such
work and will continue to support the Special Envoy
and his Office in performing their mandates.
China calls on the countries of the region to
seize the positive momentum that has now emerged
in the region by further consolidating mutual trust,
strengthening cooperation and striving for the early
attainment of peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region. The international community should provide
strong support to that end. China would like to make
three proposals.
First, resolving the humanitarian crisis in the Great
Lakes region is a top priority. Countries in the region,
including the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan and the Central African Republic, face a grave
humanitarian situation, with many displaced persons and
refugees and a serious food crisis. The Ebola epidemic
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has not been

19-300317/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

effectively brought under control and risks spreading
to other countries in the region. At the same time, more
infectious diseases, such as measles and cholera, are also
raging in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
causing a death toll that is even higher than that of the
Ebola epidemic. The international community should
further increase its humanitarian assistance, effectively
honour its assistance commitments, narrow the funding
gap for humanitarian aid and help the countries of the
region to resettle and repatriate displaced persons and
refugees. The Office of the Special Envoy can play a
coordinating role in close cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR).
Secondly, continued efforts should be made to
strengthen cooperation between countries in the region.
Effective communication and cooperation among
the regional countries are the basis and guarantee for
implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. China is pleased to see that, since
assuming office, the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mr. Tshilombo Tshisekedi,
has been actively meeting the country’s specific
commitments under the Framework and working
to enhance cooperation with other countries in the
region. With the assistance of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of Africa
and the ICGLR secretariat, countries of the region have
improved their cooperation and mutual trust in the
security sector. China calls on the United Nations and
the ICGLR to continue to fully leverage their mediation
roles to promote greater coordination and cooperation
on such issues among the countries of the region in
order to achieve the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of the illegal armed groups.
Thirdly, more input is required to achieve
socioeconomic development. Development is the
key to resolving all problems. In the Great Lakes
region, the root causes of such issues are poverty
and underdevelopment and the solution is sustainable
development. The international community should
increase its assistance and investment in countries of the
Great Lakes region in areas such as interconnectivity,
health and education and should help countries in the
region to create jobs and improve people’s livelihoods.
The Office of the Special Envoy is assisting with
preparations for the Great Lakes Investment and
8/19

03/10/2019

Trade Conference scheduled to be held in Rwanda
in November. We believe that it will help to attract
international investment and promote cross-border
trade. China welcomes such an initiative and hopes that
the Office will further promote economic cooperation
among countries in the Great Lakes region, increase
interconnectivity and other infrastructure areas,
promote integration, achieve sustainable economic and
social development and bring about lasting peace in the
Great Lakes region.
China stands ready to work with the rest of the
international community in our continued effort
to contribute to achieving peace, stability and
development in the region as soon as possible. China
will remain committed to strengthening peacebuilding
in the region, actively participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations in the region, providing
military assistance and supporting countries of the
region in advancing their peace processes. China will
remain committed to strengthening capacity-building
for regional development and providing, as best it can,
assistance in infrastructure, agriculture and health care
to promote peace through development. China will
remain committed to promoting the forging of regional
partnerships to help countries in the region strengthen
people-to-people and cultural exchanges. It will build
partnerships that are based on mutual confidence and
collaboration in order to promote peace through culture.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would
like to thank Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region, for
his first briefing, in which he extensively explained
the situation of the Great Lakes in general and the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region in particular.
Despite the progress made in the Great Lakes region,
it continues to face significant challenges with regard
to security, stability and development — including the
activities of armed groups — the illegal exploitation of
natural resources, rape and ethnic and sexual violence
and a large-scale humanitarian crisis affecting millions
of its inhabitants. Many of those challenges are crossborder in nature and require regional cooperation. In
that context, we believe that establishing alliances and
strengthening State structures in the region, as well
as promoting and empowering women, civil society
and the private business sector, is fundamental to the
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

promotion of sustainable development, which will
alleviate poverty, curb frequent migration and famine
and confront armed groups in the region.
We welcome the recent positive developments
in the region. Those include the holding of peaceful
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
peaceful transfer of power, the election of the Prime
Minister and the formation of the new Government,
the steps taken by His Excellency Mr. Antoine Félix
Tshisekedi Tshilombo to open up the political space
and the momentum of the regional dialogue that has
been initiated. Those are all good indicators. The
signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, under
the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, and the signing of the memorandum of
understanding between Uganda and Rwanda in order to
alleviate tensions are two other positive developments.
The current situation and return to normalcy in
Burundi, including the adoption of its new Constitution
and new electoral code, its presidential, legislative
and local elections scheduled for 20 May 2020 and the
decision of His Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza to
fully finance the elections are signs of a strong and
positive political will.
We appreciate the efforts deployed by the authorities
of the Central African Republic, in coordination with
its international partners, in the signing on 6 February
of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation between
the authorities of that country and 14 armed groups
within the framework of the African Union Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic with a view towards an inclusive Government.
We appreciate the efforts of the Central African
Republic to stabilize itself and welcome the efforts of
its Government to mobilize a platform to support the
political process during the presidential and legislative
elections to be held in 2020 and 2021. That constitutes
another step towards achieving reconciliation as well as
future and permanent stability in the country.
We commend the work that the Advisory Board
of the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework is doing to ensure women’s
genuine participation in the political, peace and security
processes in the region. We appreciate the approval by
ministers responsible for gender issues of the regional
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, we must continue to support the
regional efforts undertaken by the Great Lakes Judicial

S/PV. 8630

Cooperation Network to achieve peace and security,
safeguard human rights and fundamental freedoms and
combat impunity. The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its firm commitment to the formal declaration
of the African Union to silence the guns by 2020. That
initiative is outlined in resolution 2457 (2019), which
was preceded by an open debate organized by the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea (see S/PV.8473).
Despite the measures that have been implemented
by the Governments of the Great Lakes region to
address the critical humanitarian situation, we remain
concerned about the large number of forcibly displaced
persons, who remain exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola, all of which require the provision
of adequate technical and financial assistance from the
international community. We condemn the frequent
attacks in the Great Lakes region by illegal armed
groups, both foreign and domestic, as well as the
constant and sporadic clashes with armed forces and
State security, humanitarian personnel and means
of transport and equipment. Those actions violate
international humanitarian law.
Our delegation is confident in the capacity of
the joint efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and regional and subregional organizations to
deal adequately and in a coordinated manner with the
conflicts in the region. We welcome the recent report
(S/2019/759) of the Secretary-General on strengthening
that partnership with regard to issues of peace and
security in Africa. Our delegation deeply appreciates the
renewed political will shown by the leaders of the Great
Lakes region to strengthen ties among their countries,
address differences through trust and dialogue and
investigate cross-border incidents in a constructive
manner in order to advance international cooperation
and integration. We appeal to the African Union,
the International Organization of la Francophonie,
the Southern African Development Community and
international partners to continue to develop synergies
with the member States of the International Conference
of the Great Lakes Region in order to implement of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework agreement
in the region and to take advantage of the current
climate so that the countries of the region, especially
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the
Central African Republic, can be fully involved in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and African
Union Agenda 2063. We would like to conclude by

19-300319/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

congratulating the various United Nations missions and
offices in the Great Lakes region on their hard work.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I would
like to thank Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for the
work he has done to promote peace and security in the
Great Lakes region during his first several months in
that role.
Conflict has plagued the Great Lakes for decades,
but six years following the signing of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, we have seen
some momentum towards solutions to the drivers of
that conflict. The United States is encouraged by that
momentum. We recognize the positive developments
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo following the
historic Democratic elections that were held this past
December. Specifically, we applaud the formation of a
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that embraces new leaders, whom we hope will pave the
way for positive reforms while largely excluding those
who have proven themselves corrupt and unfit.
We also recognize the President’s efforts to
proactively address the long-held grievances of the
Congolese people, improve conditions for foreign
investment and strengthen relationships with
neighbouring countries. Amidst those developments,
we must underscore that the burdens of implementing
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework fall to
all signatory parties, not just the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We are therefore heartened that the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/783) details multiple
efforts of neighbouring countries to engage on issues of
mutual concern — regional commerce, illicit flows of
goods that contribute to corruption and the presence of
armed groups.
We commend the initiative that countries of the
region have shown in working toward lasting peace and
stronger economic ties. With that said, the United States
is deeply concerned by several negative trends outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/783).
Insecurity continues to plague the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, armed groups still benefit from
the mineral trade, especially in gold, and the Allied
Democratic Forces continue indiscriminate attacks on
civilians, peacekeepers and the Congolese military.
Political solutions, security sector reform and the
demobilization of armed groups into civilian life will
10/19

03/10/2019

be critical for future stability. For our part, the United
States will continue to identify opportunities to engage
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on how to attain greater security, peace and
prosperity for the Congolese people.
In Burundi, we remain concerned about continued
restrictions on freedom of assembly and expression,
as well as attacks on opposition political parties. We
remind the Government of Burundi that peaceful, free,
fair and transparent elections in 2020 are the basis for
normalization of relations with the United States and
other members of the international community.
Next week, the Security Council will discuss its
need to assume a stronger posture towards preventative
diplomacy and conflict prevention. We are all keenly
aware that elections in this region have been a flash point
for considerable violence in the past. So, with Burundi’s
2020 presidential elections fast approaching, and with
recent trends in the country pointing in a concerning
direction, the United States believes that the people
of Burundi need the Council’s attention. If we fail to
engage, their lives and the lives of millions of others
throughout that region could be adversely impacted.
As previous meetings on this subject have been
largely pessimistic, the United States is pleased that
the Secretary-General’s latest report suggests an
improving situation in the Great Lakes region — yet
we worry that the gains of the last six months will
be lost if the concerns I have expressed today are
not comprehensively addressed. I remind my fellow
Council members that just yesterday we were inspired
by young African leaders who challenged us to do our
part in bringing peace and security to the continent (see
S/PV.8629). Therefore, in conclusion, I want to reiterate
their challenge to us and encourage this organ to engage
proactively and preventively as we consider the specific
challenges facing the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me, like others, to
thank Special Envoy Xia for his briefing this morning.
We look forward to continuing to work closely with him
to support efforts to achieve greater peace, stability and
development in the Great Lakes region.
The Great Lakes region, historically characterized
by internal conflict and tensions between neighbours,
is experiencing a new momentum towards regional
cooperation on peace and security. I think it is important
to note and appreciate President Tshisekedi’s efforts
to revive the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

diplomatic relations with its neighbours and enhance
regional cooperation. The United Kingdom very
much welcomes this new momentum, in particular the
signing of a memorandum of understanding intended
to ease tensions and restore friendly relations between
Rwanda and Uganda, facilitated by the Presidents of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola. We also
very much welcome the holding of confidence-building
meetings between regional security and intelligence
actors aimed at enhancing efforts to neutralize armed
groups in the east of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Alongside this positive and welcome diplomatic
momentum within the region, the security, human
rights, development and economic challenges that
persist are immense. In this regard, let me say that I
strongly agree with the Ambassador of Equatorial
Guinea on the importance of taking a coordinated
approach to Ebola, but not just Ebola — to cholera and
to measles as well. I also agree, of course, with the
Ambassador of France on the importance of properly
funding the humanitarian response plan.
Of particular concern is the situation in and along
the borders of the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, where illegal armed groups continue to commit
atrocities against the civilian population and present a
major threat to regional security. It is important that
President Tshisekedi have full control of the security
forces and that senior figures within the Armed Forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are not
allowed to act independently and foster insecurity.
The problems in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the wider Great Lakes
region cannot be resolved solely through military
means. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2019/783), regional actors must work together to
address the underlying drivers of conflict. That will
require cooperation and concerted pressure to prevent
armed groups from receiving financing and support
from within and beyond the region. Armed groups
and other security actors control significant flows of
resources, including gold, minerals and charcoal, from
the east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
neighbouring countries. It is clearly in the interests not
only of the countries of the region, but more specifically
the peoples of those countries, to turn those illicit flows
of resources into legitimate trade flows, contributing
thereby both to economic development and, crucially
for the Council, to stability. In that regard, I would like

S/PV. 8630

to say how much we encourage Special Envoy Xia’s
efforts to support the establishment of responsible
mineral supply chains and to promote economic
integration in the region.
There can be no lasting stability without good
governance and the protection and promotion of human
rights. Restrictions on political space in Burundi,
including harassment of opposition parties and
restrictions on media freedom, are deeply concerning.
As we look ahead to elections next year in Burundi and
the Central African Republic, the United Kingdom calls
upon all relevant actors in those countries to ensure that
elections are safe and credible, uphold human rights
and fundamental freedoms and properly reflect the
aspirations of the populations.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom encourages all
countries of the Great Lakes region to seize the positive
momentum that is emerging and to fully commit
themselves to enhancing regional peace, stability
and development and, as they do so, the support of
the United Kingdom — and, I believe, of the entire
Council — is with them.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
Mr. Huang Xia’s valuable briefing and express our
gratitude to him. We also wish to assure him of our full
support in his efforts to bring about lasting peace in the
Great Lakes region.
We recognize the ongoing commitment of the
signatory countries to implementing the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region, which continues
to demonstrate its relevance and significance in helping
to alleviate the principal issues and tensions in the
region, such as those that arose between Rwanda and
Uganda but were later overcome thanks to the signing
of a memorandum of understanding. We particularly
appreciate the potential for regional rapprochement
that the Framework agreement affords, not only
in identifying common trends and challenges but
also in promoting political dialogue and alternative
complementary actions, particularly in cross-border
regions. In that regard, we welcome the projects that the
Special Envoy will promote to generate employment
and investment in those areas.
We welcome the positive developments detailed
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/783)
linked to the deepening of bilateral ties and the quest
for greater coordination and regional integration based

19-3003111/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

on the establishment of confidence-building measures
and the revitalization of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region.
In the political sphere, we consider the engagement
of countries in the electoral process in Burundi in 2020
and in the implementation of the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic in the Central African Republic within this
framework to be very positive. Equally promising
is the broad political space promoted and fostered in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by President
Tshisekedi, as well as the formation of a civilian
Government in the Sudan following mediation by the
African Union and Ethiopia.
Nevertheless, we continue to be concerned by the
ongoing presence of armed groups and the potential
for disruption that they represent through attacks on
the civilian population and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. We are also seeing an increase in
intercommunal violence and persistent violations of
human rights across various territories. All of those
phenomena are fuelling the fragility, volatility and
insecurity of the region. We therefore view it as the
utmost priority to take a coordinated approach in
addressing security challenges through such joint
initiatives as the meeting held last June that brought
together the intelligence and security services of
various countries in the region.
At the same time, the humanitarian situation
remains cause for serious concern, given the persistently
alarming numbers of refugees and internally displaced
persons living in conditions of extreme vulnerability,
who must be protected. Added to this is the troubling
health situation due to the prevalence of the Ebola virus
in Uganda and eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and multiple outbreaks of cholera, malaria and
measles. We hope that the international community,
especially those countries committed to peace and
stability in the region, will continue to provide sustained
and predictable financing to the crucial humanitarian
response plans.
We welcome the vision of Special Envoy Xia to
continue supporting and funding the various gains
aimed at neutralizing the activities of armed groups at
the regional level, protecting natural resources against
illegal exploitation, promoting economic cooperation,
supporting the fight against impunity and promoting
inclusive political dialogue and action with adequate
12/19

03/10/2019

representation of women and young people committed
to sustaining peace and development.
All of this should be done based on the commitments
made under the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and through efforts coordinated with the
various regional bodies and the United Nation system,
including the Peacebuilding Commission, humanitarian
agencies and civil society.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I wish to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia, for his very
informative briefing. Over recent months, significant
opportunities for consolidating regional peace and
stability have emerged, including through the holding
of peaceful elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan,
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, and the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups,
facilitated by the African Union-led African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation.
Against this positive backdrop, threats posed by
armed groups, rising tensions between the signatories
of the agreements and human rights abuses, as well
as violations of international humanitarian law and
further displacement of people, continue to impact
countries of the Great Lakes region. In that regard,
Poland believes that countering illegal cross-border
activities has to be an integral part of responding to
challenges in the region. It is an essential precondition
for the limitation of the activities of armed groups and
successful submission of combatants to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
We therefore welcome ongoing efforts to strengthen
regional security cooperation mechanisms, notably the
expanded Joint Verification Mechanism and the Followup Mechanism on the Allied Democratic Forces.
Poland remains deeply concerned over persistent
challenges to the exercise of basic political freedoms
and human rights in parts of the Great Lakes region.
We therefore call on Governments to uphold their
respective commitments, notably those under the
African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance, and to create the conditions necessary for
the voices of all stakeholders to be heard in local and
national decision-making processes.
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

We likewise recognize the important and vital role
of women in efforts to maintain and promote peace
and security in the region. In this regard, we welcome
the role play by the Advisory Board of the Women’s
Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. At the same time, we call on all national and
regional stakeholders to implement the regional action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
notably by achieving the agreed quota for women’s
representation in peace and political processes by 2020.
Poland considers the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region to be an essential mechanism
for achieving peace and security in the region. We
therefore call on all signatories promptly and in good
faith to fulfil their respective commitments under the
relevant agreement. We thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General and his team for their tireless
support to the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes
Ambassador Huang Xia to his first briefing to the
Council as the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to the Great Lakes Region. I assure him of Indonesia’s
full support in his work.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s
report of 1 October 2019 (S/2019/783). The Great
Lakes region has witnessed positive developments and
initiatives recently. We must seize the momentum to
make progress in overcoming challenges to peace and
sustainable development. I should like to make several
pertinent points.
First, the root causes of the conflict should be
addressed. The Great Lakes region has been marred
by conflict, mistrust and humanitarian difficulties for
years. We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
over the persistent challenges to human rights in the
region. Peace and stability remain fragile, especially
in the light of threats posed by armed groups, the
illicit exploitation of and trade in natural resources
and the outbreak of Ebola in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. A lack of development also causes the
instability. Yet, hope remains.
We welcome steps taken by President Félix Tshilombo
Tshisekedi to strengthen relations with neighbouring
countries, leading to the confidence-building meeting
held in Kinshasa. I also echo the Secretary-General
in recognizing the importance of a comprehensive

S/PV. 8630

approach to addressing the root causes of conflict in the
region. Trust is important and partnership is key. The
international community should unite and stand behind
African efforts in their pursuit of peace and security.
Secondly, relief for the humanitarian situation must
be prioritized. There are 548,153 refugees and asylumseekers and 4.8 million internally persons in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Although 75,000
Burundians have returned to their country, the total of
remaining Burundian refugees in the region exceeds
400,000. Furthermore, cases of communicable diseases
raise concerns and require an urgent international
humanitarian response. However, funding for
humanitarian responses in the region in 2018 was less
than 50 per cent. We, as the international community,
must do more. This cannot go on much longer. We
should strengthen our support to the region, including
through improved humanitarian assistance.
Thirdly, the work of regional organizations
and United Nations missions in the region should
be supported by the Council. We recognize the
role of regional and subregional organizations. The
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR), the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community and the United Nations
are the major guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed by 13 countries
in the region. We commend the ICGLR for its efforts
to ensure that all countries of the region adhere to
the cause of peace, including by preventing the illicit
movement of natural resources.
We also recognize that United Nations peacekeepers
are playing their role in winning the hearts and minds
of the local population to support the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process. We are
proud that Indonesian peacekeepers in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have been successful in assisting
the DDR process by engaging with local communities.
The support of the international community through
regional and subregional organizations will enable the
Government to reintegrate combatants into society,
thereby preventing relapse.
In conclusion, addressing the complex peace and
security challenges in the region is not easy. For our
part, Indonesia will remain committed as a true partner
of Africa in maintaining peace and security.

19-3003113/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At
the outset, Germany welcomes the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Huang Xia, to the Council and pledges its support
for his work. We share his conclusions and those of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/783), especially
with respect to the improvement of the cross-border
situation and the positive rapprochement he spoke
of. We also share the view that it is largely due to
President Tshisekedi that we were able to achieve that
cooperation. Germany also supports and encourages
the ongoing regional efforts and rapprochement, as well
as intensifying regional cooperation.
In his briefing, he underlined the remaining
challenges. I will touch upon them briefly. Everyone has
already highlighted the continuing crimes and attacks
perpetrated by armed groups, the forced displacement
of persons and the illegal trade in natural resources.
If those developments continue, they risk derailing the
positive dynamic.
Looking forward, we share Mr. Xia’s priorities,
particularly on the need for a comprehensive approach
of which he spoke. In that connection, one point that has
been flagged by many around the table is key — good
governance. On that particular point, Germany echoes
what was said by our American and British colleagues
on the elections in Burundi, which we believe will be
crucial for the development of that country.
Respect for human rights, as Mr. Xia said, is
absolutely vital. People need to be at the heart of efforts
going forward. Action against corruption and impunity
is also essential, and we need to strengthen justice in all
countries of the region. With regard to the participation
of young people and women, I can only endorse what
my Polish colleague said on those issues just a few
minutes ago.
As the written report of the Secretary-General
spells out, sexual violence continues to rage. As has been
noted, a large part of that sexual violence is committed
by the security forces. That needs to be acknowledged
and addressed. Mr. Xia was not here then, but in April
the Noble Peace Prize laureate Dr. Mukwege spoke
before the Council (see S/PV.8514) and described the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He
also spelled out what needed to be done to address it.
Thereafter, the Security Council adopted resolution
2467 (2019) to address that issue, and the provisions of
that resolution need to be fully implemented.
14/19

03/10/2019

On the economic front, again we support what
the Special Envoy said. Cross-border cooperation is
vital. The upcoming Kigali conference on trade and
investment will be key. In order to promote job creation
and more prosperity, there must be good governance. If
the rule of law does not improve, it will not be possible
to attract investors.
On the humanitarian front, we share the concerns
expressed by other colleagues with respect to financing.
This year, Germany will provide €66 million for
humanitarian efforts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the broader region. The Ebola situation is
having a ripple effect on the humanitarian and security
situation. On that issue, we share the view that the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo ought to play a
key role.
To conclude, we support the Special Envoy.
Germany stands ready to contribute to his considerations
concerning potential adjustments to his mandate.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to express our appreciation for
the valuable briefing by Mr. Huang Xia, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
and to welcome him today on his first briefing to the
Council. We fully support his efforts to stabilize the
situation in the Great Lakes region. We also support
his tireless efforts to build capacities and enhance
development in the region.
We have been following with interest the activities
of the Special Envoy and his Office and we welcome
the steps they have taken to engage the countries
of the region in efforts leading to the creation of an
environment of cooperation, which will contribute
to the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
We also welcome the coordination and cooperation
among all the United Nations offices and missions
in the region. Cooperation among them and with
regional organizations like the African Union and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region is
essential to achieving stability of the region which is
our common goal.
On the political situation, there are many positive
indicators that we must shed light on and build upon
during the upcoming period. We welcome the political
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including the recent formation of a new Government
and President Tshisekedi’s engagement with many of
leaders of the region. That could undoubtedly help
build trust among countries of the region and create
an environment conducive to regional cooperation,
especially since many challenges in the region are
mutual and interrelated.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region is the best way to address those challenges.
We welcome the progress achieved thus far, and in
particular the outcome of the Luanda meeting, at which
certain countries of the region agreed to settle regional
disputes through existing regional mechanisms.
There is no doubt that achieving development
in the region will contribute to stability and conflict
prevention. We note that all leaders of the region talked
about this issue when they addressed the international
community during the general debate last week. We
look forward to the outcome of the conference on trade
and investment in the Great Lakes region that is set to
take place next year. We welcome the support provided
by the Office of the Special Envoy to the Conference
and urge all countries of the region to participate
constructively in it and in all regional activities aimed
at bolstering the region’s economy.
On the security situation, we are concerned about
continued insecurity in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as it has serious repercussions on the
stability and security of the entire region. We welcome
the commitment of the Congolese President to take
serious and effective steps in that regard, and we stress
the importance of regional cooperation to the success
of any stabilization plan in the region.
In that connection, we recall the recommendations
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, calling on the
countries of the region to redouble their efforts to
address the situation in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We welcome the conference organized
by the Special Envoy and the guarantors of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework on exchanging
information among security services. This is a positive
step that enhances cooperation and trust among the
countries there.
We also call on all countries of the region to ensure
the success of the tenth summit of the regional oversight
mechanism, to take place in Kinshasa. We note that

S/PV. 8630

agreeing on strategies to counter violence is essential
to achieving the stability of the region.
We are indeed concerned about the fact that
some armed groups in the Central African Republic
are not abiding by the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation, and we stress the importance of
upholding the Agreement in the coming period, given
its importance to stabilizing the security situation.
With regard to Burundi, the stable security situation
is a positive indicator, and we hope it remains stable
beyond the elections to be held in 2020.
In conclusion, the humanitarian situation in the
Great Lakes region is dire. The large numbers of
refugees and displaced persons, along with the spread of
disease, are increasing the burdens on the countries of
the region and the responsibilities they bear. Intensified
regional and international efforts are needed to address
those challenges. We commend the preventive measures
that various countries in the region have taken to stop
the spread of the Ebola virus on their territories and
also look forward to seeing them the steps necessary
to ensure the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees to their homes.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Huang Xia, for his comprehensive briefing and for
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/783) for the first time.
It is our view that the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region continues to serve as
a cornerstone of regional stability. We support the
unconditional implementation by all signatories of
their commitments, including respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, non-interference in internal
affairs, the strengthening of confidence-building
measures and the development of regional cooperation
and economic integration. We are confident that the
full implementation of the Framework’s provisions will
have a positive impact on the overall security situation
in the Great Lakes region.
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains a crucial factor in ensuring security
in the region. We are currently witnessing important
changes in the life of this major Central African State
that have already had an impact on the region as a
whole. We welcome President Félix Tshisekedi’s efforts

19-3003115/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

to achieve political stability, including by establishing
constructive relations with his neighbours. We were
pleased to note the summits held in May and August
in Kinshasa and Luanda with leaders of States in
the region, as well as the decisions taken there on
strengthening security in the Great Lakes region. We
noted the important memorandum of understanding
between the Presidents of Rwanda and Uganda
signed in Luanda in August, and the first meeting of
representatives of the security services of States in the
region, held in Kinshasa in June with the participation
of the Office of the Special Envoy.
We remain seriously concerned about the situation
in the eastern provinces of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where a difficult political and military
situation persists and attacks by illegal armed groups,
intercommunal clashes and the Ebola epidemic
continue. Against that backdrop, we welcome the results
achieved by the Congolese armed forces, together with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in the fight
against several groups. We call for taking advantage
of the positive changes in the region to further expand
the efforts to eliminate militants and encourage the
processes for their disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into peaceful life. It will be particularly
important to resolve the problem of the Allied
Democratic Forces.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the difficult humanitarian situation in the Great
Lakes region. At the same time, we note some positive
developments in resolving the refugee problem. We
particularly want to highlight the ongoing repatriation
of Burundian refugees from neighbouring countries
in connection with the stabilization of the situation
in their homeland. We welcome the measures taken
in the framework of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to harmonize
national strategies for repatriating and integrating
refugees and address the root causes of the issue. Such
efforts show that the regional players are part of the
collective quest for responses to the challenges facing
the Great Lakes region. We hope that the remaining
disagreements between the leaders of individual
countries in the region will not affect their commitment
to the principles enshrined in the Framework. We call
on the relevant States to resolve their differences and
continue to cooperate on key issues that affect the
stability and security of the entire region. We believe
16/19

03/10/2019

that lasting solutions to these problems can only be
found independently, with the support of the ICGLR
and other regional mechanisms, in accordance with the
maxim “African solutions to African problems”.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.
At the outset, let me join others in thanking
Mr. Huang Xia, the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, for his informative briefing.
South Africa welcomes the improving relations
and levels of cooperation among the core countries of
the Great Lakes region. In that regard, we welcome
the reinforced commitments by the regional Heads
of State to a stable Great Lakes region, as reflected
in the rapprochement in the region. That includes the
normalization of bilateral relations between Rwanda
and Uganda, mediated by President Lourenço of
Angola with the support of President Tshisekedi of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome
the formation of a Government of national unity in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which will
hopefully help to unify the Congolese people in a step
on the road to national reconstruction and development.
However, my delegation remains concerned
about the security situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the humanitarian situation
in parts of the country, which deteriorated during the
reporting period. South Africa therefore underscores
the importance of ensuring that the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo strengthens the
capacity of its State institutions, with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We hope that the strategic review report reflects the
desire of the Congolese people, as articulated in the
country’s statement in the General Assembly (see A/74/
PV.7), to see that the training provided by MONUSCO
to the Congolese armed forces results in a force that
is focused, well-equipped and capable of adapting to
the prevailing conditions on the ground. My delegation
is also concerned about the Ebola virus outbreak,
which has resulted in the loss of lives. In that regard,
we commend the efforts undertaken by regional and
international partners in fighting the Ebola outbreak
and further urge them to continue to assist in efforts to
curb the pandemic.
Turning to the Central African Republic, we note
with concern the logistical challenges that hamper
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the country’s smooth implementation of the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation. We are also
concerned about the activities of some non-State actors,
which continue to violate the provisions of the Political
Agreement in some prefectures, including through
illegal taxation and the obstruction of the deployment
of State institutions and security forces. It is our hope
that the Council’s action in September (see S/PV.8617)
easing the arms embargo (resolution 2488 (2019))
will constitute a strong push in the multidimensional
efforts to accelerate the restoration of State authority
throughout the Central African Republic’s national
territory. In spite of the challenges, we welcome the
cooperation and coordination between the African
Union (AU), the Economic Community of Central
African States, the United Nations, the European
Union (EU) and the Peacebuilding Commission, as
well as with other bilateral and multilateral partners.
We also welcome the continued positive role of women
in fostering local and inclusive peace processes in
the region.
Against that backdrop, we call on development
actors to continue to play a central role in building and
sustaining peace in the country through the creation
of inclusive institutions, building capacities to deliver
services and investing in critical infrastructure, with
a view to addressing the socioeconomic gaps and
responding to the long-standing drivers of conflict.
Collaboration with the World Bank, the EU, the African
Development Bank and other development actors is
therefore vital for a genuine reconciliation process in
the Central African Republic.
Burundi remains an important part of the stability
of the Great Lakes region. We therefore continue to
support the inter-Burundian dialogue, including the
facilitation process led by the East African Community,
in the spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, with the support of the AU
and the United Nations. It is South Africa’s hope that
Burundi’s preparations for the May 2020 elections will
be inclusive, transparent and peaceful.
With regard to the situation in South Sudan, my
delegation welcomes the recent face-to-face meetings
between President Salva Kiir and Vice-President
Riek Machar, which we believe are a step in the right
direction. Continued dialogue is therefore essential, as
it will help to unlock the impasse that has stalled the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.

S/PV. 8630

It is our view and expectation that a region that is
politically stable serves as a foundation for regional
economic integration. We therefore reiterate our position
on the importance of curbing the persistent illicit
exploitation of and trade in natural resources, which
undermine their proper management. In addition, it will
be critical to ensure that there is increased cooperation
among the Great Lakes countries in eliminating armed
groups by focusing on inclusive cooperation and
coordinated security-sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes.
In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations that the differences among
States that are signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region are best addressed
through dialogue and cooperation. We therefore urge
the Council to reiterate its call to all signatories to the
Framework to implement their commitments under it
with a view to ensuring long-term, sustainable peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October and to say how honoured we
are to see the friendly country of the Republic of South
Africa leading our deliberations today. I also want
to thank you for taking the initiative to organize this
meeting, focusing on the situation in the Great Lakes
region in general and on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region in
particular. I would also like to thank all the members
of the Security Council for the kind attention and
willingness that they have always shown whenever
they are called on to address the situation concerning
my country.
My delegation appreciates the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/783) on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework, which
Ambassador Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes region, just presented to

19-3003117/19

S/PV.8630

The situation in the Great Lakes region

us, and I welcome his presence in this Chamber. It is
regrettable, however, that the report was made available
only late yesterday evening.
Before I come back to that, I have taken it upon
myself to convey to the Council the vision of my
President, Mr. Félix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, of
how he intends to resolve the situation in the Great Lakes
region and more particularly in the eastern part of our
country. Since taking office, as he underscored at the
high-level meeting on the Framework agreement held on
the sidelines of the general debate of the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly, he has been taking
stock of the challenges to peace and security in our
country and the stability of the region. To that end, he
has been working tirelessly to find a permanent solution
to the worrying security situation in our eastern areas.
In the light of the importance of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, which is seen as an agreement
for hope and the right instrument for regional stability,
he has decided to revitalize its national monitoring
mechanism. In that context, an evaluation is being done
to draw up a non-compliance assessment of the level
of implementation of our country’s commitments. The
President has now mobilized a new effort in our quest for
peace and security. The recommended strategy consists
of three components — strengthening the capacities of
the defence and security services, promoting national
reconciliation and activating regional diplomacy.
With respect to the capacity-building of the
defence and security services, he has launched military
operations that are ongoing, including in Ituri and North
Kivu provinces, in order to disrupt the negative forces
that continue to hamper peace and security in that part
of the country. With regard to national reconciliation,
that process is aimed at promoting peaceful coexistence
among the local communities. With that in mind, the
forums will be organized with a view to strengthening
national cohesion. Lastly, with regard to regional
diplomacy, he has undertaken tours to several countries
of the region with a view to restoring, together with his
counterparts, the trust needed for regional cooperation
and integration.
That is the context in which we should consider the
rapprochement and dialogue that began in Kinshasa in
May with the summit that brought together his peers
from Angola and Rwanda, followed by a summit in
Luanda with the Heads of State of Angola, Uganda
and Rwanda, and, lastly, a third summit, held once
18/19

03/10/2019

again in Luanda, in August, which was also attended
by the President of the Republic of the Congo and was
sanctioned by a memorandum of understanding between
Presidents Kagame and Museveni. All those meetings
are an important step forward in the determination of
the region’s leaders to work together for peace, security
and stability in the region.
With regard to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), as he also emphasized in
his address to the General Assembly (see A/74/PV.7),
President Tshisekedi stated that he is in favour of
keeping MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as long as it is streamlined, well equipped,
strong and with a mandate adapted to the realities on
the ground, similar to the Force Intervention Brigade.
As he himself stressed, it continues to be his dream to
make the Democratic Republic of the Congo a country
that exports peace.
To get back to the report under consideration, we
should say that we do not have any particular comments
to make about it on the whole. However, we do think that
a brief comment with respect to the security situation
would be useful. The report highlights the efforts of
the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo, in collaboration with MONUSCO, to neutralize
the foreign and national armed groups that are active in
our eastern regions. As we have always said, we want to
assure the Council that those efforts will continue until
the groups are totally eradicated. In that context, we are
pleased to be able to point out that the elements from
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda who
surrendered voluntarily a few years ago, along with
their dependants, and who were cantoned in Orientale
province, have finally been repatriated to Rwanda with
the assistance of MONUSCO.
Moreover, based on the new dynamic in relations
with the various surrendering groups that we have
seen since our new Head of State came to power, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reaffirms its determination to fulfil the commitments
that it has undertaken under the terms of the Addis
Ababa Framework agreement. In that regard, we are
asking that the former members of the Mouvement du
23 mars return to the country and make themselves
available to the new authorities. My country calls once
again for the involvement of the countries of the region
and the Security Council in order for this situation to be
definitively resolved.
19-30031

03/10/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

As the Council will have noted, a new wind of
hope and confidence is blowing across the Great Lakes
region today. My delegation believes that the region
should seize this opportunity to restore trust among
its leaders, who must now face in the same direction
and work together to promote regional cooperation
and integration as a means of establishing the peace
and stability that the region desperately needs for its
development. In that regard, the positive developments
in the region should be encouraged. That is why my
country calls on the United Nations and the international
community as a whole to support the efforts of our
leaders to ensure that peace, which some still consider
to be a dream, may become a reality for all of the
peoples of the region.

S/PV. 8630

I cannot end my speech without thanking
Ambassador Huang Xia, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for his
ongoing efforts within the framework of his mandate to
restore peace throughout the entire Great Lakes region
and in my country in particular. I wish to reiterate the
gratitude of the Congolese people and our Government
to all members of the Security Council for their
dedication and commitment to our country’s cause.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

19-3003119/19
