UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FIFTH

2236”

COUNCIL

REC
YEAR

MEETING:

26 JUNE 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2236) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 from the Acting Permanent Representative of
Pakistan to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/13966) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SIPV.2236

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ I. .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered ‘in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

i

:.*:
1.‘:.

.
. ‘L

.’

:
\L L

:

.‘k..’
1. . :
. ,a
“,’

2236th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 26 June 1980, at 3.30 p.m.
Mr. Ole ALGARD (Norway).

President:

of the Council chamber and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the Council
table.

’ Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic; .Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provkional

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Malaysia, Turkey, Yemen and
Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2236)

1. ‘Adoption of the agenda

2.’ The situation in the Middle East:
,Letter dated 28 .May. 1980 .from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the
United Nations addressed to the President
:
of the Security Council (S/13966)
The meeting

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Halim (Malaysia), Mr. Eralp (Turkey), Mr. Alaini (Yemen) and
Mr. MujezinoviC
(Yugoslavia)
took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

has called to order at 4.10 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
24 June from the Rapporteur of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which reads as follows:

,Adoption of the agenda
.‘The agenda was adopted.

..

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 28 May 1980 fqm the Acting Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/1396q)

“I have the honour to request that I be allowed to
participate in the consideration of the item ‘The
situation in the Middle East’, in accordance with
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Security Council, in my capacity as Rapporteur
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.”

:

1. The ‘PRESIDENT: In accordance with previous
decisions [2233rd to 2235th meetings], I invite the
representatives of Israel and Pakistan to take a place
at the Council table, I invite the representatives of
Cuba, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mauritania; Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal and the Syrian Arab Republic to take the
places’reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber and I invite the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to take a place at
the Council
I table.

4. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this
matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
the Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Blum (Israel)
and Mr. Naik (Pakistan) took places at the Council
table; Mr. Roa-Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Elaraby (Egypt),
Mr. Suwondo (Indonesia), Mr. Al-Ali (Iraq), Mr. Nuseibeh (Jordan), Mr. Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. Tueni(Lebanon), Mr. Kane (Mauritania),
Mr. Laraki (Morocco),
Mr. ,Jamal (Qatar), Mr. Zowawi (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Djigo (Senegal) and Mr. Mansouri (Syrian Arab
Republic) took the places reserved for them at the side

It was so decided.

5. Mr. ESSAAFI (Tunisia) (interpretation
from
French): In placing before the Council today the question of Al-Quds Al-Sharif (Jerusalem), the Organization
of the Islamic Conference, through its Chairman,
Pakistan, has restated in its broadest sense the essential problem which will determine peace and’peaceful
1

coexistence in the Middle East. First, there are the
inalienable historic rights of the Palestinian people,
and, secondly, the inadmissibility of the acquisition
of any territory by force. When applied to the particular case of Jerusalem, these two aspects stand out
even more starkly.

fails to live UP to its elementary obligation today to
deny the legal validity of such violation of the status
of Jerusalem. Our profound and sincere attachment
to the search for a peaceful solution to the whole of
the Middle East problem, as well as our faith in the
force of international law, have dictated our making
this appeal to the Council in time for it to take a clearcut decision on the facts while they are actually
occurring before our very eyes so as to spare us an
additional possible impediment to peace.

6. The Council is in a good position to assess the
true problem of Jerusalem, in terms of its nature and
development, by means of the resolutions which have
marked the development of the crisis in the Middle
East ever since it began. To keep within the confines
of the current crisis, we would recall; first, that
the United Nations has never sanctioned the annexation of Jerusalem by Israel. Quite the contrary, it has
constantly stated that Israel, as the occupying authority, must evacuate the whole of the occupied territory,
including Jerusalem. We would also recall that the
General Assembly, as well as the .Security Council,
has condemned attempts to alter the City of Jerusalem
in its physical, demographic and spiritual aspects
and has affirmed the total applicability of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of. Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949,’ to the
occupied City. We shall see, too, that there has never
been any demonstration of the least willingness on the
part of the population of the occupied territories,
and certainly not of that of Jerusalem, to accept or
to resign itself to Israeli occupation. Indeed? acts of
resistance to the occupation have constantly harassed
the Israeli authorities and have kept the City in a state
of tension, if not of permanent warfare.

10. We are also witnessing the rise of a terrorist
system which, in addition to resorting to intimidation
and murder, has the clear-cut aim of rendering the
civilian population leaderless in the occupied territory.
All forms of colonialism, when the colonialists have
had their backs to the wall, have for a time spawned
this inhumane practice, and today no one is safe from
that death-dealing machine in the occupied territories
and Jerusalem. This most recent manoeuvre, added to
the expulsions and expropriations that have already
been carried out on a broad scale, is aimed at provoking
an exodus of the population and paving the way to
appropriation of the land.
11. We should like most vigorously to state that
neither manoeuvres nor subterfuges, nor yet terrorism
can possibly constitute the foundation of any right
of ownership for Israel, either in Jerusalem or in any
part of the occupied territories.
12. We also observe that the Israeli occupation
authorities do not feel bound by any international
commitment with regard to the City of Jerusalem
inasmuch as they have through their representative at
the United Nations constantly proclaimed their rejection of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

7. On this basis, the United Nations has affirmed a
constant policy, either through the General Assembly,
in particular in resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254
(ES-V), or through the Security Council; in particular
in resolutions 252 (1968), 267 (1%9), 298 (1971) and
465 (1980). Without ever having endorsed the principle
of occupation, the Council has condemned, in particular, in substance the improvements in the occupation system which were aimed at gradually establishing
a system of annexation. The international community,
in this regard, has been unanimous in considering
null and void any unilateral measures taken by the
occupation authorities with the aim of transforming
a de facto situation into a de.jure one.

13. In this context, we cannot through abstention
sanction the regime of absolute unilateral right which
the occupying authority has claimed for itself with
regard to the occupied territory. The Council must,
at the very time that Israel is attempting to legalize
its annexation, be able to establish that the very claim
is null and void. It is, indeed, not enough to call
occupation “occupation” in order to take care of the
matter. We must in fact directly and formally pronounce an act null and void when we believe it to be
legally and formally null and void.

8. The need for this further debate on the question
of Jerusalem has arisen because of a combination of
factors the gravity and urgency of which require urgent
and responsible action. What we are faced with, in fact,
is the putting into effect of a ‘major decision. The
occupation authorities have thus embarked upon a
unilateral procedure of legalization to make occupied
Jerusalem the capital of Israel, and therefore have
begun the transfer of the seat of3,:the$ire,vemment.
9. We believe that’the Conncil~~cannot remain inactive, indifferent or silent in the face of such an act of
provocation, which tomorrow may,very well in its turn
become the heart of a specific problem if the Council

14. If the Security Council has frequently-reminded
Israel of its obligations as an occupying Power, it has
certainly not done so on the basis merely of its intentions but also of its acts. The most recent report of
the Council Commission established under resolution 446 (1979) [s/13679] made that very clear, and
the Council did not fail to refer to that in’ its resolution 465 (1980). Today it is equally true that we are not
picking a spurious quarrel with Israel. What we are
doing is noting and deploring fully identifiable acts that
have actually been committed.
2

15. Because of that persistence in violating the status
of Jerusalem, and because of the very nature of the
act, which is aimed at pre-empting the destiny of
Jerusalem, we believe that the Council is in duty bound
to have recourse to the sanctions provided for in the
Charter.

I am certain that under your guidance the Council
will be able to fulfil its task in a most efficient manner.
23. I should like to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Oumarou of the Niger, for the admirable
way in which he conducted the Council’s meetings
during the month of May.

16. Furthermore, it is apparent to us that, in its very
substance, the question of Jerusalem will not be
properly dealt with unless there is an overall solution
to the problem of the Middle East, which will obviously
be linked with the restoration to the Palestinian people
of its rights and the evacuation by Israel of all the
occupied territories, including Jerusalem.

24.. The issue being debated here is.one of the most
important aspectsofthe Palestine question and one that
continues to threaten the political and human rights of
the Palestinian people and the religious interests of one
third of the population of the world. Israel’s intransigence has defied the countless resolutions and
decisions adopted by the General Assembly, the
Security Council, the Trusteeship Council and the
United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine,
as well as by other important United Nations bodies.

17. However, we do feel that the inherent legitimacy
of the rights of the Palestinian people, as well as the
legitimacy of those of all peoples devoted to the legal,
historical and spiritual integrity of Jerusalem, makes it
the duty of the Council, responding to the d&mar&e
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference, to act
in full responsibility in order to prevent an irreparable
act taking place, to safeguard law and to set legal
limits to the claims of the occupation authorities.

25. Even though Israel’s very existence was based
on aggression, the Zionist State has never considered
its political dream accomplished. It begrudged its
inability to occupy and annex Al-Quds Al-Sharif in
1948, and considered this as a temporary setback to
be remedied at a more opportune moment when it could
set the stage for a more successful invasion. The blueprint was there and was never abandoned. It was only
delayed a few years, for hardly had Israel accomplished
the occupation of the West Bank in 1967 than it
declared the annexation of Al-Quds Al-Sharif under
the sinister guise of “unification”.

18. A firm and responsible resolution based upon
justice and right would be an essential and perhaps
decisive contribution to the attainment of overall
peace. But even if such a resolution were to constitute
only a holding action, provided it were properly
respected, it would still constitute a valuable milestone
on the road towards peace.

26. At its special emergency session held in 1967,
the General Assembly wasted no time in expressing
world, disapproval of that illegal action. In its resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 2254 (ES-V) the General Assembly stated, inter alia, that it considered those
measures invalid, called upon Israel to rescind all
measures already taken and to desist forthwith from
taking any action that would alter the status of the
city of Al-Quds. The Security Council, in turn, adopted
several resolutions censuring Israel and calling for the
rescission of measures taken that affected the status
of the City.

19. We are profoundly concerned about the integrity
of the Holy City of Jerusalem-which, in the final
analysis, means its actual destiny-and it is in our view
by no means a peripheral problem ancillary to the
overall Palestinian problem, but part of the same
whole, and even the fundamental heart of the problem,
which may have an effect on the future of all the
peoples of the region and an even greater impact on
the destiny of the Palestinian people and on the hopes
for peace of all the countries of the region, if not
of the whole world.
20. With utmost conviction we reaffirm that the key
to peace lies in the restoration to the Palestinian
people of their inalienable rights and in Israel’s
evacuation of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and indeed of all the
occupied territories.
21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Saudi Arabia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make a statement.

27. What ,was Israel’s response to those resolutions?
It took immediate, calculated and -systematic steps
to defeat those resolutions and.to implement its blueprint of irreversible.annexation by expropriating Arab
lands within and beyond the boundaries of the city
of Al-Quds Al-Sharifand constructing houses and fortress apartment buildings designed to encircle the Arab
city and to isolate it from the rest of the West Bank
Arab cities and towns.

22. Mr. ZOWAWI (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, at
the outset I should like to thank you and the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to express my Government’s views on the highly
important issue on the agenda. May I also most warmly
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the current month.

28. The latest of these resolutions was resolution 465
(1980), in which the Council affirmed once more that
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’ was applicable
to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including Al-Quds. The Council determined that all
measures taken by Israel to change the physical character, deinographic composition, institutional structure
3

,

and status of the Palestinian and other Arab territories
occupied since 1967, including Al-Quds or any part
thereof, had no legal validity and that Israel’s policy
constituted a serious obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

Al-Aqsa, were desecrated and turned into ‘tourist
attractions for the Israelis, who behaved in the most
scandalous and shocking ways there. Jewish religious
rites were performed in Islamic places.
I.
33. Israel’s world-wide campaign to publicize the
fact that Al-Quds had been “unified” could not
conceal the fact that this ‘*unification” was based
on conquest and that the extension of Israeli control
over the whole city inevitably implied a radical change
in the status of the Arab city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, to
the detriment of both the Arab population and of the
long-established rights of the Muslim faith. The
changes which followed the annexation of the Holy
City by Israel in conquest were no less radical on the
physical and aesthetic levels than they .were for the
Arab citizens of Al-Quds who are held in captivity.
In a historic city like Al-Quds, where spiritual significance. is symbolized in stones and landscapes,
changes in its architectural and physical features
involve changes in its spiritual and religious character.:

29. The Commission, which was appointed by the
Council in accordance with resolution 446 (1979) to
investigate and report upon the situation in the
occupied territories, found conclusive evidence that
Israel was engaged in a wilful, systematic and largescale establishment of settlements in the occupied
territories in complete disregard of the decisions and
resolutions adopted by various organs of the United
Nations. Furthermore, the Commission considered
that the pattern of Israeli settlement policies, as a consequence, was causing profound and irreversible
changes in the geographical and demographic nature
of those territories, including Al-Quds. Thus, it was
reported that since 1967 the Arab population has been
reduced by 32 per cent in Al-Quds and the West Bank.
30. The burning of the Al-Aqsa Mosque on 21 August
1969leads one to believe that the event was but another
link in the series of Israeli-Zionist plans to destroy that
holy Muslim shrine and the nearby Dome of the Rock,
and to ‘rebuild on their site the Temple of Solomon,
presenting the world with afuit accompli. In the background to the act of arson against the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
one notes the following declarations made and
measures taken by the Israeli occupation authorities:
statements made by Jewish religious leaders urging
Israel to confiscate Al-Haram Al-Sharif and all it
contains; expropriation and demolition of <Arab property in the vicinity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque; occupation
of Al-Magaribah Gate, one of the gates of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif leading to the Al-Aqsa Mosque; holding of
prayers in the courtyards of the Al-Aqsa Mosque by
members of the Israeli army, by rabbis and later by
Jewish organizations; and excavation around the AlAqsa Mosque which seriously has imperilled and
weakened the foundations and structure of those holy
shrines.

34. Israel’s actions since June 1967,have followed
such a scheme and the pattern of colonization has
become very clear: military’ conquest, the forced
mass exodus of the Arab population, the bulldozing
and dynamiting of Arab houses and quarters within’the
city, duress through either imprisonment.orexpulsion,
the confiscation of land and private -properties, the
construction of purely Jewish settlements and the
ingathering of new waves of immigrants.
35. That the Zionist master plan .was to occupy the
whole of Al-Quds and to settle it is related in some of
the writings of the Zionist leaders and Israeli militarists.
To mention only one example, Menachem Begin,
leader of the Irgun terrorist organization and the hero
of the Deir Yassin massacre, wrote that A:$
“at the end of January 1948, at a’meeting of the
Command of the Irgun in which the planning section
participated, we outlined four strategic objectives:
(1) Jerusalem, (2) Jaffa, (3) the Lydda-Ramleh
plain, and (4) the Triangle”.
~
:-

31. When Israel was admitted to the United Nations,
it implicitly agreed to abide by the Charter and the
resolutions concerning Palestine and the city of AlQuds-an agreement which it then proceeded to
ignore. The problem is that some of the big Powers
have handled and continue to handle Israel with velvet
gloves, thus encouraging it to disregard completely
all United Nations resolutions.

Thus Al-Quds was the first target to be occupied. The
massacre of Deir Yassin was one ‘step towards the
1
occupation.
..;
‘.
36. The situation in the occupied‘ Arab territories,
including Al-Quds Al-Sharif, has deteriorated. as the
Israeli authorities have executed one carefully~planned
measure after another such as the desecration of
Islamic Holy Places, the imposition of Israeli civil
law and regulations and school curricula, the application of the Absentees* Property Law which authorizes
the seizure of all the property of so-called absentee
Arabs, the refusal to permit Arabs to go back to their
homes in the city of Al-Quds, the~expulsion-of ‘many
Arab- dignitaries, and the ,building of new Jewish
settlements on expropriated land belongingentirely to
Arabs with the purpose of separating the ‘Arabs of

32. No sooner was the seizure of the whole of AlQuds by the Israelis accomplished than the worst fears
of the Arab population and the Arab and Muslim
worlds were realized. Within days, the demolition of
historic buildings and the expropriation of religious
and private properties began in order to create avulgar
piazza on Islamic property so that jubilant Jews might
dance and chant in front of the Wailing Wall. The most
sacred places of Islam, the Mosques -of, Omar and
4

Al-Quds from the Arab towns to the north and limiting
any expansion of Al-Quds.

to halt the vengeful repression of the freedom of the
Palestinians. Those reprehensible actions, compounded by Israel’s deliberate attempts to alter the
status of the city of Al-Quds, were unequivocably
condemned by the unanimously adopted Council
resolution 465 (1980). That resolution made it quite
clear that all measures taken by Israel to change the
status of Al-Quds, as a part of the Arab territories
occupied by Israel in June 1967, have no legal validity.

Lf,

37. The Zionist plan for Greater Jerusalem aims at
the speedy creation of afuif accompli by enlarging the
boundaries of the city, settling Jewish immigrants
and redesigning the Jewish quarter. In 1971, when the
plan was presented to a conference in Israel of
30 civil engineers, architects and artists from all over
the world, it foundered under the weight of the
criticism heaped upon it by the expert advisers. The
reason for the advisers’ view was the plan’s violation
of the special character and atmosphere of Jerusalem.
Professor Bronsky, a Jewish participant in the conference, stated that the proposed constructions were
an act of mass suicide, committed as a result of utter
failure.

42. The tragedy of Al-Quds is part and parcel of the
whole tragedy of Palestine. It is the tragedy of a
colonial-settler conquest which has suppressed and
continues to suppress undisputed and indivisible Arab
rights through the blunt use of Israeli Zionist power
and tyranny which is condoned by world power
politics. The resolution adopted on 15 March 1971 by
the Human Rights Commission, the highest intemational authority in the defence of human rights, stated
that this “is a right the denial of which by Israel
constitutes an affront to humanity and agrave violation
of international law”.* It should therefore be remem-.
bered that the Palestinians are facing in Al-Quds,
as indeed in all of Palestine, a uniquely savage conquest which challenges morality in all its categories.

38. Apart from the illegality of the Israeli actions,
it is clear that the development of the city should be
left to its rightful inhabitants. Neither now nor in the
past has Israel shown any appreciation of the culture
of Palestine. The Arabs, who have owned the land
from time immemorial and have developed its culture,
alone have the right and the responsibility to develop, it.
39. I wish to express my Government’s grave concern at and total rejection of this latest evidence
of Israel’s determination to strengthen its illegal presence in the occupied Arab territories and of the steps
being taken to have Al-Quds recognized as Israel’s
capital. Those illegal and aggressive acts constitute
a flagrant’ violation of international law and of the
Charter and resolutions of the United Nations, and
disregard of world public opinion. My Government
strongly believes that urgent action should be taken to
arrest those developments and to secure the immediate
and total withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab
territories, especially Al-Quds. The continuation of
those Israeli policies will only intensifytension in the
area and endanger international peace and security.

43. The Security Council, as the main organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security, is in
duty bound to take the required decisions in accordance with its power under the Charter in order to put
an end to the Israeli policy of the creeping annexation
of Arab territories, including Al-Quds. My delegation
believes that the Council must resolutely condemn the
latest measures taken by Israel in Al-Quds and re-.
affirm that Israel’s policy of establishing settlements
and changing the demographic and physical status of :
the Arab territories occupied since June 1967is illegal
and an obstacle to the attainment of a comprehensive,
lasting and just peace in the Middle East. The Council
must fully assume its responsibilities pursuant to the
relevant provisions of the Charter. It is to be hoped
that in the face of the persistent and flagrant defiance
of this body by Israel, the Council will be able to take
effective measures to find a way out of this explosive
and dangerous situation.

40. My Government forcefully denounces the continuing Israeli measures of annexation and Judaization
undertaken in Al-Quds, as well as the repeated profanation of the Holy Mosques of Al-Aqsa and Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimiin Al-Khalil and the other Holy Places in
Palestine. The meeting of Foreign Ministers of the
Islamic Conference held at Islamabad last month, at.
which more than 800 million Muslims in the world
were represented, condemned those criminal acts and
strongly rejected all illegal and aggressive measures
taken by Israel in the Holy City of Al-Quds, the latest
of which was. the bill before Israel’s legislative body
formalizing the declaration of Al-Quds as the capital
of Israel. -I,, ,:
,.
41. At this ‘critical stage the attention of the intemational Organization should be focused exclusively,
relentlessly..‘and unmistakably on Israel’s violation
of the inherent rights of the Palestinian people, on its
rejection of United Nations decisions and on its refusal

44. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Rapporteur of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Mr. Gauci.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
45. Mr. GAUCI (Rapporteur, Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People): The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, at its meeting
last Monday, asked me, as its Rapporteur, to make a
statement on this sensitive question of the Holy City
of Jerusalem.
46. On my own behalf and on behalf of the Committee, permit me first to express to you, Mr. Presi5

dent, our warmest congratulations on your assumption
of the duties of President of the Council for the current
month. This is a tribute I willingly pay not only to your
country, Norway--devoted to the ideals of the United
Nations-but also to your personal capabilities, which
will be taxed to their maximum as we discuss this
complex issue during these troubled times.

affecting the status of Jerusalem were already considered paramount. The General Assembly had reaffinned the principle of the maintenance of “existing
rights” and of an intemationalized corpus sepamtum
status for Jerusalem, despite the City’s de facto
division between Israel and Jordan. The defined status
of the City was unaffected by the Israel-Jordan General
Armistice Agreement of 1949.

47. When the first report of the Committee3 was
prepared in 1976, containing recommendations on the
implementation of the rights of the Palestinian people,
we made no specific recommendations on Jerusalem,
but inevitably of course we referred to it in the report.,
In that report, in a separate chapter on the status of
Jerusalem, the Committee, faithful to its obligations to
respect previous decisions of the United Nations,
simply recalled the most pertinent resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council which
were adopted unanimously. Subsequently, the Special
Unit on Palestinian Rights compiled several studies,
some of which dealt with the history of Jerusalem
and its legal status. I respectfully draw the attention
of members of the Council to those studies.

51. Regrettably, as the division of Jerusalem was
protracted, its two parts became progressively more
integrated into hostile camps and political barriers
were thereby consolidated. This unsatisfactory status
quo of the divided City was further compromised
by the israeli occupation of East Jerusalem in June
1967. With West Jerusalem already declared by Israel
as its capital, Israeli actions following the 1967 war
tended to show that Israel had unilateral ambitions over
the Holy City.
52. The Security Council was therefore often
involved. As has already been mentioned, the Council
has pronounced itself on previous occasions when
measures have been taken by Israel that tended to
affect the status of Jerusalem. The provisions of the
resolutions unanimously adopted are familiar to all.
I need only mention that each implicitly maintain+sthe
validity of the status of Jerusalem as an intemationalized corpus sepurutum defined by the partition
resolution and each declares Israeli action and legislation in respect of Jerusalem totally invalid. That was
considered sufficient reason for the Committee not to
make specific recommendations on Jerusalem in 1976,
because we were convinced that the combined strength
of legal opinion and of the unanimous decisions of the
Council was sufficiently evident to deter any possibIe
unilateral changes.

48. The debate so far has already amply illustrated
the extreme sensitivity of this question and the consequent need for an objective and serious analysis
of the central issues involved. The Council would do
well not to be distracted-from the sensitive political
aspects of this question by discussion of a maze of
controverted details.
49. Without going into too much detail therefore, let
me only recall that, from those studies I have referred
to it emerges that, when the question of Palestine was
first taken up by the United Nations in 1947, the
country already was ravaged by conflict. Jerusalem
became a particular centre of convergence of that confrontation. Population changes and influxes were
taking place. Nevertheless, the United Nations Special
Committee on Palestine at the time unanimously
recommended that the sanctity of the Holy Places be
guaranteed by special provisions and that “existing
rights” in Palestine be preserved. As members of the
Council are also aware,- that Committee included
among its recommendations the territorial intemationalization of Jerusalem as an international enclave
in the proposed Arab State in Palestine. Those recommendations were approved by the General Assembly
in its resolution 181 (II) of 29 November 1947. They
envisaged a demilitarized Jerusalem as a corpus
separatum under the aegis of the Trusteeship Council. The principle of upholding “existing rights” in the
Holy Places was again maintained in the partition
resolution. The conflict in Palestine, however, prevented the implementation of that resolution. In fact,
the unfortunate reality was that Palestine’s fate was
being determined by conflict and not by international
agreement.

53. Furthermore, even the then Prime Minister and
Minister of Defence, David Ben Gurion, of Israel
recognized that Jerusalem was occupied territory, as
far back as 1948, in an edict issued by him on 2 August
of that year and published in the Israeli official Government Gazette No. 12. On the same day another official
proclamation appointed Mr. Dov Joseph as Military
Governor of the occupied area of Jerusalem. United
Nations diplomats at the time addressed Mr. Joseph
as “the Military Governor of Israeli-occupied JeruSalem”.
54. As a result of subsequent controversy, the
General Assembly, in paragraph 1 of its resolution 303 (IV), of 9 December 1949, as if to make
assurance doubly sure, restated “its intention that
Jerusalem should be placed under a permanent international regime and that the City of Jerusalem shall
be established as a corpus separatum”.
55. It therefore seems that the evidence is overwhelming that the area of Jerusalem has been an area
under military occupation since 1948, that itis occupied
territory and that the fourth Geneva Convention of

50. Even in those tragic circumstances, however, by
1950certain features of the Palestine question directly
6

1949applies to Jerusalem as well as to the other territories occupied by force. Our Organization in any
case also possessesthe necessary machinery authoritatively to determine that aspect.

city of peace and of hope. The Security Council and
the procedures it has evolved represent the latest
aspirations of mankind for collective means to achieve
peace. I very much hope, therefore, Mr. President,
that under your able guidance the Council will preserve
its unanimity and send out an unmistakable message
that on this sensitive issue the international community
remains united in its determination to preserve the
unique character of Jerusalem.

56. The recent bill introduced in the Knesset declaring Jerusalem the eternal capital of Israel has now
added a new and unfortunate dimension to Israel’s
illegal occupation of the city. Following that move,
Prime Minister Begin has decided to transfer his office
and that of his Cabinet to East Jerusalem as soon as
possible. These actions have shocked the conscience
of religious people throughout the world. They are
bound to exacerbate even further the tension in the
area. Because, even if the Middle East were to be
considered a model region for friendly co-operation
among its people and even had the proposed legislation
been motivated by the highest interests of promoting
good-neighbourly solidarity, a legal enactment of such
world-wide scope and sensitivity would at the very
least have required extensive previous consultations
and subsequent study and negotiations with all
concerned.

61. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
62. Mr. ERALP (Turkevl: On biddine farewell to
the Council on 13June, I &id that, barriig unforeseen
circumstances, that would be my last appearance
before the Council. I apologize for having requested
the privilege of addressing the Council one more time
during the course of this month, but those circumstances have occurred.
63. The question of Jerusalem is one with which the
Government and people of Turkey have been throughout the centuries, and are at present, deeply associated
and concerned. For centuries, Turkey was part of a
large “commonwealth”, which included the whole of
the Middle East, even before the word commonwealth
was in general use. Furthermore, our membership in
the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine, our membership in the Islamic Conference and
our membership in the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People constitute additional reasons for our not being able to
remain silent over the fate of Al-Quds.

57. As far as we know, neither the situation on the
spot nor the procedure adopted comply with that
scenario. On the contrary, with the Middle East in
general and the occupied territories’ in particular
seething with resentment and prone to violence, it is
difficult to escape the conclusion that the proposed
legislation is, to put it mildly, ill-timed and ill-advised.
It is in fact extremely difficult to reconcile the
proposed legislation with Israel’s oft-declared policy
of seeking to live in peace with its neighbours. Furthermore, when this intended legislation is seen within the
.broader perspective of other actions illegally taken by
Israel in the occupied territories, then the concern of
the international community for the prospects of peace
in the area-in which all of us have a stake-inevitably
becomes even more pronounced than it has been in the
past.

64. The legal, historical and politicalaspects-and the
dire consequences--of any attempt to change the status
and alter the Arab character of the Holy City have
been eloquently expressed by..Mr. Agha Shahi, the
Foreign Minister of Pakistan [2233rd meeting], and
other speakers. Before I go into the substance of the
subject-matter before us, I should like, with the permission of the Council, to start my comments by
relating a reminiscence which may throw further light
on the historical aspects.

58. The members of the Committee were shocked
when the proposed legislation was brought to their
attention, and on this occasion at this latest indication
of Israel’s insensitivity they wish to strike a note of
alarm-as, unfortunately, we have had to do on too
many occasions since the Committee was established.

65. I believe it was during the second session of the
General Assembly in 1947, at a meeting of the First
Committee, that the then Permanent Representative of
Syria, Mr. El-Khouri, referred to the following
authentic incident. During the reign of Sultan Abdulhamid, the Ottoman Empire was having financial
difficulties. The Sultan was approached by the wealthy
Zionists of Europe who offered to pay off the outstanding debts of the Empire, if only the Sultan would
deliver to the Israelites the province of Palestine, then
a part of the Ottoman Empire. The reply of the Sultan
was quite simple: “Palestine belongs to the Arabs; how
can I ever give something that does not belong to me?”

59. I say this only with regret and certainly with no
desire to incite. On the contrary, our objective is to
have recourse to reason, to urge restraint and that
wiser counsel may prevail. We applaud the inspired
words of His Holiness the Pope on this question and
on the related question of Palestine. We recognize that
we all have a responsibility to advance rather than to
imperil the striving and the search for a just solution
to the overall Middle East crisis, which has been a
running sore in the body politic of international relations for so many decades.
“._.
60. Jerusalem is indelibly engraved in the hearts of
women and men throughout the world as the eternal

66. In this connection, I should like to mention one
more little-known fact which illustrates the tolerant and
7

impartial role played by Islam and Turkey during the
400 years of its guardianship of Jerusalem and its Holy
Places. The Church of the Holy Sepulchre in the Old
City ofJerusalem, which is one of thesancru sanctorum
of Christianity, was frequented by several different
denominations of Christians which were often at
loggerheads with one another. To avoid conflicts, a
so-called~srurus quo agreement was signed under the
auspices of the local Ottoman authorities, in which the
rights of each denomination were clearly specified.
The keys to the Holy Sepulchre were entrusted for
generations to an Ottoman Muslim who would openthe church in the morning and lock it up at night.
During the negotiations of the United Nations Conciliation Commission for Palestine with the Christian
dignitaries in Jerusalem, the Committee on Jerusalem
of the Commission was always beseeched not to tamper
with the specifications of this status quo agreement.
In short, throughout the 13 centuries of Muslim rule
over Palestine, Islamic sovereignty over Jerusalem was
carried as a sacred trust. The history of Muslim sovereignty over Jerusalem exemplifies in an excellent
manner Islam’s true spirit as a religion of peace, understanding, tolerance and respect for other religions and
places of worship.

70, The sacred heritage of the Holy City, to which
I referred earlier, is being systematically andconstantly
obliterated by unilateral moves to change its character;
and this has been going on since the 1%7 June war.
The recent bill introduced in the Knesset declaring
Al-Quds Al-Sharif Israel’s capital, which has, in fact,
prompted the convening of the Council at this partitular time, has really been the culmination of the
numerous previous unilateral measures taken by
Israel in Jerusalem itself as well as other occupied
Arab territories. According to the information available to us, the bill has been referred to a Committee
for eventual adoption as a basic law. This move
juridically to alter the status of Al-Quds Al Sharif
has been followed by the most provocative decision
of the Israeli authorities to shift the office of the
Prime Minister and the Cabinet to East Jerusalem.
71. The earlier examples of the sacrilege committed
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, the desecration of AlKhalil and several other measures to demolish the
Holy Places of Islam in Palestine cannot be seen as
isolated incidents but constitute an integral part of
the Israeli plan permanently to occupy Al-Quds. In
fact, since June 1967, after the occupation by Israel
of the eastern part of Jerusalem, the numerous statements and declarations of Israeli officials to the effect
that Jerusalem is finally united, will remain united
and will be the capital of the State of Israel have continuously and systematically been supplemented and
complemented by their deeds in this regard, in spite
of all the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions to the contrary.

67. By its resolution 194 (III) of 11 December.1948,
the General Assembly established the United Nations
Conciliation Commission for Palestine consisting of
the representatives of France, Turkey and the United
States, which was instructed
‘.‘to present to the fourth regular session of the
General Assembly detailed proposals for a permanent international regime for the Jerusalem area
which will provide for the maximum local autonomy
for distinctive groups .consistent with the special
international status of the Jerusalem area.‘:’ ,.
:, ‘,
,
I
68. While the Commission was engaged in negotiations with all the parties concerned in the area to carry
out that mandate, the Government of Israel had already
started the process of consolidating its position in the
western part of Jerusalem and making it the capital
of the new State by moving the Supreme Court and
the Knesset to that part of Jerusalem-of course, in
spite of all the vigorous protests of the Commission.
69. The Commission tried to. carry out its mandate
by meticulously preparing and submitting, through
its Committee’ on Jerusalem-of
which Turkey
happened to be a member-detailed proposals for an
international regime for Jerusalem. However, the
regime’s status as envisaged by these proposals never
saw the light of day because Israel, though it had
participated actively in the negotiation.s, rejected the
proposals. Nevertheless, members of the Commission
continue to be bound by the mandate and the terms of
resolution 194 (III), as further witnessed by the fact
that they have refrained from moving their diplomatic
representation from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
.’

72. The United Nations has adopted a number of
resolutions on Jerusalem. General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-Vjand 2254 (ES-V) and Security Council resolutions 252 (1%8), 267 (1%9), 271 (i969) and
298 (1971) specifically address. themselves to Jerusalem. These resolutions, as well as Council resolutions
242 (1%7), 446 (1979), 465 (1980) and 471(1980), have
unequivocally affirmed the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by military conquest and declared all legislative and administrative
actions taken by Israel to change the status of the
City of Jerusalem, including the expropriation of land
and properties, transfer of population, and .legislation
aimed at the incorporation of the occupied areas, to
be totally invalid. In almost all of these resolutions,
Israel has been condemned for its refusal to comply
with them.
’
*ii .y
73. It is certainly no coincidence that the mtemational community and the Security Council have constantly been occupied with one or the other. aspect
of the Middle East question during the last few,months.
* Israel, instead of complying with United,.Nations
resolutions, has continued to build new settlements,
to expand existing ones, to expropriate *lands, to
demolish houses and to expel inhabitants, -including
elected officials, causing the situation in theoccupied
territories to deteriorate further and aggravating yet
‘8

more the already existing tension in the area. The
persistent ilenial of Israel and its non-compliance with
the provisions of numerous resolutions not only constitute a flagrant violation of the principles and the provisions of the Charter, the provisions of the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949and the principles of international law but also pose a major obstacle to the search
for a just, equitable and durable comprehensive solution to the Middle East question. My delegation,
which is committed to an overall solution of the
Middle East question, at whose core is the question of
Palestine, finds the attitude, actions and unilateral
measures Israel persistently takes to be totally incompatible with the peace process in which Israel seems
to be involved.
74. The attitude of Turkey vis-d-vis the Middle East
question is clear. As has been made known on several
previous occasions and in several forums of the Organization, Turkey believes that the Palestine question
is the essence of the Middle East issue. We also believe
.that a just and lasting solution to the Middle East
question can be achieved only by the withdrawal of
Israel from ail Arab territories occupied since 1967,
including Jerusalem, and by taking into consideration
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian Arab people,
including their right to establish a State ,of their own.
Furthermore, it has been our constant belief that an
overall solution to the problem of the Middle East
should imply respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence of all States’in the region,
including Israel, and for their right to live in peace
within secure borders. We have co-sponsored or supported all resolutions on those questions.
75. The universal spiritual heritage aridsignificance of
Jerusalem, have found their most eloquent expression
in the address of His Holiness Pope’ John Paul II
before the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly.4 Recently the European heads ,of, State and
Government at Venice declared that they would not
accept any unilateral initiative designed to change the
status of Jerusalem [S/14009]. We feel that it is high
time for the Council to take determined action on this
highly delicate question, where there is unanimity in
international public opinion. The Council must take all
necessary ‘measures to ensure the preservation of the
status of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Such determined
action by the Council on the Holy City of Jerusalem
-the Holy City of peace-will not only serve to solve
a most important part of the question of the Middle
East but will certainly pave the way for its overall
solution. ’ ,’
t’
76. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Qatar. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table
2;. and to make his statement.
77. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): Mr. President, the Security
Council is’*meeting today to discuss a grave issue of
our time: Jerusalem. The name evokes deep concerns
and associations. It is a good omen that these delibera-

tions are taking place under your wise leadership and
guidance. Your country, Norway, and you personally
have exhibited great interest in the fate and destiny
of the Holy City.
78. The issue of Jerusalem was one of the major .
Islamic issues taken up by the Islamic Conference of
Foreign Ministers at Islamabad. Upon the conclusion
of the Conference on 22 May 1980, the’ Ministers
unanimously reiterated their countries’ commitment
to the implementation of the resolutions relating to
Jerusalem adopted by previous Islamic Conferences
and the General Assembly and Security Council. They *
further condemned the Israeli Government’s new
legislative actions on the annexation of Jerusalem,
calling upon all Islamic and friendly countries to
counter them. The Conference also decided to call for
the immediate convening of the Council to carry out
its responsibilities and face this grave challenge to
world peace and security.
79. The Israeli Parliament’s decision on 14 May to
approve the legislative proposal on the status of
Jerusalem was the latest Zionist crime against Jerusalem and the other Arab lands occupied since 1967.
It was the latest crime against the Palestinian people,
the Arab nation, the Muslim ,world and the entire ;
world community.
!
80. The initial approval by the Zionist Parliament to
consider under basic law which cannot be reversed
by future governments “Greater Jerusalem‘*, illegally
occupied in 1948 and illegally annexed in 1%7, as the
eternal capital of Israel is further proof of the fact that
the aim of the Zionists was and still is the-continued
expansion and colonization of the Arab lands and the
establishment of a so-called “Greater Israel” ‘as- a
racist ,and ‘exclusivist State in our ‘Arab homeland.
That action unveils once again the Zionist movement
as a colonialist, racist and expansionist one. The
policies of daily expansion and of uprooting the
Palestinian people from their homes and properties are
the result of the continued implementation of the.
Zionist historical goals in Palestine and in the rest of
the Arab lands. Those policies and practices have con- ..
tinued, thanks to unlimited United States support of
the Zionist aggressor enabling it to continue its occupa- ;
tion of Palestine and the rest of the Arab territories,
despite the fact that those policies are illegal under
international law and in severe violation of the clear
pertinent resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly and the relevant provisions of
The Hague regulations and Geneva Conventions.
81. Some statements and press reports in the United
States have attempted to play down the gravity of the
latest Israeli action on the status of Jerusalem. We
were told that the proposed legislation was introduced
as a private bill by a representative of the Opposition
and that it might be buried in the Committee. But as
a matter of fact this was not the case, as proved by ,
the statement of a member of the Israeli Parliament
on this bill.

82. Uri Avneri, in his statement to the Israeli Parliament on 14 May, said:
“How can we ever achieve peace, not only with
4 million Palestinians, not only with 100 million
Arabs, but also with 1 billion Muslims, on the basis
of the present status quo in Jerusalem? Are we
ready for eternal war against the entire Arab world
and against the entire Muslim world not because we
insist on the sanctity of Jerusalem, but on the sanctity
of the present political sfufus quo in Jerusalem?‘*.
Avneri protested the grave provocation undertaken in
the name of the unification of the City. He asked:
“Is Jerusalem today unified when weapons and
explosives are discovered on the roof of a Yeshiva
school in the Old City? Is it a unified city when
hundreds of policemen and troops are needed to
force the Arabs to open their shops against their
will?“.
Avneri concluded: “This is an act of evil, even when
wrapped with the cover of holiness and sanctity”.
83. On 20 May Huolum Nazi magazine published the
draft bill that was approved by the Knesset. The third
paragraph of the bill states the following, as translated
from the Hebrew: “A Greater Jerusalem, unified and
complete within the boundaries set after the six-day
war, its unity and completeness may not be altered’*.

and 2254 (ES-V), and of Security Council resolutions 252 (1%8), 267 (1969), 271(1969) and298(1971).
All those resolutions condemned Israeli measures in
Jerusalem and called upon Israel to rescind forthwith
all measures taken by it that might tend to change the
status of the City of Jerusalem.
86. In fact, the response of the Israeli occupation
authorities to the Security Council resolutions was to
take additional measures to change the status of
Jerusalem. There was increased destruction of Arab
quarters and eviction of the Arab inhabitants, additional expropriation of Arab lands and further desecration of Holy Places. After the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 465 (1980) last March calling upon
Israel to rescind all its measures in all occupied Palestinian and other Arab territories, including Jerusalem, the Israeli authorities announced the expropriation of another 1,000 acres of the remaining Arab
lands in north-eastern Jerusalem.
87. The mass media in Europe and in the United
States have recently disclosed news about another
conspiracy by the criminal Rabbi Kahane, to destroy
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, specifically by using explosives
in the midst of the Friday prayers. The Israeli’
authorities as usual have imposed a blackout on the
release of that news.
88. The Security Council is empowered to stop those,
crimes and those offensive acts which gravely endanger peace and security in the area and throughout the
entire world.

84. The part of Jerusalem illegally occupied in 1948
was proclaimed the capital of Israel contrary to General Assembly resolutions, despite the fact that no
Member State has recognized that illegal act. Now we
are faced with the grave action of the inclusion of
that part of Jerusalem occupied in June 1967 in the.
original illegal act. This bill has been referred to a
committee, and this does not mean it will be killed
there, as some have attempted to imply. What it
means is that the bill has been initially approved. The
function of the Committee is to finalize the draft
and to submit it to the plenary House. If the Govemment of Menachem Begin wanted to kill this awful
bill, it would have done so before it was taken to the
Committee-and it did not do so.

89. The crimes against the Holy City of Jerusalem
are of the utmost gravity because of the uni-que value
of that city, especially when they are seen in the wider
context, as part of the genocide perpetrated by the
Zionist regime against the Palestinian people;
90. In the case of Jerusalem, we must quicken our
concern anew. In the case of Jerusalem, we see the
issue as special, as pivotal to the history of-mankind
on this planet. In the case of Jerusalem, we’ must not
let the normal procedures of diplomacy block us off
from confronting a single, simple fact. The global
community is endangered by the continued imprisonment of the religious heart of the world. This common
spirituality must be released in order to allow us to
recognize not only the historical source of Judaism,
Christianity and Islam, but also the fact that. Jerusalem
is also the nerve-centre of Palestinian iights and
destiny, and the focus of Arab and Islamic commitment.

85. The Zionist authorities gave assurances to the
General Assembly before Israel was admitted to the
United Nations in 1949 that they would refrain from
taking any action contrary to United Nations resolutions concerning Jerusalem. Those assurances were
specifically mentioned in General Assembly resolution 273 (III) admitting Israel to membership in the
United Nations. Yet, Israel did not comply with that
resolution. All resolutions of the General Assembly
and Security Council since the occupation of Arab
Jerusalem in. 1967have been disregarded by the Israeli
Government. Further measures and actions have been
taken in contravention of those resolutions. That was
the fate of General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V)

91. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yemen. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement. .
92. Mr. ALAINI (Yemen): Mr. President, allow me
at the outset to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and at the
10

same time to commend your way of conducting the
work of the Council. Your wise guidance of our deliberations surely merits our appreciation and respect.
The assumption of the presidency by the representative of a friendly country that has firmly stood by the
cause of justice and freedom is a source of assurance
of the successful conclusion of our deliberations.

97. It is obvious that Israel is trying to confront the
international community with a fait accompli by
annexing Al-Quds, hoping that as time passesrejection
of that aggressive act will diminish. It was only a few
days ago that the Israeli Prime Minister announced that
his office would be moved to East Jerusalem. Weeks
before that announcement was made legislative steps
were initiated in the Knesset to annex the eastern part
of Al-Quds to its western part so that the unified City
could be the capital of Israel. Moreover, reports from
the occupied territories indicate that there are secret
plots to blow up the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

93. I should also like to thank you and the other
Council members for giving me the opportunity to
speak on this sensitive issue, which concerns not only
our Arab nation but also the Muslim as well as the
Christian world and, indeed, all those who yearn for
freedom and justice all over the world.

98. We are, however, sure that neither the Muslim
peoples nor the Christian world will accept this
Israeli assault on Muslim and Christian shrines. For
its part, our country firmly stands with the struggling
people of Jerusalem and Palestine in resisting these
expansionist adventures.

94. Using every means, and supported by the colonial
Powers, the Zionist organizations were able gradually
to usurp Palestine. Circumstances were exceptionally
favourable to the Zionist conspirators. After the
Second World War, most of the Arab countries were
under foreign occupation and domination and unable
to render any meaningful assistanceto their Palestinian
brothers. The post-war international scene was
dominated by the two antagonistic military alliances,
and the thiid world, as we know it today, was nearly
non-existent.

99. All the alarming developments in the Middle East
are seriously threatening the peace and security of the
region, and concern is always being expressed about
those developments. But we should now be even more
aware that we are facing a very serious situation, a
situation which, if not dealt with effectively, will
certainly have extremely dangerous consequences.

95. After the Second World War, Zionism played on
the guilty feelings of some Western Governments concerning the Jewish people, blackmailing them into
justifying that people’s migration to Palestine, and
drew both military and moral support for its occupation. International Zionism sought to punish the Palestinian people for the crimes committed against the
Jews by the racist, Fascist and Nazi regimes in Europe.
However, history proves that the Arab people of Palestine had absolutely nothing to do with the inhuman
practices of those regimes. History also testifies that,
prior to the occupation of a substantial part of Palestine
and the declaration of the establishment of the State
of Israel, the Zionist movement had appealed to the
Governments of Western States to help in settling
the Jewish refugees, preferably in Palestine, for purely
humanitarian considerations. The evil intention of the
Zionists was at that time known to only a very few
people. It was only after numerous massacres committed by- the Zionist terrorist organizations against
the Arab population of Palestine that the real Zionist
motives became unmistakably clear. As though it
intended to remove any doubt as to its expansionist
objectives, .Israel, in total disregard of the United
Nations partition resolution of 1947, waged a series of
aggressive’ ‘wars against its neighbours, after which it
not only completed the occupation of Palestine but
also occupied parts of the neighbouring Arab States.

102. If the Arabs are still bringing their case to the
Council, it is because they wish to reaffirm their
commitment to the Charter and their belief in the
role of the United Nations in the promotion of human
rights and the establishment of a just peace. The day,
however, may not be far away when the Arabs, under
pressure of public opinion and realizing the impotence of the Organization, may be compelled to deal
with their own problems by themselves, following the
example of the heroic people of Viet Nam and other
glorious examples. The region and perhaps the whole
world will then pay dearly.

96. While Israel talks about peace and accuses
others of being terrorists, it persists in its occupation
of Arab land and continues its settlement policy in
Arab territories in total disregard of the relevant United
Nations resolutions and in contravention of intemational law.

103. The Israelis under the American umbrella are
furthering their expansionist designs by annexing the
occupied land as part of what they call land of Israel.
In doing so, they are trying to give the impression
that they are only filling a vacuum, colonizing a noman’s land. Contrary to their wishful thinking, how-

100. We recall how violently millions of Muslims in
various countries responded to the incident in AlHaram Al-Makki a few months ago, especially when
it was suspected that there was foreign involvement
in that incident. Violence of an even wider magnitude
is expected to take place if the present status of AlQuds is in any way altered. Peace and stability in the
area will in effect be greatly jeopardized and Govemments will be unable to cope with the situation.
101. The Council is called upon to take firm action
and the great Powers have to shoulder their responsibilities in foiling the Israeli plans of annexation, which
the Council previously termed void and illegal.

11

ever, the whole world is now very much aware of the
existence of the Palestinian people and their deeprooted civilization. Thanks to their armed struggle
under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Grganization, the Palestinian people have proved their
persistence in their homeland and their determination
to establish their independent State. Their just cause
is increasingly recognized not only by the Arab nation,
the Muslim and non-aligned countries and the socialist
countries, but even today by the Governments of
Western Europe, which have begun to realize that
peace is unlikely to prevail in the Middle East if the
Palestinians are not enabled to exercise their right of
self-determination in their homeland.
104. We have no doubt that the Palestinian people
will liberate their homeland and eventually establish
their own independent State. Colonialism and fascism,

history has taught us, have no place in our world. What
is needed at this stage is for the Council to reaffirm
its responsibility in supporting legitimacy, right and
peace based on justice.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

NOTES
1 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.
2 Oflcial Records of the Economic and Social Council, Fiftieth
Session, Supplement No. 4. chap, XIX, resolution 9 (XXVII).
3 Offcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session,
Supplement No. 35.
4 ibid., Thirty-fourth Session, Plenary Meetings, 17th meeting.

l
c

. .

HOW TO ORTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICA’IlONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENf

SE PROCURER LRS PUBLICATIONS

DES NA’IIONS UNIES

Les publications dcs Nations Unies sent en vente dans la iibrairics et tK agenas d@ositaires du
monde enticr. Informez-vous auprts de votn libraire ou adrcsscz-vowsB : Nations Unies, Section
dcs vcntes. New York ou Gentvc.
ICAIC IIOZYPHTh

EI3AAHHSf

OPrAHM3AI~HW

W3nasrxx OpraxiH3axtmf 06ae~miemib~x
3wrax
H aremcmax
~0 Bcex
pafionax
nameu
K(AII~~XOY
uaraxiiie
mu
marme
KauxR.Ce~qxxnonpo~ame~sxaa~R.Hb~-JIopI(nllH~exena.

COMO CONSEGUIR PURLICACIONES

oli’bEAHHEHHMX

Hart~R YOXHO rynWrb
nnpa. H~BOJJHT~
cnpaenn
uo

~pecy:OpraRHJailH~

HAItBH
II 8cxmc~blx
mara06 kwtamnx
B
O6'beAHHembrX

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las pubtiiciones de las Naciones Unidas es&n en venta M liim5as y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librrro o dirijase a: Naciones,Unidas. Qccibn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

83-61462-Se.@ember1962,050
