44

General Assembly-Twenty-fourth Session

in the final report of the Enlarged Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination;53
7. Requests the Secretary-General to provide adequate and effective secretaria! assistance to the reconstituted Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
and keep it informed of relevant developments within
the United N ations system of organizations;
8. Notes in particular the recommendation of the
Enlarged Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
conceming the use of computers in the United Nations
system of organizations54 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit, in 1971, the report suggested in
paragraph 40 of the final report of the Enlarged Committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the specialized agencies and other bodies in the
United Nations system, to include as part of the report
to be submitted to the Economic and Social Council at
its forty-ninth session, as requested in its resolution 1454 (XLVII) of 8 August 1969, an examination of the existing Secretari~t machinery for providing
scientific and technical advice in the United Nations
system and to prepare recommendations for its reorganization in a way which will enable it to contribute
most effectively to the selection of priorities and to
the planning and programming of United Nations activities designed to meet the growing and changing needs
of the United Nations system, of the intemational
community and of Member States;
10. W elcomes the practice recently initiated by the
Secretary-General of holding top-echelon meetings of
staff concemed with economic and social affairs within
the United Nations, including the regional economic
commissions and the semi-autonomous organs, and
urges the Secretary-General to bring to the attention
of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination
any matters discussed in these meetings which may be
of interest to it;
11. Welcomes the practice of joint meetings between
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and
µrges that these meetings should be continued, bearing
in mind that they have proved their value in facilitating
understanding and co-operation among those dealing
with ,interagency issues at the intergovemmental and
executive levels, respectively;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman
of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to
bring to the attention of all organizations in the United
Nations system the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination for
strengthening the present arrangements for co-ordination
by the adoption of more effective procedures for prior
consultations on work programmes;1111
' 13. Notes the recommendation of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on co~rdination at the national level118 and requests the
Secretary-General to dráw to the attention of the memt,ers of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination
the recommendation contained in paragraph 80 of the
$nal report of the Enlarged Committee;
' aa Ibid., document E/4748/Rev.1, paras. 27 and 28.

• !~ lbld., docuinent E/4748/Rev.1, chapter 111, recommen-

aauon B.
' 111 lbld., recommendation E.
•• Ibid., recommendation F.

14. Notes with interest the other matters considered
by the Enlarged Committee for Programme and Coordination in its final report 57 and agrees that these
proposals should be reviewed by the reconstituted Committee for Programme and Co-ordination.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2580 (XXIV).

Co-ordination of marine activities

The General Assembly,
Having considered the final report of the Enlarged
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, 118
Noting that the Enlarged Committee was unable in
the time available to give thorough consideration to a
proposal for more systematic co-ordination of continuing activities of the organizations in the United
N ations system relating to the seas and oceans,
A ware of the complexity of the co-ordination of
existing intemational activities with regard to marine
science and its applications, and that the field of marine
science is only one aspect of the existing activities of
the organizations in the United Nations system relating
to the seas and oceans,
Noting that use by States of the marine environment
is rapidly becoming intensified and diversified,
Noting with appreciation the work done in this field
by the organizations in the United Nations system,
Concerned that present intemational machinery may
not permit a prompt, effective and flexible response to
existing and emerging needs of Member States,
Recognizing that, in order to avoid the overlapping
and duplication of programmes and gaps in competence, a full review of the existing activities of the
organizations in the United Nations system relating to
the seas and oceans may be urgently required,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at
its organizational meetings in January 1970, to consider instructing the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination, after reconstitution, to examine the need
for a comprehensive review of existing activities of the
United Nations system relating to the seas and oceans
in the light of present and emerging needs of Member
States, with a view to making the Committee's recommendations available to the Council at its fortv-ninth
session;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination in the fulfilment of this task;
3. Invites the specialized agencies and the intergovemmental bodies concemed to extend their full cooperation and assistance to the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
2581 (XXIV). United Nalion11 Conference on the
Human Environment
The General Assembly,
In pursuance of its decision in resolution 2398
(XXIII) of .3 December 1968 to convene in 1972 a
117 /bid., document E/4748/Rev.1, chapter IV.
118/bid., document E/4748/Rev.1.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Seeonfl Committee

United Nations Conference on the Human Environment
and to begin immediately preparations for the Conference,
Having considered with appreciation the report of
the Secretary-General59 called for in the abovementioned resolution,
Having considered the relevant section of the report
of the Economic and Social Council,60
T aking into account the recommendations of the
Economic and Social Council in the matter,
Having taken cognizance of the note by the Secretary-General of 21 October 1969,61
Reaffirming the importance and urgency of the problems of the human environment and underlining the
necessity for complete preparatory arrangements for
the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in 1972 to become operative as soon as possible,
Recognizing the important work on the problems of
the human environment that is at present being undertaken and planned by the organizations in the United
Nations system, other intergovernmental organizations,
non-govemmental organizations and national Govemments,
1. Endorses in general the proposals contained in
the report of the Secretary-General regarding the purposes and objectives of the United Nations Conference
on the Human Environment;62
2. Affirms that it should be the main purpose of
the Conference to serve as a practica} means to encourage, and to provide guidelines for, action by Governments and intemational organizations designed to
protect and improve the human environment and to
remedy and prevent its impairment, by means of intemational co-operation, bearing in mind the particular
importance of enabling developing countries to forestall the occurrence of such problems;
3. Entrusts the Secretary-General with over-all responsibility for organizing and preparing for the Conference, bearing in mind the views expressed during
the debates of the Economic and Social Council at
its forty-seventh session and of the General Assembly
at its twenty-fourth session;
4. Establishes a Preparatory Committee for the
United Nations Conference on the Human Environment--consisting of highly qualified representatives
nominated by the Govemments of Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Cz.echoslovakia, France,
Ghana, Guinea, India, lran, Italy, Jamaica, J apan,
Mauritius, Mexico, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Singapore,
Sweden, Togo, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
the United Arab Republic, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northem Ireland, the United States of
America, Yugoslavia and Zambia--to advise the Secretary-General;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to set up immediately a small conference secretariat by drawing, with
the agreement of the specialized agencies concemed,
particularly upon regular staff of the United Nations
system, and to appoint at the appropriate time a
Secretary-General of the Conference;
119 E/4667.
60 Ofjicial

Records of the General Assembly, Twentyfourth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/7603 and Corr.1), chapter V, section D.
6 1 Jbid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 21,
document A/7707.
62 See E/4667, paras. 82-92.

45

6. Further requests the Secretary-General to pursue
the consultations on the preparations for the Conference, undertaken by him in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2398 (XXIII), to take account of the results of other intemational conferences,
such as the conference on the problerns of environment organized by the Economic Comrnission for Europe and scheduled to take place at Prague in 1971,
and to draw on contributions frorn appropriate intergovemrnental and non-governmental organizations;
7. Invites the specialized agencies, the Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency and the Advisory Committee
on the Application of Science and Technology to Developrnent to collaborate closely with the SecretaryGeneral in the preparations for the Conference and to
assist, as appropriate, in the work of the Preparatory
Comrnittee;
8. Invites the intergovernmental and non-govemmental organizations concemed to lend every possible
assistance in the preparations for the Conference;
9. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Preparatory Committee, to take the necessary
steps, as part of the preparations for the Conference,
to bring to public attention the nature and importance
of the problerns of the human environment;
10. Believes it essential that all participating countries should be enabled to take an active part in the
preparations for the Conference and in the Conference
itself, and requests the Secretary-General to investigate
what concrete steps could be taken to this end;
11. Notes the outline of the range of the possible
financia! implications for the United Nations of the
holding of the Conference presented in the report
of the Secretary-General63 and in bis note 64 and requests him, in the light of the views expressed during
the debates of the Economic and Social Council at its
forty-seventh session and of the General Assembly at
its twenty-fourth session, to rnake ali efforts to reduce
the costs of the Conference;
12. Decides that the Conference should be of two
weeks' duration and requests the Secretary-General to
take full account of this fact in preparing for the Conference;
13. Believes that, for the Conference to achieve its
objectives, it is essential that its agenda be selective,
its organizational structure simple and efficient, and
that the docurnentation be kept within reasonable
limits;
14. Accepts with appreciation the invitation of the
Government of Sweden to hold the Conference in
Sweden, 611 in June 1972;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
brief progress report, through the Economic and Social
Council at its forty-ninth session, to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
16. Decides to consider the progress of the preparatory work of the Conference and to take the necesS!lfY fu~er decisions at its twenty-fifth and twentysixth sess1ons.
1834th plenary meeting,
15 December 1969.
63 lbid., paras. 139-143.
64 See Ofjicial Records of

the General Assembly Twentyfourth Session, Annexes, agenda item 21, document A/7707,
paras. 5-8.
611 lbid., document A/7514.
