62

Genera I Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

2906 (XXVII). Programme for the observance
of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Univeri,al Declaration of Human Rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling that on 10 December 1973 the world community will celebrate the twenty-fifth anniversary of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Recalling its resolution 2860 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971, by which it expressed its conviction of the
historic significance and enduring value of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights as a common standard
of achievement for all peoples and all nations and decided to consider at its twenty-seventh session the
question of the preparation of an appropriate programme to observe the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Declaration,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General1 containing suggestions as to a programme of
suitable activities which could be undertaken for this
purpose,
1. Reaffirms its adherence to the principles, values
and ideals contained in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights;
2. Reiterates the hope that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
will be celebrated by the world community in a manner befitting the occasion and serving the cause of
human rights;
3. Decides to hold a special meeting on 10 December 1973 at which will be launched the Decade for
Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
as and when approved;
4. Takes note with appreciation of the suggestions
presented by the Secretary-General in his report;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To transmit his report to Governments, specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council
for such action as they may wish to undertake in order
to give effect to the suggestions contained in the report;
(b) To take the necessary measures for the implementation of those suggestions which fall within the
Secretary-General's area of responsibility or which require action by other organs of the United Nations;
(c) To organize as soon as possible seminars on a
regional level under the programme of advisory services
in the field of human rights with the purpose of studying new ways and means for promoting human rights
in the light of the present resolution, with special
attention to the problems and needs of the various
regions of the world;
(d) To submit to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session a progress report on the preparations made and the measures taken in accordance with
the present resolution.
2068th plenary meeting
19 October 1972
2919 (XXVII). Decade for Action to Combat
Racism and Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Firmly convinced that racial discrimination in all
its forms and manifestations is a total negation of the
1 A/8820 and Corr.I.

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and that it militates against human progress,
peace and justice,
Believing that the continuation of national, regional
and international action against racial discrimination
in aH its forms is a matter of vital importance if the
world is to live in peace and justice,
Noting that a detailed draft programme for a Decade
for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination has been prepared by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities 2
and that it has been submitted to the Commission on
Human Rights for urgent consideration at its twentyninth session,
l. Decides to launch the Decade for Action to
Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination and to
inaugurate the activities thereof on 10 December 1973,
the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
2. Invites therefore the Economic and Socia~ Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to
give the highest priority to the consideration of the
draft programme for the Decade and to submit it to
the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session for
final consideration.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
2920 (XXVII). Exploitation of labour throu~h
illicit ancl clandestine traffil'king

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, 3
Recalling the provisions of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1706 ( LIII) of 28 July 1972 concerning illicit trafficking in foreign labour,
Noting that some States have acceded to the Convention concerning Migration for Employment (Revised 1949), 4 adopted by the International Labour
Conference at its thirty-second session,
Noting with interest resolution IV of 27 June 1972,
adopted by the International Labour Conference at its
fifty-seventh session, concerning conditions and equality
of treatment of migrant workers,
Deeply concerned by the de facto discrimination of
which foreign workers are the victims in certain countries of Europe and of other continents, despite the
efforts . ma~e by certain Governments, particularly at
the legislative level, to prevent and repress it,
1. Calls upon the Governments of the above-mentioned countries to take or supervise the application of
measures to put an end to the discriminatory treatment
of which migrant workers in their territory are the
victims and particularly to ensure the improvement of
arrangements for receiving such workers;
2. Invites all Governments to ensure respect for
the provisions of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
2 A/8805, annex.
3 Resolution 2106 A (XX).
4 International Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No. 97,
p. 743.

63

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights should consider the question of the exploitation
of labour through i11icit and clandestine trafficking at
its next session, as provided in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1706 (LIil), as a matter of priority;
4. Invites the International Labour Organisation to
continue the studies it has begun on illicit trafficking
in foreign labour, which is a form of exploitation, and
to strengthen international machinery for the protection
of migrant workers;
5. Urges the Governments which have not yet done
so to give high priority to the ratification of the Convention of the International Labour Organisation concerning Migration for Employment (Revised 1949),
in the context of their efforts to eliminate illicit trafficking in foreign labour.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2921 (XXVII). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the third year
of its activities,~ submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimimtion of A11 Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6
l. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Urgently requests all States which are not yet
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify
or accede to the Convention, if possible by 10 December 1973, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
3. We/comes the adoption of the new procedure
for the consideration of reports submitted by States
parties under article 9 of the Convention, which includes an invitation to States parties to be present at,
and take part in. the Committee's discussions when
their reports are under consideration, as suggested in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of General Assembly resolution
2783 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971.
2085 th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
2922 (XXVII). Draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2786 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime
against humanity,
Recognizing the urgent need to take further effective
measures with a view to the suppression and punishment of apartheid,
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8718).
6 Resolution 2106 A (XX).

Reaffirming again that the conclusion of an international convention on the suppression and punishment
of the crime of apartheid would be an important contribution to the struggle against apartheid, racism, economic exploitation, colonial domination and foreign
occupation,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made in order
to elaborate an international document on the suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Special Committee on Apartheid and to States the
revised draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid7 and the amendments thereto 8 for their comments and views;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights at its twentyninth session to consider as a priority item the revised
draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid and the amendments thereto,
and to submit the results of its consideration thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.

2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2955 (XXVII).
Importance of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting
of independence to colonial eountries ancl
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Importance of
the universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective
guarantee and observance of human rights",
Recalling resolution 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, in which the General Assembly urged the
Security Council as well as States Members of the
United Nations or members of specialized agencies to
take effective steps to ensure the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples under
colonial and alien domination to self-determination,
freedom and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and with
Assembly resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November
1970 and 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Disturbed at the continued reluctance of the colonial
and racist Powers, such as Portugal and South Africa,
to recognize and to apply the right to self-determination and independence for the peoples of the Territories
under their control,
Deeply concerned at the negative attitude of certain
Member States to the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Annexes, agenda item 50, document A/8880, para. 42.
8 fbid., para. 43.
