S/PV.8857

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8857th meeting

Tuesday, 14 September 2021, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(S/2021/766)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-25145 (E)
*2125145*

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Sudan and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (S/2021/766)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Volker
Perthes, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan; and
Ms. Hala Alkarib, Regional Director of the Strategic
Initiative for Women in the Horn of Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/766, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Sudan and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Perthes.
Mr. Perthes: It is a pleasure to brief the Security
Council again on the situation in the Sudan. Since my
most recent briefing, in May (see S/2021/495), there has
been some progress in the Sudan’s transition, as well
as continued setbacks and challenges. The violence in
Darfur and the east of the country, the absence of justice
and accountability and the difficult economic situation
have continued to inflict hardship and suffering on the
Sudanese population. The transitional Government
has taken measures in an attempt to address those
challenges and renew trust in the political transition.
In June, Prime Minister Hamdok launched a
political initiative entitled “The National Crisis and
Transition Issues — The Way Forward.” In August, he
established a follow-up mechanism, a form of Sudan2/19

14/09/2021

Sudan dialogue, to reinvigorate and shape national
consensus around key transitional objectives, including
the reform of the military and security sector, the
economy, justice and peace. The initiative enjoys broad
support among the forces backing the transition and,
if implemented, it can address expectations of the
Sudanese people.
Just last week, the Forces for Freedom and
Change — the ruling coalition in the transitional
Government — agreed on a reformed and more inclusive
structure. That is a welcome development that I hope
will also lead to a swift formation of the Transitional
Legislative Council with, as agreed in the Constitutional
Document, at least 40 per cent women’s participation.
There is also growing momentum to move
forward on the preparations for constitution-making
and elections. The Government has produced a draft
law on the constitution-making process, which will
now be subject to public consultations. The United
Nations is providing technical support to the process,
as well as on the drafting of the law on the national
electoral commission. In line with the Prime Minister’s
initiative and the Juba Peace Agreement, I continue
to encourage an inclusive dialogue on a road map for
military and security sector reform. The United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) stands ready to provide technical support
at the request of the Sudanese.
The Sudan’s continued economic reforms allowed
it, on 29 June, to reach the so-called decision point
of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative,
thereby becoming eligible for debt relief. That is very
important, as it will unlock critical financial resources
to strengthen the Sudan’s economy and improve social
conditions. The Sudan must ensure that the most
vulnerable segments of Sudanese society are protected.
I also commend the launch of the Sudanese
Partnership Forum under Prime Minister Hamdok’s
leadership on 9 September, which should facilitate
the coordination and alignment of development and
humanitarian assistance between the State of the
Sudan and its donors. Humanitarian organizations
in the Sudan are advocating for timely and flexible
funding, as humanitarian needs, largely driven by the
economic crisis and increased intercommunal conflict,
continue to rise. Between January and August this year,
approximately 418,000 people were newly displaced as
a result of conflicts and armed attacks across the Sudan,
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

mainly in Darfur, parts of Kordofan and the Blue Nile
states. That is approximately six times as many newly
displaced persons as in the same period last year.
On the regional front, I remain concerned about
the impact of the conflict in Ethiopia on the Sudan,
including the flow of refugees from Ethiopia to the
Sudan, which the Sudan is dealing with in a very
constructive way. Moreover, the tensions between the
Sudan and Ethiopia over the Fashaqah border, as well
as the stalemate over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance
Dam, are persisting. I continue to urge all stakeholders
to avoid further unnecessary escalation.
Following the Council’s adoption of resolution 2579
(2021), UNITAMS has moved to refocus its efforts on
the priority areas identified by the Council, including
peace talks, ceasefire monitoring and support to the
National Plan for the Protection of Civilians. In June,
working closely with the mediator, South Sudan,
UNITAMS facilitated negotiations between the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North Al-Hilu faction
and the Government. Both sides made significant
progress on key elements, yet they were unable to reach
an agreement on a framework. We continue to engage
both parties to advance the process and look forward to
a return to talks in the near future.
In that context, alongside UN-Women and the
United Nations Development Programme, UNITAMS
facilitated the establishment of a gender working group
to mainstream gender into the peace talks, including a
women observers group inside the negotiation chamber.
In resolution 2579 (2021), the Council emphasized
ceasefire monitoring in Darfur as a priority area for
UNITAMS support to the Sudan. That is in line with
the Juba Peace Agreement. On 30 June, the Chairperson
of the Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General Abdel
Fattah Al-Burhan, issued a series of decrees by which
the Permanent Ceasefire Committee for Darfur and
sectoral committees for the five states of Darfur were
established. According to those decrees and in line with
the Juba Peace Agreement, UNITAMS will serve as the
Chair of those committees.
We have consequently begun to operationalize
the Permanent Ceasefire Committee, starting with
technical consultations on 5 and 6 September in
Khartoum, which brought together all members of
the Ceasefire Committee from the military, the armed
groups and other key stakeholders to discuss concrete
modalities for implementing a meaningful ceasefire

S/PV. 8857

mechanism. Preparatory meetings were also held with
the signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement, civil
society, women’s groups and the United Nations country
team. Women’s participation in the implementation of
security arrangements remains a key concern and one
of the conditions for the legitimacy and effectiveness of
any ceasefire arrangement.
By chairing the Committee, UNITAMS will
follow the provisions of the Juba Peace Agreement.
The signatory parties will have to extend the necessary
commitment so that the Committee can effectively
fulfil its mandate. The parties — most Government and
armed groups — have clearly conveyed to UNITAMS
that they expect logistical and financial support from
the international community for the implementation of
the security arrangements. Indeed, if Member States
want security to be stabilized in Darfur, they should
not shy away from making resources available for,
among other things, the training and support of the
planned joint security keeping forces, the police and the
demobilization and reintegration of fighters. However,
the Sudan also needs to assume its own responsibility
and begin implementing the security arrangements and
reforms to gain such international support.
The expectations of the Permanent Ceasefire
Committee are high and partially misplaced,
particularly concerning the protection of civilians.
While the Committee can contribute positively to
stability in Darfur, its role and mandate remain
distinct. The Permanent Ceasefire Committee is
about monitoring, reporting and trying to mediate
and reconcile the parties, but it is not about physical
protection. The recent resurgence in intercommunal
violence in Darfur therefore demonstrates the urgency
of supporting the Sudanese police and of deploying the
joint security keeping forces. The Ceasefire Committee
is not, and cannot be, a substitute for those forces and
their protection mandate.
I was encouraged that, on 5 September, the Sudanese
Government convened the first high-level meeting of
the Sudan’s international partners with the national
mechanism for the protection of civilians. Challenges,
advances and needs in implementing the national
plan were clearly expressed. On the same basis, our
UNITAMS Police Advisory Unit then convened a joint
workshop with the Sudanese Police Force to identify
the needs and strengthen the capacities of the police
for the protection of civilians, community policing

21-251453/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and other tasks, as well as to garner support from the
international community.
UNITAMS has continued its efforts to maximize
its impact in the priority areas through refocused
Mission capacities. We have also accelerated our
recruitment and deployment efforts and intensified
cooperation with the United Nations country team.
However, UNITAMS has also identified several
critical gaps where the Mission will require additional
capacity to provide scalable support, as expected
by the Council. That applies in particular to the task
of ceasefire monitoring in Darfur, For now, we have
deployed a multidisciplinary advance team to support
the operationalization of the Ceasefire Committee.
We are recommending to the Secretary-General the
establishment of an initial operational capability to
allow UNITAMS to fulfil its roles as the Chair of the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee, secretariat and Chair
of the sectoral and area committees across Darfur’s
five states.
The concept for that deployment will be light
and mobile, with a focus on facilitation and advisory
functions and the capacity to deploy small teams to
react to ceasefire violations when requested by the
parties. It will not include an active United Nations field
monitoring role, recognizing that such responsibility is
primarily a function for the Sudanese parties.
Other priorities where we need additional resources
pertain to my good offices function, where the need to
deliver simultaneously on support for the peace talks
and key transitional activities is straining our capacity.
Moreover, we need to address gaps in the Mission’s
field network in critical hotspots, including in support
of the Sudanese Police Force and with regard to critical
operational and security enablers.
By filling critical gaps in what remains a modestly
sized mission, I hope we can effectively respond
to the evolving needs of the transition in the Sudan.
The Sudan’s challenges are immense, and the United
Nations remains fully committed to supporting the
State and society in addressing those challenges and
realizing the aspirations of the Sudanese people for a
peaceful, stable and democratic Sudan. We count on
the robust backing of the Council as we navigate the
path forward.
The President: I thank Mr. Perthes for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Alkarib.
4/19

14/09/2021

Ms. Alkarib: My name is Hala Alkarib, and I am
the Regional Director of the Strategic Initiative for
Women in the Horn of Africa, a feminist organization
that advocates for the rights of grass-roots women
across the Sudan, including in Darfur.
The Sudan today stands on the verge of mounting
crises. The removal of Omer Al-Bashir’s regime in
2019 revealed a rotten structure that must be urgently
transformed. While there are frameworks for reform,
their slow implementation is contributing to ongoing
violence and is impacting the Sudan’s already fragile
economy, governance system and public institutions.
As was the case before the revolution, women are
disproportionately affected by the ongoing violence,
deterioration of services and slow pace of reform. The
economic recession and the worst food crisis in the
Sudan’s history are pushing families to desperation. That
is especially true for women who are mostly confined
to informal labour, where they also face violence.
Women in conflict-affected areas such as Darfur,
Blue Nile, Nuba Mountains and Kordofan suffer from
ethnic marginalization and poverty due to the previous
regime’s discriminatory policies. Furthermore, they
remain at risk of rape, displacement and death due to
ongoing conflict. The coronavirus disease pandemic is
exacerbating all those challenges for women, especially
gender-based violence.
Despite women leading the revolution, we
have been shut out from equally and meaningfully
participating in every step of the transition. Our calls to
end sexual violence, ensure just family laws and enable
equal access to resources, education and employment
continue to be ignored. Instead, disrespect for women’s
rights has encouraged those who seek to violate them.
Earlier this year, a group of men attacked women in
the streets of Khartoum for lack of modesty. Such
occurrences have generated a real fear for safety and
are pushing women out of public life; they are also
making an inclusive and democratic transformation in
the Sudan more difficult.
This is the Sudan today — where women wonder
if they are better off than they were under Al-Bashir’s
oppressive regime. I would like to highlight three areas
for the Security Council that must be urgently addressed.
The first is the need to ensure women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation and leadership
throughout the transitional Government bodies and in
the ongoing peace processes. Despite the 40 per cent
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

quota demanded in the Constitutional Declaration,
women are still fighting for representation. Only one
woman sits on the Sovereign Council. Women serve as
only four of 26 ministers in the Cabinet and two of 18
state governors. In addition, in Darfur and elsewhere,
officials from the former regime dominate the local
authorities and executive administrations, conveying
little hope that reform is on the way. How can we take
the transitional Government’s commitments seriously
when women are so poorly represented politically
and perpetrators of violence remain in positions
of authority?
Women continue to advocate for representation in
the country’s peace processes. Yet the modern history
of the Sudan is littered with peace agreements that have
failed because they excluded women. We must learn
from our mistakes or else risk making them again.
Women must be given the space to speak to the impact
of war on their communities and to share their vision
for the Sudan’s future.
The second is the need to urgently reform the
legal system to ensure protection for women’s rights,
including the prevention of gender-based violence.
That is critical to enable women to fully participate
in public life. The transitional Government’s efforts
to enact legal reform have so far failed to adequately
tackle systemic discrimination against women and girls
in the Sudan. For example, the Sudan’s Criminal Act
and the Personal Status Law both continue to protect
perpetrators of violence against women and girls. That
includes permitting child marriage for girls as young
as 10 years old and empowering male guardians to
control women’s right to marriage, divorce, custody
and citizenship.
Furthermore, women continue to be arrested for
so-called morality transgressions, despite the repeal
of the Sudan’s Public Order Law. The punishments are
brutal, including imprisonment and, in certain cases,
execution. Other inhumane forms of punishment and
torture, such as amputation and crucifixion, are still
practiced under Sudanese law. Women and girls who
are poor, internally displaced, refugees or live in areas
of armed conflict are the most vulnerable to those
punishments. Such laws and practices fly in the face
of the Sudan’s international and regional obligations to
uphold human rights law.
Thirdly, the transitional Government of the Sudan
must ensure that inclusive and gender-sensitive security

S/PV. 8857

sector reform be urgently operationalized. Since the
transitional Government came into power, extrajudicial
killings and the rape of civilians have continued to
occur in Darfur, as well as in Kassala and Port Sudan in
the east. The uncontrolled presence of armed militias in
civilian areas in Darfur and other parts of the country
has led to an increase in sexual violence, which is
perpetrated with impunity. Such concerning trends not
only compromise the Sudan’s chances of achieving a
peaceful transition, but risk the country slipping back
into chaos.
I welcome the National Plan for the Protection of
Civilians as a framework for mitigating the ongoing
violence. However, I am concerned that only the political
elite will be involved in its execution. The United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in
the Sudan (UNITAMS) must ensure that the design
and implementation of the Plan’s activities include
women as leaders and active participants. UNITAMS
must support the transitional Government to work with
existing platforms, such as Darfur women’s protection
networks and women’s civil society organizations,
which have intimate knowledge of good practice
interventions grounded in decades of experience.
Critically, women’s rights must be central to
enacting any and all security sector and legal reforms if
we are to achieve meaningful change. The transitional
Government plays an important role in that regard
and must set a precedent for the nation by calling for
investigations into crimes and ensuring justice. That is
particularly important in Darfur, where just last week
a 17-year-old girl was gang raped by seven men. That
also holds true for the Khartoum massacre on 3 June
2019, where over 100 peaceful protesters were killed
and at least 70 women protesters were raped.
I would like to remind the Security Council that
the Sudan is currently under the control of a hybrid
Government of Sudanese civilians, politicians and
military, whose mandate was given to them by millions
of Sudanese people who took to the streets in 2019. The
legitimacy the Government holds will be erased if it
fails to build the foundation needed for a new inclusive,
democratically elected Government in 2024.
In conclusion, I urge the Security Council to call on
all parties to fulfil their obligations and commitments
under the Constitutional Declaration, the Juba Peace
Agreement and the National Plan for the Protection of

21-251455/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

14/09/2021

Civilians and to continue to use all available tools to
ensure accountability and compliance.

civilians displaced so far this year demonstrates the
urgency of tackling intercommunal violence.

I call for the full, equal and meaningful participation
and leadership of diverse women, youth and civil
society at all stages of peace and political processes.

Ms. Alkarib has just given us a powerful account
of the plight of women in the Sudan. We urge the
Government to expedite the implementation of its
National Plan for the Protection of Civilians and
other efforts to prevent and reduce violence at the
community level, including violence against women
and girls. In that regard, we welcome the Sudanese
Police Force’s engagement with the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) and the formulation of a One United
Nations protection of civilians strategy to support the
Government’s efforts.

I demand that the transitional Government realize
the 40 per cent women quota for the Transitional
Legislative Council in line with the Constitutional
Declaration, and apply the quota to broader Government
bodies, as well as the upcoming election laws.
Furthermore, I call on the transitional Government
to fulfil its intention, articulated by the Council of
Ministers, to ratify the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
ensure the harmonization of domestic laws with the
Convention without delay, in order to ensure the
protection and promotion of the full scope of women’s
rights in the Sudan.
I call for accountability for all violations of human
rights, including gender-based violence, that occurred
before, during and after the revolution, on which there
has been little to no progress.
The President: I thank Ms. Alkarib for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Perthes, Ms. Hala Alkarib and Ambassador
Jürgenson for their briefings. I would like to make three
key points in response to what we have heard today.
First, I would like to join Mr. Perthes in recognizing
and commending the significant and continued
progress towards a more peaceful, prosperous and
democratic Sudan. We welcome Prime Minister
Hamdok’s initiative of 22 June and encourage the buyin of all parts of the Government. We also commend
the deepening cooperation between the Government
and the International Criminal Court, particularly the
recent visit of the Chief Prosecutor and the decision of
the Sudanese Cabinet to transfer indictees to The Hague.
Secondly, I want to acknowledge that, despite that
progress, significant challenges remain. Commitments
are welcome, but they need to translate swiftly into
concrete actions that improve the lives of Sudanese
civilians. Increased intercommunal clashes, particularly
in Darfur, are concerning. The plight of over 300,000
6/19

We also urge the Government to build on the
initial progress made in implementing the Juba Peace
Agreement. We echo the Secretary-General’s call for
the timely formation of the monitoring and evaluation
mechanism and urge the swift establishment of the
peace commission.
In July, the Special Envoy of the United Kingdom
and his United States and Norwegian counterparts
joined Mr. Perthes to visit areas under the control of the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM/N)
Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction in support of peace talks.
We welcome the talks between the Government and
the SPLM/N Al-Hilu faction and continue to call
for their swift resumption. We commend the role of
UNITAMS in facilitating those talks, in particular
efforts to strengthen women’s meaningful participation
and inclusion. I reiterate our call for those who remain
outside the peace process to engage in it swiftly and
without preconditions.
Thirdly, it is clear that, for the Government
of the Sudan’s efforts to be sustainable, they must
be underpinned by a significant investment in
peacebuilding. That is why the United Kingdom has
provided early contributions to the Sudan peace fund.
We commend the peacebuilding support already being
provided to the Sudan by UNITAMS and the United
Nations country team. In order to inform our future
deliberations, we encourage Mr. Perthes to share
findings of the Mission’s State-level peacebuilding
assessments with the Security Council. A joinedup approach across the United Nations system in
conducting those assessments and in delivering its
support to the Sudan will be crucial to maximize
resources and impact.
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, the United Kingdom encourages
continued partnership between the Government,
UNITAMS, international partners and all stakeholders
for the success of the Sudan’s transition.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I also thank Special Representative Volker
Perthes and Hala Alkarib for their briefings.
For my part, I would like to stress three points.
France reiterates its full support for the democratic
transition in the Sudan. We welcome the Government’s
economic reforms, which have made it possible to
begin the process of debt relief. We take note of the
initiative launched by the Prime Minister, which is
called “the way forward”, aimed at consolidating
the Government’s reform agenda. In this regard,
we encourage consultation between the different
components of the transition, the inclusion of civil
society and the strengthening of the participation of
women and youth. Progress has also been made with the
ratification of important conventions on the protection
of human rights and strengthened cooperation with the
International Criminal Court and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.
These efforts must continue, including the
establishment of key transitional institutions, most
notably the Transitional Legislative Council, with at
least 40 per cent representation of women. We also call
for further institution-building in the judicial field and
in the fight against corruption.
France also remains concerned about the fragility in
Darfur and in the east of the country. We call for the rapid
implementation of the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians and the acceleration of the deployment of
the joint force in Darfur, which were provided for in
the Juba Peace Agreement. The protection of civilians,
including humanitarian workers, and the guarantee of
humanitarian access remain high priorities.
The inclusion of members of the parties is also
essential. We call for settling the outstanding issues
in the context of talks between the Government and
Abdelaziz Al-Hilu. We also encourage Abdul Wahid
Al-Nur’s movement to join the peace process. We also
welcome the Government’s efforts aimed at engaging
in dialogue in the east of the country in order to ease
tensions in that region.
We are encouraged by the operationalization of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance

S/PV. 8857

Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the cooperation
established between the Mission and the Sudanese
authorities. In this regard, I commend the work
of the Special Representative, UNITAMS and the
entire United Nations country team, especially their
efforts to facilitate peace talks and in supporting the
implementation of the mechanisms provided for in
the Juba Peace Agreement, as well as in supporting
the participation of women in the peace process. The
strengthening of police and judicial capacities and
the fight against the risk posed by mines are also
very important aspects of their involvement. France
attaches particular importance to UNITAMS technical
assistance for the protection of civilians, in particular
women and children.
Finally, France is also attentive to regional
challenges that could jeopardize the success of the
transition. The crisis in Tigray and the arrival of
Ethiopian refugees are one of the main destabilizing
factors for the Sudanese economy. We are committed,
bilaterally and on a European basis, to assist Khartoum
in responding to this emergency. We also support the
mediation efforts of the African Union and encourage
the countries of the region to resume talks to resolve the
Al-Fashaqah and Renaissance Dam disputes.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Volker Perthes, for his briefing, and
I welcome the presence of the representative of the
Sudan at today’s meeting. I also listened carefully to
Ms. Alkarib’s briefing.
Positive progress has been made in the Sudan’s
political process. This is inextricably attributable to
the joint efforts of the Sudanese authorities and other
stakeholders. We need to build on this encouraging
momentum and keep injecting fresh impetus into the
Sudan’s peace process and development. In this context,
I would like to make the following points.
First, we must take a multipronged approach to
advance the political process. The Sudanese Government
has invested a deal of effort in the implementation of
the Juba Peace Agreement. What they have achieved is
plainly visible to all. China commends the framework
of comprehensive political settlement proposed by the
Sudanese authorities, which is conducive to easing
the tensions between the parties and promoting the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

21-251457/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We hope the Sudan will make fresh headway in,
inter alia, forming the Transitional Legislative Council
and preparing for general elections. China supports
the Government in carrying on peace talks with the
non-signatories to the Peace Agreement and urges the
latter to join the peace process as soon as possible.
China is pleased to see that the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) has been bolstering its configuration and
enhancing its capacity for mandate implementation.
UNITAMS should, as it has been mandated to do,
closely align its activities with the strategic priorities of
the Sudan and improve the relevance and effectiveness
of its work on an ongoing basis.
Secondly, efforts must be ramped up to keep
Darfur stable. The situation in Darfur has markedly
improved over the last few years. Following the exit of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, the Sovereignty Council in the Sudan and
the Transitional Government have launched a raft of
initiatives including establishing multiple mechanisms,
such as the Joint High Military Committee for Security
Arrangements, the Permanent Ceasefire Committee
and sectoral and area committees, to implement the
security arrangements under the Peace Agreement
more quickly. Recently, precipitated by such factors as
the coronavirus disease and natural disasters, sporadic
security incidents and intercommunal clashes have
occurred in Darfur. The international community
should lend strong support to help the Sudan enhance
its security capacity-building to better protect civilians
in Darfur.
Thirdly, it is imperative to identify the right
priorities for economic development and national
reconstruction. The Sudanese Government has been
working hard to address its challenges, maintain
macroeconomic stability and reform its economy.
However, the country’s economic woes remain dire,
with acute shortages of water and electricity and the
scarcity of daily necessities. In June this year, the
International Monetary Fund announced that the Sudan
had reached the decision point of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative. The international community,
especially developed countries, should effectively fulfil
their debt-relief and debt-suspension commitments,
support Sudan’s development in infrastructure,
agriculture and other key sectors, and help the country
achieve universal education and poverty eradication to
8/19

14/09/2021

eliminate the root causes of conflict, thereby laying a
solid foundation for lasting peace in the Sudan.
In the same breath, I would like to underscore that
resolution 2562 (2021) calls for clear and feasible key
benchmarks for adjusting the sanctions measures in
respect of the Sudan. The current situation in the Sudan,
especially in Darfur, has improved significantly, and
lifting these sanctions as soon as possible is consistent
with the prevailing dynamics on the ground. The
benchmarks set by the Security Council should be
clear, realistic, feasible and in line with the realities of
the Sudan. China is ready to play a constructive role to
this end.
The Sudan is at a critical stage in its transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding. At last week’s Security
Council open debate, Secretary-General Guterres
noted that
“[p]eacekeeping missions can help put the country
on the right track, but only national stakeholders can
keep it there over the long term” (S/PV.8851, p. 2).
The Sudanese authorities should continue to play a
leading role, and all stakeholders should remain united.
China is ready to work with the rest of the international
community to scale up our collective assistance and
support for the Sudan in the interests of lasting peace
and development in the country.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I have the honour to make this
statement on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
highlighting the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) and recent developments in the country
(S/2021/766). We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of UNITAMS,
Mr. Volker Perthes, and Ms. Hala Alkarib for their
briefings, and we welcome the participation of the
representative of the Sudan in today’s meeting.
The A3+1 welcomes the recent progress made by
the Government of the Sudan in making progress on
the political transition track despite acute economic
and humanitarian challenges. While commending
the commitment and efforts made by the Sudanese
authorities to implement the Juba Peace Agreement,
in particular, the formation of the Joint High Military
Committee for Security Arrangements, the Darfur
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Permanent Ceasefire Committee and related sectoral
and area committees, we reiterate our call to all
signatories to continue to implement the key provisions
of the Juba Peace Agreement in order to consolidate the
gains made thus far.
We also emphasize that the establishment of the
remaining key transitional institutions is critical
for advancing an inclusive and sustainable political
transition. Peace in the Sudan will not be complete
until all conflicts end. The A3+1 remains concerned
about the sporadic intercommunal violence, as well
as clashes between Government forces and certain
non-signatory armed groups. The incidents attest to the
need for continued efforts to address the root causes of
the conflicts.
The A3+1 welcomes the progress made in the
talks between the transitional Government and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N)
Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction and urges both parties to
build on that initial progress and advance a constructive
framework for addressing their remaining differences.
We commend UNITAMS on its contribution to
facilitating those talks, as part of its efforts to support
the peace process and the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement. The A3+1 also urges those who
have not yet joined the peace process to do so without
delay in order to give sustainable and inclusive peace a
chance in the Sudan.
The A3+1 welcomes the Sudanese Government’s
commitment and efforts to provide for the full
protection of civilians through the implementation of
the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians as well
as promotion of dialogue and reconciliation among the
different ethnic communities. We welcome the Sudan’s
ratification of the 1984 Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment and its accession to the 2006 International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance, on 9 September.
We also commend the steps taken by the
transitional Government to improve its child protection
legislation, including the Cabinet’s decision that the
Sudan would withdraw its reservations to the African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child related
to child marriage, the right of married pregnant girls to
education and child rights to privacy.
The peace process in the Sudan faces serious
challenges, particularly the lack of necessary financial

S/PV. 8857

and technical resources needed for the implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement. In that regard, the A3+1
welcomes the establishment of the Sudan peace fund.
While we thank Germany, Switzerland and the United
Kingdom for their contributions, we call on all the
Sudan’s partners to support the initiative and facilitate
its effective and efficient operationalization.
We encourage all parties to ensure gender equality
in decision-making structures and call on international
partners to support the Sudan in fulfilling its national
women and peace and security agenda. In that regard,
we commend the support provided by UNITAMS
to the Sudanese authorities to strengthen women’s
participation and inclusion in the peace process, in
cooperation with UN-Women and the United Nations
Development Programme.
On the economic front, the A3+1 commends the
efforts of the Sudanese authorities, including stringent
economic reforms undertaken to pave the way for
the country to begin receiving debt relief under the
enhanced Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative,
despite the difficulties related to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and the regional context. In
that connection, the A3+1 encourages the transitional
Government to continue its crucial economic reforms,
with continued international support, to ease the heavy
debt burden inherited from the past for a prosperous
future for all Sudanese.
The already-dire humanitarian situation in the
Sudan has been further aggravated by the economic
crisis, food insecurity, COVID-19, the adverse effects
of climate change, intercommunal violence and the
prolonged displacement of populations, as well as
the recent refugee crisis in the east. In that regard,
we commend the Sudanese for hosting the refugees
concerned and sharing resources with them. The
difficult situation, which affects more than 13 million
people, calls for us to show responsibility and solidarity
with the Sudan, with a view to mitigating the impact of
the humanitarian situation on the current peacebuilding
dynamics in the country.
The A3+1 commends the progress made in the
establishment of UNITAMS and accordingly welcomes
the signing of the status-of-mission agreement on
4 July. We commend UNITAMS for the various support
and training activities that it is undertaking within
its mandate to assist the political transition, facilitate
the implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement and

21-251459/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

support Sudanese-led peacebuilding, the protection of
civilians and the rule of law.
We call on UNITAMS to continue working
closely with the transitional authorities to facilitate the
expeditious implementation of the reform agenda and
enhance its assistance in the mobilization of economic
and development assistance and the coordination of
humanitarian and peacebuilding support.
In conclusion, we hope that close cooperation with
UNITAMS and the country team and strong support
from the international community behind a unified
Security Council will help the country address those
challenges so that it can complete its historic transition
and fulfil the Sudanese people’s aspirations to achieve
democracy, peace and prosperity.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his detailed briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS),
centred around the Mission’s four pillars. I also thank
Ms. Hala Alkarib for her insights, and I welcome the
representative of the Sudan to this meeting.
The progress made by the Sudanese authorities
in the past three months has been reassuring, and we
appreciate the initiatives taken. The implementation
of the Juba Peace Agreement is on track with the
appointment of Governors in North Darfur, West
Darfur and the Blue Nile states. The talks between the
transitional Government and the major non-signatory
group — the Sudan People’s Liberation MovementNorth (SPLM-N) Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction — have
made progress, and the SPLM-N Abdelaziz Al-Hilu
faction and the Sudanese Liberation Army have signed
a political declaration.
The transitional authorities have announced initial
measures to begin the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement security arrangements, including the
establishment of the Joint High Military Committee, the
Permanent Ceasefire Committee and sectoral and area
committees. The implementation of the National Plan
for the Protection of Civilians has also seen forward
movement. There has been support for the Prime
Minister’s national initiative on transitional challenges,
announced on 22 June. Those developments reflect
the continuing determination and commitment of the
Sudanese leadership towards a democratic transition,
and we take positive note of them.
10/19

14/09/2021

At the same time, we also note the delays in the
establishment of important transitional institutions
We hope that they will be resolved soon, while also
adhering to the criteria concerning the representation
for women in the Transitional Legislative Council.
We underline the need for an inclusive transition fully
involving women in peacebuilding and progress.
On the economic front, the Sudan has made
important strides in its macroeconomic agenda and
has continued to implement economic reforms. Those
steps have helped the Sudan reach the decision point
for the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative
and unlock debt relief and funds for socioeconomic
programmes. We welcome the financial assistance
extended by the Sudan’s international partners, as well
as the establishment of the Sudan peace fund to support
peacebuilding activities. All those positive steps will
ensure the emergence of meaningful opportunities in
development areas in the Sudan .
On the security front, the transitional Government
has continued to make efforts to provide the protection
of civilians in Darfur through the deployment of joint
Government forces to de-escalate violence and calm
tensions. Those are positive developments that reflect
the broadening of governance structures and the
sustained commitment of the authorities to implement
the National Plan for the Protection of Civilians. The
transitional Government has also taken steps to improve
child protection legislation.
It is matter of concern that intercommunal clashes
have continued to be the main source of insecurity.
There have been reports of incidents of criminality,
targeting the United Nations and its personnel, during
the reporting period. We encourage the transitional
Government to take measures to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel and its premises,
in line with the new status-of-mission agreement,
signed on 4 July. We also encourage the implementation
of assurances and guarantees given with regard to the
protection of civilians and that humanitarian concerns
be urgently addressed.
With respect to the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), we take note of the high level of
coordination between the Sudanese Joint Task Force
and UNAMID, and the commitment to facilitating the
administration process. We hope that, at the central and
state levels alike, all efforts will continue to be made
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by the Sudanese authorities to make the drawdown
and liquidation an example of effective collaboration
between the United Nations and the Sudan. The full
operationalization of UNITAMS and close engagement
with the transitional authorities will be a determining
factor in expediting the transitional phase and
moving towards the drafting of the Constitution and
preparations for elections.
Over the years, India has assisted the Sudan with
several projects under concessional lines of credit,
capacity-building and humanitarian assistance, by
supplying food and lifesaving drugs.
In conclusion, as the Sudan makes confident
strides towards a brighter future, India remains
committed to supporting Sudan and its people in this
political transition.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes
for his comprehensive briefing. Let me give a special
thanks to Ms. Alkarib for her powerful statement. At
a time when we hear often competing statements about
the situation in the Sudan, it is good to have a voice that
gives us some ground truth about the realities facing
the female half of the Sudanese population. I therefore
thank her very much.
Let me reiterate that the United States fully
supports the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS)
to assist in the Sudan’s democratic transition, the
protection of civilians and the implementation of
the Juba Peace Agreement. However, we share the
Secretary-General’s concern about the heightened risk
to civilians, amid continued intercommunal clashes and
the resumption of violence. The root causes of violence
in Darfur persist, with many areas continuing to suffer
intercommunal conflict, abuse of human rights and
large-scale population displacements.
Sudanese
authorities
have
the
primary
responsibility to protect civilians. The United States
therefore welcomes, as others have done, the National
Plan for the Protections of Civilians. We continue to
urge its full implementation, particularly in developing
community policing initiatives for displaced persons in
Darfur. Sudanese leaders must enable the full vetting of
Darfur’s new joint security force, so that all stakeholders
may have confidence in its troops. UNITAMS is there
to assist in building trust between the Darfuris and the
joint force.

S/PV. 8857

In addition to protecting civilians, the Government
must hold accountable those responsible for perpetrating
human rights abuses and violations. The United States
welcomes the Government’s initiative to enhance the
implementation of the Juba Agreement and advance
reforms that address the root causes of violence in
Darfur, including provisions on transitional justice and
land reform. However, we note that Sudanese authorities
have yet to stand up the transitional legislative council
or make progress in meeting other key benchmarks,
such as the constitutional drafting process, on which
we welcome the technical assistance of UNITAMS.
Moving now to the liquidation of UNAMID,
the United States remains concerned about potential
security risks to United Nations personnel and the
disposition of assets at UNAMID’s former logistics
base at El Fasher. We strongly encourage the United
Nations to continue to use its good offices with leaders
in Darfur to ensure that the liquidation of UNAMID
concludes without threat or interruption. We again
note that Sudanese authorities have the responsibility
to protect the former UNAMID team sites to prevent
further violence and looting. Those unit assets were
donated to the people of the Sudan, who continue to
face severe economic hardship, daily interruptions of
water and electricity and acute shortages of fuel and
medical supplies.
Let me end by saying that the United States remains
strongly committed to the people of the Sudan and to
working closely with the transition Government, our
fellow members of the Council and all stakeholders to
support the Sudan’s path forward.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Perthes for his comprehensive
briefing today. I also give a special thanks to Hala
Alkarib for being with us and sharing her insights and
experiences. Sudanese women made the revolution, and
their full, equal and meaningful participation is key to
the success of the transition towards a democratic Sudan.
Norway is encouraged to see the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan
(UNITAMS) scaling up its country presence and
enabling increased cooperation with the Government
of the Sudan at all levels. The Government’s efforts
to facilitate, advise and coordinate with the United
Nations are much appreciated. We also welcome the
commitment to humanitarian reform and the fact
that the preparations for electoral commissions and

21-2514511/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

14/09/2021

Constitution-making are under way. Strengthening
the capacity of authorities and Government bodies,
at all levels, will help maximize the impact of
international support and funding. Including women in
decision-making is an efficient way of strengthening
both capacity and legitimacy.

We understand that the establishment of the joint
protection force in Darfur is under way. We urge the
inclusion of a significant percentage of women in the
security, military and police forces — building on
their experiences as peacebuilders, peacekeepers and
community leaders.

We commend the Government and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement-North Al-Hilu faction
for their efforts towards a future peace agreement.
Together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Troika colleagues, Norway
will continue to support that process. I would also like
to note the key efforts of UNITAMS, UN-Women,
and the United Nations Development Programme in
promoting women observers and gender perspectives.
We acknowledge the Government’s first step in
implementing the National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians.

Finally, the situation in the Horn of Africa is fragile.
We thank the Sudan for its hospitality in receiving and
hosting Ethiopian refugees and keeping the border open.
We welcome Prime Minister Hamdok’s efforts as Chair
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
find a political solution to the conflict in Ethiopia, as
well as in South Sudan.

The training of 500 women police on the issue of
internally displaced persons (IDPs), the establishment
of 50 gender desks and 18 family-child protection units
in the states are only some of the examples of progress on
protection and security sector reform. The constructive
engagement between UNITAMS and the Government
of the Sudan on the mechanism on children in armed
conflict is another.
Norway looks forward to co-hosting a side event,
in support of the Sudan’s transition, with the SecretaryGeneral on 30 September, both to highlight those
positive developments and results achieved, almost
halfway into the transitional period, and engage
partners towards further support of a peaceful and
democratic Sudan.
As much as we welcome the progress made,
significant challenges remain. Some 9.8 million people
are severely food insecure and the situation for many
IDPs, especially in Darfur, is worsening. In some areas,
we see intercommunal conflicts and armed attacks on
the rise. Conflict-related sexual violence continues. The
recent flooding and outbreaks of diseases are another
worry. The delays in implementing the Juba Peace
Agreement and the National Plan for the Protection of
Civilians are also leaving the population vulnerable.
It is the Government’s responsibility to implement
the security arrangements in the Peace Agreement, in
collaboration with peace partners. The rapid formation
of the Agreement’s monitoring and evaluation
mechanism is now critical.
12/19

The Sudan is, in many ways, a beacon of hope in
an increasingly troubled region. We, as international
partners, must offer our support to the Government as
it works towards irreversible progress for the Sudan’s
women, men, girls and boys.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I join others in thanking
the briefers for their insightful interventions. I also
warmly welcome the participation of the representative
of the Sudan in this meeting.
At the outset, I would like to commend the bravery
and resilience of Sudanese women, without whom the
Sudan would not be on the path towards its historic
transition. It is clear that neither a sustainable peace
nor a healthy democracy can be achieved without
the meaningful participation of women. Therefore,
we urge the transitional Government to redouble its
efforts to make women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation — including in decision-making
bodies — a reality.
Estonia welcomes the progress that the Sudan
continues to make in its transition, including the
economic reforms and the entry into force of laws
on the anti-corruption, transitional justice and peace
commissions. We also welcome the Prime Minister’s
initiative of 22 June, which is aimed at responding to
the demands of the population.
However, we recognize that the transition is facing
multiple challenges. For the transition to stay on course,
as envisioned by the revolution and the Constitutional
Declaration, the importance of institution-building
cannot be overemphasized, as institutions form the
backbone of any democracy. Therefore, we urge the
transitional authorities to expedite the formation of
key transitional institutions, including the Transitional
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Legislative Council, with 40 per cent representation
of women.
Estonia welcomes the efforts to implement the
Juba Peace Agreement, including the establishment
of the National High Committee and subcommittees.
We also welcome the enhanced cooperation with the
International Criminal Court. However, there is a
clear need to accelerate the implementation of the Juba
Peace Agreement in order to respond to the hopes of
the population to live in peace. For that reason, we
urge the transitional Government to prioritize the
operationalization of the committees to help to address
pressing security challenges. It is also important to
continue efforts to encourage those parties that have
not yet joined the Peace Agreement to do so urgently.
Despite the abovementioned progress, one
persistent concern is the precarious security situation,
particularly in some parts of Darfur, and the
devastating consequences of intercommunal violence.
We urge the transitional Government to accelerate the
implementation of its National Plan for the Protection
of Civilians and call for urgent deployment of the joint
security forces. Efforts must be redoubled to ensure
the safety of civilians, including women and children.
Perpetrators of violence must be held accountable, as
there will be no peace without justice.
To conclude, we welcome the progress that the
Sudan has made while acknowledging that a long
road lies ahead. However, the Sudan will not have to
walk that path alone, as the international community
stands firmly behind the Sudan’s historic transition.
We hope that the Sudan and the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
will continue to strengthen their cooperation with the
purpose of making tangible progress, including in the
areas of transition, peace and civilian protection. I
reiterate Estonia’s full support to the Sudanese people
in achieving democracy, peace and prosperity.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Perthes for his
briefing and express my appreciation in particular to
Ms. Hala Alkarib, whose contribution is of great value
to the Council. I also warmly welcome the presence of
the representative of the Sudan at this meeting.
Two years after the revolution of 2019, Mexico
acknowledges the efforts of the Government of the
Sudan to move forward in its transitional phase. Many
challenges remain and will require coordinated and

S/PV. 8857

sustained action by all actors involved. The reforms
being undertaken by the Government are an encouraging
sign. We hope that the transition initiative announced
on 22 June by Prime Minister Hamdok will offer new
possibilities for the process. The initiative requires
the commitment of and consensus-building among the
civilian and military components of the transitional
Government and must be based on an inclusive and
transparent framework.
In that connection, the formation of institutions
such as the legislative assembly, with at least 40 per
cent women’s participation, as well as other committees
and commissions provided for in the Constitutional
Document and the Juba Peace Agreement, are essential.
Despite all of the above, it is clear that building a
lasting peace in the Sudan requires that all armed
groups that are not yet part of the peace process join
and participate in the negotiations. The progress made
in the discussions between the Government and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North Al-Hilu
faction is positive, and we hope that the dialogue will
soon resume.
Mexico also acknowledges the efforts of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS), UN-Women and the United Nations
Development Programme to ensure the participation
of a team of technical observers to promote a gender
perspective in the framework of the dialogue process.
The full, equal and meaningful participation of women
is paramount for sustainable peace. To that end, it
is essential to make headway in the approval of the
commissions on women and gender equality and human
rights. We also take note of the decree for the formation
of a ministerial-level committee on resolution 1325
(2000) and encourage progress in the implementation
of the national action plan on that resolution.
Mexico notes with concern the deteriorating security
situation in Darfur and other areas of the country, as
well as the increasing levels of intercommunal violence.
Despite the formation of a Permanent Ceasefire
Committee and the Joint High Military Committee for
Security Arrangements, important security reforms
are still pending. We urge the transitional Government
to accelerate the implementation of the National Plan
for the Protection of Civilians and to establish a joint
security force in Darfur. We also urge Darfuri armed
groups with a presence in neighbouring countries to
withdraw immediately.

21-2514513/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In that context, the widespread availability and
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in
Darfur continues to represent one of the main threats
to security in the region. Among the commitments
made by the Government in the National Plan for the
Protections of Civilians and the Juba Peace Agreement
is the collection and management of weapons. Progress
in that area has been minimal and so we hope that
the Sudanese Government will rely on UNITAMS on
that front.
The rule of law is the backbone upon which the
transition must be built. We welcome the Cabinet’s
adoption of a bill to ratify the Rome Statute, which is a
major decision, and we urge the Sovereign Council to
approve it at the earliest. The signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the International Criminal
Court’s Office of the Prosecutor and the Ministry of
Justice strengthens cooperation, and it is a priority
for the authorities to take action to transfer to the
Hague those individuals for whom arrest warrants
have been issued so that they can be prosecuted. The
ratification of the conventions against torture and
enforced disappearances are also noteworthy and show
significant progress towards accountability and the
protection of human rights.
Mexico again urges the Sudan to consolidate
progress in the implementation of the peace agreement
and reiterates its support for UNITAMS in its important
task of providing support and guidance in that regard.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
for briefing us on developments in the Sudan. We
listened carefully to the statement delivered by Ms. Hala
Alkarib and welcome the Permanent Representative of
the Sudan to this meeting.
The internal political situation in the Sudan
remains complicated. It continues to be adversely
affected by developments in Libya, the growing
number of internally displaced persons and refugees
from neighbouring African States and the spread of
the coronavirus disease. The country is experiencing
grave socioeconomic difficulties, which have been
compounded by growing inflation and a decline in the
national currency. We note the efforts of the Sudanese
authorities to remedy the situation, including through the
implementation of some difficult decisions. It is critical
14/19

14/09/2021

to duly consider popular sentiment, as the population is
the first to suffer from economic hardships.
In that regard, we trust that the activities of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS) will help to build
Khartoum’s capacity in such important areas as
peacebuilding, socioeconomic reforms and the
maintenance of domestic peace and law and order.
In these circumstances, we attach great importance
to maintaining balanced contacts with all Sudanese
authorities and supporting their efforts to implement
the 17 August 2019 Constitutional Declaration,
aimed at ensuring domestic stabilization. We note the
commitment of the Sudanese leadership to further
normalizing the situation in Darfur.
The signing in October 2020 of the Juba Peace
Agreement between the transitional Government of
the Sudan and the Sudanese Revolutionary Front was a
meaningful step towards achieving lasting stabilization
in the country and solving many of its urgent problems.
We note the measures taken by Khartoum to improve
the situation and to implement the provisions of the
agreement, including through the establishment of the
relevant military committees.
We urgently call upon all armed groups that have
not yet joined the peace process to do so now. It is
regrettable that Abdul Wahid Al-Nur still refuses to
engage in dialogue with Khartoum.
We look forward to the resumption of talks between
the authorities and the Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction of
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North on
the basis of the declaration of principles signed by
the parties. We trust that UNITAMS will provide the
necessary support for this process.
We
welcome
Khartoum’s
willingness
to
comprehensively address the root causes of conflicts
and intercommunal disputes in various regions of the
Sudan. The prompt implementation of the National
Plan for the Protection of Civilians will certainly be an
important step in that direction.
Peace is gradually being restored in Darfur.
Sporadic intercommunal clashes in some states do
not change the overall landscape. The coordinated
response of the authorities to the incidents reaffirms
Khartoum’s commitment to promoting stabilization in
a comprehensive manner.
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We are satisfied with the Secretary-General’s
assessment that the drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
which successfully carried out its tasks, is proceeding
as planned and that there is close cooperation among
representative of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Sudan. We commend the efforts made by the
leadership of the Secretariat in that regard.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special
Representative Perthes for his comprehensive briefings
and Ms. Alkarib for her statement. I welcome the
representative of the Sudan to today’s meeting.
We commend the continued efforts of the
Government of the Sudan in leading and implementing
the country’s transition, with the support from the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS), in accordance with the
principle of national ownership. While it is encouraging
that the country has witnessed important progress in its
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, many
challenges still remain.
In the light of the current situation, I wish to
highlight several points.
First, it is imperative to further advance the
transition process in line with the Juba Peace
Agreement. The Sudanese parties should focus their
efforts on finding ways and means to resolve their
differences in order to implement the remaining
provisions of the agreement. The establishment of
the remaining key transitional institutions is equally
important for advancing an inclusive and sustainable
political transition. We reiterate our strong support
for the full, active and meaningful participation of
women and youth in all stages of the transition period
and beyond. We call on the remaining armed groups in
Darfur to join the peace talks as soon as possible and
in good faith for the benefit of the Sudanese people and
the peace and stability of the country. Furthermore, it is
critical to continue to foster the collaboration between
the United Nations, UNITAMS, the African Union,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
neighbouring countries and other international partners
in supporting peace and development in the Sudan. We
would also like to encourage the efforts of the Sudan
and the countries of the region to promote cooperation
and friendship based on common interests.
Secondly, we call on the Government of the Sudan
to continue strengthening its primary responsibility

S/PV. 8857

for the protection of civilians. It is critical to ensure
the full implementation of the National Plan for the
Protection of Civilians and to address the root causes
of intercommunal violence in Darfur, including though
reconciliation among different tribes and communities.
More efforts should be focused on ensuring the
protection of vulnerable groups, especially women and
children. We commend the Government’s efforts to
improve its child protection legislation and call for the
effective implementation of all protection frameworks,
especially at the local level, with the strong support of
the international community in the form of resources
and capacity-building, as advocated by Special
Representative Perthes. In addition, we commend
the cooperation between the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
the Government of the Sudan in ensuring the safe and
orderly withdrawal of the Mission’s personnel in recent
months. We call on the Government to further facilitate
UNAMID’s liquidation process.
Thirdly, in order for the Sudan to effectively own
the transition process and beyond, the international
community must continue to support the Sudanese
Government in addressing the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the current socioeconomic challenges.
It is concerning that there are a great many people in
need of humanitarian assistance in the country. More
than 9.8 million people are severely affected by food
insecurity. Food prices in June had risen by almost
three times compared to the same period last year.
It is therefore critical that urgent efforts are made to
provide food and basic services to the people in need,
in particular vulnerable groups.
We commend the efforts of the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank in providing initial
debt relief for the Sudan and welcome the establishment
of the Sudan peace fund. We call for further facilitation
of the Sudan’s access to international financial facilities,
including through the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Initiative, as the country’s economy continues to face
various challenges.
Fourthly, with regard to the issue of sanctions,
it is necessary to establish clear and well-identified
benchmarks and constantly review the measures in
the light of the progress on the ground, in line with
resolution 2562 (2021).
In conclusion, Viet Nam reaffirms its strong
commitment to supporting the Sudan in this transitional

21-2514515/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

chapter towards long-term peace and stability. We
commend the work of UNITAMS and reiterate our
support for the Mission.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I thank Special Representative Perthes for his
briefing. I also want to welcome the representative
of the Sudan here with us today, and of course I want
to thank Ms. Hala Alkarib for her truly powerful
testimony. Her work and her voice, alongside those of
so many Sudanese women, have played a vital role in
the Sudan’s historic political transition.
The leadership of Sudanese women in bringing
about peaceful change is one of the most emblematic
examples of women, peace and security in action in
recent years. This is what we mean when we speak about
the transformative power of women’s participation. The
courage of women in standing up against oppression
was powerful in ways that no gun, bullet or bomb could
ever be.
In the Sudan, we saw, as we see so often in our
work in the Security Council, that the cause of women’s
rights is the cause of peace and democracy. As Alaa
Salah told the Security Council (see S/PV.8649),
women in the Sudan spoke out against public order laws
that restricted their rights and, in so doing, opposed a
system built on quashing dissent.
Historic as it is, progress on the Sudan’s transition
is, as we have heard this morning, slow and uneven.
Crucially, however, the power-sharing agreement at
the centre continues to hold. I am also encouraged
by the Prime Minister’s new initiative to reinvigorate
the process.
The success of this transition will ultimately be
based on the transitional Government’s ability to
maintain the power-sharing agreement and strengthen
Government institutions. As we have heard today, much
more needs to be done across the reform agenda, from
human rights to the security sector. It is critical that
key democratic institutions, such as the Transitional
Legislative Council, be established on an urgent basis.
The success of the Sudan’s transition will depend,
therefore, on broadening the political agreement and
investing in the country’s marginalized and conflictaffected areas. We simply cannot expect real buy-in if
those at the peace table and in the new institutions do
not represent the diversity of the people of the Sudan.
16/19

14/09/2021

Women were at the forefront of the protests that lit the
spark of change. They must also be at the forefront
of the Government that will deliver that change. It is
crucial that the Sudan meet its own commitments, on
both the full, equal and meaningful, as well as the safe,
participation of women.
The current representation of women in the
transitional Government is far below the 40 per cent
quota agreed. As Hala Alkarib said, only one woman
sits on the Sovereign Council. I want to underline that
this representation is a right, not a request. Youth should
also be represented in such peacebuilding processes.
The Sudan’s transition is taking place against a
backdrop of a stark economic crisis. The commitment
to implementing exceptionally difficult but necessary
economic reforms is admirable. With the cost of many
food commodities having doubled in one year, and
3 million children under five suffering from acute
malnutrition, our support for the Sudan’s response to
humanitarian needs is vital.
We welcome the progress on implementing the
Juba Peace Agreement, including the formation
of key committees, such as the Darfur Permanent
Ceasefire Committee. What is needed now is swift
operationalization of the work of those bodies.
Meanwhile, we continue to urge all remaining
non-signatories to join the Juba Peace Agreement.
I want to add that the support of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
(UNITAMS) to women peacebuilders in this negotiation
process has also been commendable.
Despite some progress, the security situation in
many parts of the country remains deeply concerning,
especially in Darfur. The full implementation of
the Government’s integrated National Plan for the
Protection of Civilians is therefore a matter of real
urgency. While we welcome the establishment of
state-level protection-of-civilians committees and
deployments of the joint protection force in some areas,
addressing the root causes of insecurity is the only way
to break the cycle of civilian harm.
Finally, as we heard earlier and graphically from
Hala Alkarib, we are seeing alarming levels of sexual
and gender-based violence across the Sudan, including
evidence of targeting of politically active women,
intended no doubt to silence their voices. In that regard,
I welcome the Government’s enhanced cooperation
with the International Criminal Courts. Perpetrators
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

must be held accountable if we are to end impunity, and
this is a vital step in that direction.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Alhassein (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Head of the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS), for his briefing today.
The transitional Government of the Sudan continues
to make steady progress in the implementation of the
tasks of the transition, as set forth in the Constitutional
Document. The Government also continues to
implement its policy aimed at ensuring a democratic
transition, the rule of law and the promotion of human
rights. We are also working to address the legacy of
structural weakness in the Sudan’s economy. The
Sudanese leadership has reiterated many times that
most of these programmes and policies seek to build
a safe and stable Sudan, where everyone enjoys peace,
prosperity, freedom and justice, as set forth in the
slogans of the glorious December revolution.
To that end, the transitional Government is working
during this critical phase of its political, constitutional,
economic and social development to mobilize and
engage national efforts in the development and
implementation of comprehensive policies in line with
the nature, needs and aspirations of that phase. This
will enable us to overcome decades of obstacles and
lay the foundation for a developed, democratic and
human-centred State that strengthens democracy, the
rule of law and the enjoyment of personal, economic
and political freedoms.
Since our last briefing to the Security Council (see
S/PV.8825), the Government of the Sudan has continued
to complete the transitional structures of authority in
the country. In that regard, we continue our consultation
with different political powers and stakeholders to
establish the Transitional Legislative Council. As part
of the implementation of the provisions of the Juba
Peace Agreement aimed at ensuring stability, as well
as comprehensive and lasting peace and addressing the
root causes of conflict in Darfur, we also appointed as
governor of the Darfur region a leader of one of the
signatories of the Juba Peace Agreement.

S/PV. 8857

In addition, as part of implementing the Juba Peace
Agreement, the Government has facilitated the work
of the Permanent Ceasefire Committee headed by
UNITAMS. The Committee began its work by holding
a number of workshops in Darfur.
We would like to point out that the Government is
committed to maintaining the ceasefire and silencing
the guns, even with parties that are not signatories to
the Juba Peace Agreement. This will build confidence
among those parties to join the comprehensive and
lasting peace process. In this regard, we stress that the
Transitional Government is committed to achieving
peace and to holding a dialogue with non-signatories
to the Juba Peace Agreement. We are pursuing talks
to create an enabling environment for the resumption
of negotiations with the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North Al-Hilu faction, as well as the Sudan
Liberation Movement/Army faction led by Abdul
Wahid Al-Nur.
The State political leadership at the highest level
has also welcomed anything that would bring about
comprehensive peace across the country without
preconditions except the national interest. We would
like to point out that the transitional Government has
great political will to implement the provisions of the
Juba Peace Agreement on security arrangements and
on a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programme, as well as to establish and deploy
joint forces for the protection of civilians. All of this is
designed to strengthen and enhance security in Darfur.
As for the implementation of the security
arrangements protocol, the Government has set up
the Joint High Military Committee for Security
Arrangements, headed by the Minister of Defence
and including as members the leaders of the signatory
movements, so as to implement the agreements made
in Juba. In addition, subcommittees are working on the
ground to start the DDR programme. We would like
to stress in this context that these tasks are difficult
and that it will not be easy for the Government of the
Sudan to accomplish them single-handedly and in the
desired manner. We therefore call up the international
community to share these burdens by providing the
necessary financial and technical support, and we
expect UNITAMS to play a role in this regard as well.
We are determined to continue to work to
improve the security situation in Darfur through the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement and

21-2514517/19

S/PV.8857

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by collecting unlicensed weapons, achieving justice
and accountability, implementing the National Plan
for the Protection of Civilians with the participation
of the signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement and
bringing the y Abdul Wahid Al-Nur movement into the
peace process.
Darfur is currently undergoing an important
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
This transition involves seeking the support of
the international community for the transitional
Government to extend security, peace and sustained
stability across the region. Decades of mismanagement
and bad governance led to extremely complicated
political and economic situations in the Sudan. The
Government has therefore sought appropriate solutions
for these situations. In this regard, Prime Minister
Hamdok has set forth a comprehensive national initiative
that includes seven pillars: economy, justice, reform of
the security sector, peace, dismantling the Al-Bashir
regime, combating corruption, foreign policy, national
sovereignty, and national security, as well as establishing
the Transitional Legislative Council. The foundations
of the comprehensive settlement in the aforementioned
initiative include unification of the transitional bloc,
including using an agreed timeline for implementation
of programmes to reach the desired goals.
As for the economy, the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated the delicate
economic situation in the country. Despite this fact,
the Government is sparing no effort in terms of
economic reform to increase economic growth and
attract investment. These reforms have affected the
weakest segments of society. Accordingly, we have set
up a social-protection programme called Thamarat to
provide support for the most marginalized and poorest
segments of Sudanese society. In this regard, we thank
our international and regional partners for supporting
this programme. We look forward to more support so
that the Sudan will be able to bolster its promising
economic capabilities.
As for the protection of civilians and the promotion
of human rights and the rule of law, the Government of
the Sudan is pursuing its efforts to introduce institutional
and legal reforms that enhance the frameworks for the
protection and promotion of human rights and justice.
In this regard, the Sudan’s Cabinet has approved the
country’s joining the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC); there remains only one more and
final legislative step to join it.
18/19

14/09/2021

In addition, the Sudanese authorities recently
facilitated a successful visit by the new ICC Prosecutor.
During the visit, a proposal was made for working with
the ICC to achieve justice for the victims of the war in
Darfur. Also in this regard, the Sudan has deposited its
accession instruments for the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearances and the United Nations Convention
against Torture. This step reaffirms that we are eager to
meet our international commitments and cooperate with
the international community towards the protection and
promotion of human rights.
Furthermore, we have taken other legal and
legislative steps to annul any laws that restrict freedoms,
with a view to enhancing the role of women in society
and protecting their rights. These new laws will also
allow for free expression and the freedom of assembly
in Sudanese society. It is worth saying that as we
emphasized many times, the transitional Government
is working seriously to improve the situation of
women and guarantee their dignity. In this regard, we
have joined the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and amended
many laws that used to discriminate against women. I
note that many elements of the briefing given by the
representative of civil society, Ms. Alkarib, are not in
line with the current situation in the Sudan or with the
reports submitted by relevant entities.
As for humanitarian work, we express our
appreciation to the United Nations and its humanitarian
agencies, all international organizations and other
donors for their generous support for our work in
addressing the situation of internally displaced persons
(IDPs), refugees and returnees to their homes through
provision of food and health assistance. I would
like to point out that the Government has lifted all
restrictions and obstacles that hampered the delivery of
humanitarian aid to those affected in conflict areas. In
this regard, the State has addressed through its national
plan the issue of improving the environment for
humanitarian work and providing for its needs through
adopting sustainable solutions for IDPs and improving
their living conditions.
In this regard, we note that the Sudan has opened
its borders to refugees from some neighbouring
countries undergoing exceptional circumstances,
namely, Ethiopia and South Sudan. The Sudan is
currently hosting more refugees than any other country
in Africa. Based on our values and our morals, the
21-25145

14/09/2021

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan continues to receive refugees from neighbouring
countries and provide assistance to those in need.
Doing so is also part of our international
commitments. Accordingly, we urge the international
community to shoulder more responsibilities in terms
of helping with the current burden being placed on the
Sudan as we host waves of humanitarian refugees. As
we are addressing waves of humanitarian refugees, this
burden puts pressure on local governments and host
communities, exacerbating an economic situation that
is already deeply affected by the spread of COVID-19.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
fully cooperating with the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan in
implementing its strategic objectives, as set forth
in resolution 2579 (2021), with regard to supporting

S/PV. 8857

the political transition, peace processes and the
implementation of the Juba Peace Agreement, as
well as working to build peace, protect civilians and
promote the rule of law, particularly in the Darfur,
South Kordofan and Blue Nile regions. That is in
addition to mobilizing economic and development
assistance, coordinating humanitarian assistance and
peacebuilding assistance. We also underscore our full
cooperation with the Secretariat on the completion of
the UNAMID liquidation process.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at noon.

21-2514519/19
