88

General Assemhly-Twenty-eighth Session

3149 (XXVIII). ·Human rights and scientific and
technological developments

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Proclamation of Tcheran 67 and resolution XI adopted by the International Conference
on Human Rights on 12 May 1968, 68
Recalling further its resolution 2450 (XXIII) of 19
Deccmber 1968 and subsequent resolutions on human
rights and scicntific and technological developments,
Regretting that the Commission on Human Rights
was unabk to consider this ítem at its twenty-ninth
session,
Requests the Commission on Human Rights, through
the Economic and Social Council, to give high priority
to the consideration of the ítem in conformity with
its decision of 3 April 1973.Gn
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3150 (XXVIII). Use of scientific and technological developments in the interests of peace
and social development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 3026 B (XXVII) of 18
Dccember 1972 and recalling its previous resolutions
on this subject,
Noting the reports of the Secretary-General on this
subject, 70
Noting the positive role of scientific and technological achicvcments in the development of human society
and thc unprecedented acceleration of the rate of scientific and tcchnological developments,
Convinced that scientific and technological developmcnts effect important changes in many areas of the
lifc of society and should be used to exert a beneficia]
influencc on human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Bearing in mind that, while scientific and technological devclopments provide ever increasing opportunitics to better the human condition, in a number of instances they can give rise to social problems and may
be accompanied by an increase in social and material
inequality and a deterioration of the social situation
of broad sectors of the population,
Noting the urgent need to make full use of scientific
and technological developments for the welfare of man
and to neutralizc their present and possible future
liarmful consequences,
Noting with concern that scientific and technological
dcvelopments are used by thc forces of imperialism
and colonialism to intensify the arms race, suppress
national Iiberation movements and deprive the peoples
of their fundamental rights,
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determinatíon and the nced to respect human rights ,and funda67 Final Art vf the lnternational Conference on Human
Ri;;hts ( United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
r• 3.
6H [bid., p. 12.
tlll See Of]icia/ Records of the Economic and Social Council,
17.'ftv-fourth Se.nion, Supp!ement No. 6 (E/5265), chap. XII.
10 See A/9075.

mental freedoms and the dignity of the human personality in the light of scientific and technological
developments,
l. Ca/Is upan ali States to develop further international co-operation to ensurc that the results of
scientific and tcchnological developmcnts are uscd in
thc interests of strengthening international peace and
security, the realization of the peoples' right to selfdctermination and rcspect for national sovereignty,
frecdom and indcpend0nce and for thc purposc of economic and social development and improving the quality of Iifc for thc entirc population;
2. Relieves that the efiects of scientific and technological developments have been gencrally beneficia!
and hold out grcat potential for thc future;
3. Recommends ;ill St;ites to pursue a policy of utilizing ali scientific and tcchnological achievemcnts to
satisfy the material and spiritual needs of al! sectors
of thc population;
4. Recognizes that, where it exists the use of scientific and technological achievements 'for the purpose
of violating thc sovereignty of States, interfering in
their internal affairs, waging aggressive wars, supressing na_tion~I li?e~ation movements_ or pursuing a policy
of racial chscnmmat1on not only 1s a 11agrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and other principies of international law, but constitutes an inadmissibk distortion of the purposcs that should guide scientific and tcchnological devclopmcnts for the benefit
of mankind;
5. Invites thc Sccretary-General, the Jnternational
Labour Organisation, the Unitcd Nations Educational
Scicntific and Cultural Organization, the World Hcalth
Organization and other specialized agencies concerned
to J?ªY particular attcntion to the problem of the protect1on of broad scctors of the population against social
and material incqualities, as well as other harmful effccts which might arisc from the use of scientific and
tcchnologi~al devclopm~nts, and requcsts the SccrctaryGeneral, m co-operat1on with the above-mentioned
agencies, to submit a report on this subjcct to the
Grneral Asscmbly at its thirtieth session;
6. Urges all_ Sta~es to take acti_on whenevcr necessary
to develop leg1slat10n _guaranteemg human rights and
fundamental freedoms m the light of scientific and technological developments.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3152 (XXVIII). Assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations

The General Assembly,
Recalling previous resolutions of the General Assemb_ly and th~ Ec?nornic. and Social Council relating
to d1saster rehef, m particular Assembly resolutions
2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 and 2959
(XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
Noting with appr~ci~tion the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the activrties of the Office of the United
Nations Disastcr Relief Co-ordinator71 and his report
on preventive measures. disaster contingency planning
and preparedness, 72
11 A/9063.
1
7? /\ 92: 1.
