S/PV.8461

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8461st meeting

Tuesday, 12 February 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Esono Mbengono . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Morrison González
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2014/264)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-03717 (E)
*1903717*

Ukraine

S/PV.8461

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

efforts within the Minsk framework continue, the Minsk
provisions, regrettably, remain largely unimplemented,
including its key security and political aspects.
Negotiations appear to have lost momentum, with the
main stakeholders either unable and/or unwilling to
reach an agreement on the key steps forward, or being
distracted from focusing on the implementation of
agreed steps.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 April 2014 from the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/264)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Miroslav
Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General for Europe,
Central Asia and the Americas, Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Department
of Peace Operations; Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant
Secretary-General
for
Humanitarian
Affairs
and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator; His
Excellency Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine; and His
Excellency Mr. Martin Sajdik, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and in the
Trilateral Contact Group.
Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik are joining the meeting
via video-teleconference from Minsk.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: In resolution 2202 (2015), which
was unanimously adopted on 17 February 2015, the
Security Council endorsed the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements and
called on all parties to fully implement the measures,
including a much-needed comprehensive and lasting
ceasefire. In presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12, of
6 June 2018, the Council again unanimously reaffirmed
the centrality of the Minsk agreements.
Four years after their adoption, the Minsk
agreements remain the only agreed framework for a
negotiated peace in eastern Ukraine. While diplomatic
2/28

12/02/2019

I would like to recall that detailed discussions
on the implementation of the provisions of the Minsk
agreements have been taking place in separate forums,
in which the United Nations is not a participant. The
Secretary-General has been consistent in stressing
the United Nations strong support for the lead role
of the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and other key actors in seeking a
peaceful settlement of the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
The Secretary-General has also repeatedly called for
revitalizing efforts in these negotiation formats and
bilateral channels.
As consistently highlighted by incidents over
the past five years, the conflict in eastern Ukraine
is neither dormant nor frozen. It is a conflict in the
heart of Europe that continues to claim victims. With
the five recommitments to the ceasefire by the main
stakeholders in the Trilateral Contact Group format
last year, there has been a total of over a dozen such
ceasefire recommitments since the start of the conflict.
Each one was, regrettably, short-lived.
As reported by the OSCE, military advance
positions on both sides of the contact line are coming
closer to each other in the so called grey areas, while
the use of heavy weapons and their deployment in the
proximity of the contact line are a reality. This week,
another round of discussions within the Trilateral
Contact Group will be taking place in Minsk. It is the
United Nations sincere hope and expectation that the
relevant parties will reach tangible outcomes at these
meetings and implement decisions in good faith and
without delay.
While there has been an overall reduction in
violence since 2014, including in the number of civilian
deaths, casualties and destruction continue on an
almost weekly basis. At the same time, an estimated
1.5 million people remain internally displaced. The
periodic escalations remind us of the unstable reality
along the contact line, which continues to adversely
19-03717

12/02/2019

S/PV. 8461

Ukraine

impact the already dire socioeconomic situation and
the crumbling infrastructure in the conflict-affected
area. There is an urgent need to agree on additional
measures that would make the ceasefire sustainable
and irreversible. The priority of the parties should
be, without delay, to withdraw heavy weapons from
populated areas, disengage forces and protect critical
civilian infrastructure.
The United Nations remains fully committed to
playing its role in continuing to provide humanitarian
assistance, human rights monitoring and development
support. The scale and urgency of needs arising from the
conflict remain immense. Over half a million people live
within five kilometres of the contact line and they are the
most exposed to periodic shelling, gunfire, landmines
and unexploded ordnance. The area around the contact
line remains among the most mine-contaminated
areas in the world. As called for by the Council in its
presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12, of 6 June 2018,
it is essential that the international community step
up efforts to help meet the humanitarian needs on the
ground as part of the humanitarian response plan for
Ukraine. The United Nations will continue to spare
no effort to fulfil its responsibilities in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the monitoring of human
rights. However, I wish to underline that it is also
essential that the United Nations humanitarian efforts
on the ground not be politicized or instrumentalized by
any side.
This year, the conflict in eastern Ukraine will enter
its sixth year There should be no illusions — while
negotiations may have become protracted, this conflict
remains today an active threat to international peace
and security. It would be misleading to think that time
by itself will bring about solutions. On this occasion,
and echoing the Security Council’s expectations, the
United Nations once again calls for swift progress in the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. The United
Nations also urges all parties to avoid any unilateral
steps that could deepen the divide or depart from the
spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements.
The conflict in Ukraine is first and foremost
tragically affecting the Ukrainian people, but it is also
taking place in a context of increasing challenges to
the international peace and security framework. The
conflict continues to test the credibility of international
and regional organizations. In his address to the
Council two years ago on conflicts in Europe (see
S/PV.7886), the Secretary-General stressed the need

to prevent the emergence of new crises and to resolve
existing conflicts in the region. Last month, in his New
Year message to the General Assembly, the SecretaryGeneral again singled out the conflict in Ukraine as
one of the key challenges that continues to confront the
international community. Member States need to work
together in the interest of regional stability.
The United Nations underlines the need to fully
respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, within its internationally recognized borders,
in accordance with relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. Once again, we urge all
parties to demonstrate the necessary political will to
ensure the earliest possible end to the conflict and help
bring about peace and stability in all of Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Mr. Jenča
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mueller.
Ms. Mueller: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in eastern Ukraine.
Civilians continue to pay the highest price.
More than 3,300 civilians have been killed and up to
9,000 injured since the conflict began in 2014. Some
1.5 million people have been internally displaced.
The humanitarian consequences are severe. In 2019,
3.5 million people — many of whom are elderly, women
and children — will need humanitarian assistance and
protection service. For most of them, the impact of the
conflict has deepened. They have lost their livelihoods
and their limited resources have been exhausted by
now. They rely on humanitarian assistance to meet their
most basic needs.
Critical civilian infrastructure continues to be
damaged or disrupted, compounding people’s struggle.
In 2018 alone, 89 incidents affected water and sanitation
facilities and, in the past 12 months, 12 water workers
have been injured due to hostilities and landmine
explosions. They were simply trying to do their work,
ensuring that water continues to flow to millions of
people on both sides of the contact line.
The parties to the conflict must take all feasible
precautions to avoid, and in any event minimize civilian
harm. International humanitarian law must be upheld
to protect civilians and critical civilian infrastructure
at all times, everywhere and by all parties.

19-037173/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

In the Security Council last October (see S/PV.8386),
I welcomed the efforts of the Government of Ukraine
to improve crossing conditions at the checkpoints.
While there has been progress, I appeal once again for
more to be done on both sides. In the entire Luhansk
oblast, civilians can cross the contact line through only
one checkpoint — the pedestrian bridge of Stanytsia
Luhanska. This is simply not enough. With freezing
temperatures during Ukraine’s winter, it is critical
that essential services at crossing points be improved
as people continue to wait several hours to cross the
contact line. Already this year, 10 people — most of
them elderly — have died at the checkpoints. Elderly
people account for more than half of the crossings and
face long-standing barriers to access their pensions.
I have also called on the Government of Ukraine
to adopt a national mine-action framework. Today
I am pleased to report that a mine-action law was
recently adopted. That now needs to pave the way for
urgently scaling up mine-action efforts. Landmine and
explosive-hazard explosions caused approximately
43 per cent of all civilian casualties in 2018. I implore
all parties to immediately cease using landmines.
While humanitarians today have slightly more
access to civilians in need than a year ago, particularly
in areas beyond Government control, humanitarian
access is often unpredictable. As the Council will
recall, on 6 June 2018 the Council welcomed the work
of United Nations agencies (see S/PRST/2018/12) in
order to address the tragic humanitarian situation in
eastern Ukraine and emphasized the need to scale up
efforts to alleviate the suffering of civilians affected
by the conflict. Unimpeded and sustained access for
humanitarian organizations is key.
But, despite access challenges, a complex operating
environment and limited funding, humanitarians are
making a real difference by providing aid on both
sides of the contact line. They continue to be guided
by the universally recognized principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence. In 2018
alone, humanitarians reached some 1.3 million of the
most vulnerable people with critical assistance.
We are establishing an innovative funding
mechanism to support the 2019 humanitarian response
plan efforts — the Ukraine Humanitarian Pooled
Fund — to address acute needs that are least funded. I
welcome the contributions made by donors to the Fund.
I urge others to join. The Emergency Relief Coordinator
4/28

12/02/2019

approved a $6 million allocation last month from
the Central Emergency Response Fund, as part of an
envelope for underfunded crises.
Over 60 per cent of last year’s humanitarian
response plan was not funded. As a consequence,
some civilians who desperately needed assistance were
unable to receive food, water and sanitation, healthcare
and medicines, as well as protection services. This year
we require $162 million to provide aid to 2.3 million
people through the 2019 humanitarian response plan.
The plan focuses on protecting affected people and
restoring their access to livelihoods, essential services
and critical structures. While humanitarian assistance
continues to be critical as a result of conflict, we
aim to meet people’s needs through more sustainable
efforts, linking with recovery and development action
where possible.
Civilians along the contact line have suffered the
physical and emotional consequences of repeated, often
intense, hostilities. Shelling, sniper-fire and landmines
have become a daily reality for millions. Let us remember
that behind the figures mentioned are families — men,
women and children — who have suffered every day for
over five years. Many are struggling to access schools,
hospitals and other essential services. Many have lost
their jobs, homes, family members and friends. We can,
and we must, do more for those people.
To the resilient people of Ukraine, I wish to say
that we have not forgotten them. We will continue to do
everything we can to alleviate their daily suffering, and
to call for lasting peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Mueller for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the security
situation in eastern Ukraine. I will provide members
with an update on the challenges in the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, in particular the package of
measures as we a mark a year since its signing.
The latest recommitment to the ceasefire began on
29 December. That resulted in a significant decrease in
the number of ceasefire violations — a demonstration
that, if there is will, violence can be stopped. However,
the numbers have again rapidly increased. Violence
continues to fluctuate. On 5 February, for instance, the
Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) recorded almost
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

2,000 ceasefire violations, while yesterday we recorded
approximately 1,300. Areas where violence has been
most intense, as before, remain concentrated around
the Avdiivka-Yasynuvata-Donetsk airport area, the
Popasna-Pervomaisk-Zolote area, areas east and northeast of Mariupol and areas south of Svitlodarsk. Heavy
weapons have not been fully withdrawn; they continue
to be used.
We are in Minsk, where tomorrow there will be a
meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group. I will again
emphasize the need for a comprehensive ceasefire at
the Working Group on Security Issues. There must
be progress in identifying measures to strengthen the
ceasefire. The disengagement of forces and hardware,
agreed in the framework decision of September
2016, has not occurred. On the contrary, we have
observed a re-engagement in the Petrivske and Zolote
disengagement areas. Particularly in Zolote, violence
is spilling over to nearby villages on both sides of the
contact line, resulting in civilian casualties and damage
to civilian infrastructure.
Civilians must be protected. Measures that can
improve conditions for those living in or close to
conflict-affected areas are urgently needed. In 2018
the SMM reported on the circumstances in which
43 civilians were killed and 194 were injured. In the
first few weeks of 2019 we recorded four civilian
casualties. All measures must be undertaken to prevent
further casualties. The full withdrawal of heavy
weapons, beginning with populated areas, should be a
priority. That would reduce the impact of the conflict
on civilians. Concrete, positive steps in the field of
humanitarian mine action, particularly around schools,
kindergartens and entry-exit checkpoints, are needed.
That could help prevent further civilian casualties from
mines and unexploded ordnance. Raising awareness of
those dangers is important, especially among children.
Civilian infrastructure must be protected.
Regrettably, incidents affecting sites of critical
infrastructure, such as the Donetsk filtration station and,
more recently, the pumping station in Vasylivka, have
continued to occur. They cause damage and endanger
the lives of the brave men and women who work in those
sites for the benefit of their communities. The SMM
continues to facilitate dialogue to enable the repair and
maintenance of critical civilian infrastructure. It is for
the sides to take appropriate action to protect those
sites. They must honour the agreed local ceasefires and

S/PV. 8461

arrangements. A failure to do so poses a threat to repair
crews and SMM monitors.
To carry on with their lives, thousands of people
undertake long journeys every day. They are forced
to use the few entry-exit checkpoints to access basic
services, receive pensions and visit family members
separated by the conflict. We observe the consequences
of the enduring hardships, particularly for the elderly,
of the long queues in sub-zero temperatures. Since
December, the SMM has recorded 14 cases of people who
died from natural causes while waiting at checkpoints.
Steps must be taken to facilitate access for medical staff
to the grey zone between these checkpoints to provide
assistance for civilians. Crossing conditions must be
improved and more such checkpoints should be opened,
in particular in the Luhansk region. In his recent visit
to eastern Ukraine, the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), Slovak Foreign Minister Lajčák, highlighted
the precarious conditions of civilians crossing the
damaged bridge at Stanytsia Luhanska. Action is
needed to ensure that the necessary repairs to the bridge
become possible.
The Mission continues to monitor and report
on developments taking place in a complex security
environment. SMM unarmed aerial vehicles continue
to be targeted and signal interference with their flights
persists. More recently, on 4 February an explosion
occurred about 100 metres from an SMM patrol.
Challenges to our freedom of movement remain, in
particular in areas outside Government control in the
southern Donetsk region.
It is the responsibility of the sides to make good
on their commitments and ensure effective monitoring
and verification by the OSCE — a commitment they
made in the package of measures. The Mission will
continue to support and facilitate the implementation
of the Minsk agreements. The SMM will also continue,
according to its mandate, to monitor and report on
the security situation, facilitate dialogue to reduce
tensions and promote stabilization and normalization
throughout the country. In that context, we have
enhanced our patrolling activities to monitor on land
the possible effects on the socioeconomic situation and
potential implications related to developments in the
Sea of Azov.
I wish to thank the Council once again for the
opportunity to share the observations of the OSCE

19-037175/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

SMM. I also wish to express my gratitude for the close
cooperation with United Nations agencies in Ukraine,
both in Kyiv and in the field. In closing, I would like
to acknowledge the work of my colleagues, the SMM
members, and the dedicated men and women with
whom I have the honour to work. I also wish to thank
my colleague and friend, Ambassador Sajdik, for his
close cooperation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Apakan for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sajdik.
Mr. Sajdik: Ambassador Apakan and I have
today the honour to brief the Council from Minsk on
the evening before another negotiation round of the
Trilateral Contact Group and the four working groups
established by the Minsk agreements will take place.
This bears witness to the fact that the Minsk mechanisms
function on a regular basis and that there are many
different questions to be discussed and problems, also
of a current nature, to be solved.
The Trilateral Contact Group unites Russia
and Ukraine and the Special Representative of
the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), a
function presently held — as already mentioned by
Ambassador Apakan — by His Excellency Foreign
Minister Miroslav Lajčak of Slovakia, the President
of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session.
The Minsk platform foresees the participation of
certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in
meetings. Resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015, in welcoming the declaration adopted by the four
leaders of the Normandy format on 12 February 2015,
has enshrined oversight by the Normandy four over our
Minsk deliberations. The latest meeting of that kind
took place in November 2018.
In today’s statement on the occasion of the fourth
anniversary of the signing of the Minsk agreements, I
said that
“unfortunately, despite unanimous recommitments
to the Minsk agreements, a solution to the conflict
has not come nearer. In the region, confrontations
are still ongoing, causing suffering to the civilian
population and losses of human lives, although their
number was considerably reduced in the course of
last year”.
6/28

12/02/2019

Having made, together with the Austrian OSCE
chairmanship in 2017, the protection of civilians a core
cause of our deliberations has — in close cooperation
with the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission and
international humanitarian organizations — helped
reduce the number of civilians casualties by more than
half in 2018, with that trend continuing this year.
Because of Ambassador Apakan’s able guidance
of the security working group — for which I am very
grateful — the Trilateral Contact Group could adopt
decisions in the security field, as required by the Minsk
agreements, namely, the addendum to the package
of measures on the withdrawal of heavy weapons, of
September 2015; the decisions on mine action and
prohibition of live-fire exercises in the vicinity of
the contact line, of March 2016; and the framework
decision on the disengagement of forces and hardware,
of September 2016.
Positive developments could also be achieved
in the economic field, especially with respect to
water deliveries, respective payments in the Luhansk
region and repairs of water infrastructure. Also in
2018, we observed encouraging efforts with regard to
maintaining mobile telecommunications across the line
of contact, which are especially vital for the elderly
receiving their pensions on accounts in Governmentcontrolled territory. Moreover, the prolongation of
the special status of certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine
until the end of this year was an important political
achievement of September last year. The special status
is a cornerstone of the Minsk agreements.
There have also been setbacks. The conduct of the
so-called elections on 11 November 2018 in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions has not
helped strengthen the underlying spirit of the Minsk
agreements, namely, the unity and territorial integrity
of Ukraine. Important obligations have not been lived
up to. No disengagement has taken place so far in
Stanytsia Luhanska, which is one of the disengagement
zones that the sides had previously agreed on. The
access to the bridge on the northern bank of the
Seversky Donets River, at the crucial crossing point
near Stanytsia Luhanska, remains unrepaired, which
has absolutely dire consequences, in particular for the
elderly. With rising numbers of people crossing the
line of contact — an increase of 20 per cent in 2018
alone, reaching an average of 1.1 million crossings
per months, according to figures provided by the
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

International Organization for Migration — improving
the conditions at crossings and opening new entry-exit
check points has become very urgent, as has already
been mentioned by previous speakers.
Unfortunately, there has been no exchange of
conflict-related detainees since the end of 2017. We
have also observed a stalemate in the political working
group. I encourage the sides to allow the latter, with
the help of its tireless coordinator Ambassador Pierre
Morel, to widen the scope of its discussions.
I have now worked more than three and a half years
with the Minsk process. During that time, I have come
to the conclusion that the absolutely full implementation
of the Minsk agreements is essential to a peaceful
resolution of the conflict in eastern Ukraine. There is
simply no alternative.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Sajdik for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would first like to thank Mr. Jenča,
Ms. Mueller, Mr. Apakan and Mr. Sajdik for their
briefings today.
We took the initiative of convening today’s meeting
in order to discuss the implementation of a document
that is extremely important to the settlement of the
internal Ukrainian crisis, the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It
was signed four years ago on 12 February 2015 by
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), Ukraine, Russia, the
Donetsk People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s
Republic.
We have every reason to bring up this issue in the
United Nations, since as an annex the document is an
integral part of resolution 2202 (2015), of 17 February
2015, which endorsed it in its very first paragraph.
Furthermore, support for the implementation of the
Minsk package was again affirmed in a Security
Council presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/12) of
6 June 2018. For some reason some of our colleagues
on the Council labour under the illusion — not on this
topic alone, but on this topic especially — that we are
uncomfortable discussing the subject of Ukraine. That
is not only not the case, it is the complete opposite. On
the contrary, we have a greater interest than anyone in

S/PV. 8461

ensuring that the world listens one more time to the
story of how Western countries first orchestrated an
anti-Government coup in Ukraine and then gave Kyiv
carte blanche to do absolutely anything on the pretext
of dealing with what it calls the Russian threat and
aggression.
On 21 February it will be exactly five years since the
moment when in the presence of high representatives of
the European Union (EU), Germany, Poland and France
in the capacity of guarantors, the then President of
Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, signed an agreement with
the opposition on a peaceful settlement of the crisis. He
was almost immediately deceived and ultimately forced
to leave Ukraine. Who knows? Perhaps if he had acted
as the current Ukrainian authorities do, or, say, like the
leaders of the democratic countries who are not afraid
to use force against protesters, Ukraine would not have
found itself mired in a deep economic crisis, powerless
and lawless, and would not have ended up as a rawmaterials farm supplying the EU’s markets with cheap
labour. Not to mention that he would have had reason
on his side. As we now know for certain, the protesters
were armed and determined to seize power at any cost,
including bloody incitement. And that is ultimately
what they did.
I have purposely described this in detail because
I want it understood that the West as a whole, and
the three pseudo-guarantor countries I mentioned in
particular, bear a direct responsibility for everything
that has happened and is happening, as does the United
States, the true puppet master of these entire Maidan
theatrics, which today encourages and covers up every
one of Kyiv’s provocations, including the recent incident
in the Black Sea, and willingly supplies Ukraine with
arms, goading it to reckless action. Unfortunately, it is
obvious to us that the West has absolutely no interest in
Ukraine itself, its future or the welfare of its citizens.
Its sole interest is in the country’s capacity as a pawn in
a geopolitical confrontation with Russia.
Four years ago, it seemed as if the international
community and the parties to the Ukrainian conflict
were of one mind as to what the formula for a settlement
should be. In May 2018, during a Council meeting
convened by our Polish colleagues (see S/PV.8270),
we went over the Minsk package of measures in the
greatest possible detail, and I will therefore not do that
today. However, so that Council members could have
the document in front of them, we decided to print
out and distribute copies of resolution 2202 (2015).

19-037177/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

Time after time, I have urged Council members to
read it thoroughly. Do not repeat that rote line that
Russia should implement the Minsk agreements. The
agreements contain not a word about Russia. As we
have said many times, the absurdity is that it is Kyiv that
is sabotaging the Minsk agreements and it is Moscow
they are trying to make pay the price for that.
To reiterate the most important point once again, the
arrangement of the steps referred to in the resolution,
from paragraphs 1 to 13, is not accidental, since the order
of implementation of each step is of key significance.
Let me say again that the implementation of paragraph
9, on the transfer to Ukraine of control of the border
with Russia in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, will
be possible only after all the other conditions have been
implemented, including the disengagement of forces
and equipment, the enactment of a law on Donbas’s
special status, the creation of self-governing institutions
based on that, amnesty, an exchange of prisoners and a
number of other measures.
Unfortunately, however, we have full grounds for
saying that Kyiv has consistently and knowingly failed
to implement the Minsk agreements and has sabotaged
them, while our Western partners have covered up all
of its unlawful actions. The best illustration of that
is the fact that on 5 February the office of Ukraine’s
Prosecutor General announced the start of criminal
proceedings against Viktor Medvedchuk, one of the
leaders of the Ukrainian opposition, who had declared
his candidacy for the presidential elections to be held on
31 March. The reason for the indictment was his call for
holding the direct dialogue between Kyiv and Donbas
provided for in the Minsk package of measures and for
granting the region special status within Ukraine. In
other words, implementing the Minsk agreements in
Ukraine today is tantamount to treason and subject to
criminal prosecution.
The Minsk agreements’ insistence on a direct
dialogue with the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s
Republics brings Kyiv out in an allergic reaction. But
our Western colleagues pretend not to notice, thereby
displaying their carefully cultivated double standards.
And they are double standards because in every other
conflict on the Security Council’s agenda, we are all
united in insisting that the opposing parties have
to sit down at the negotiating table with the goal of
ending their confrontation or their military action and
launching a political process.
8/28

12/02/2019

Take Syria. What is the proverbial main thrust of
our efforts there? Correct. It is creating a constitutional
committee with the participation of the Government
and opposition and arriving at an agreement on the
establishment of a Syrian-owned and -led political
process. Now take Yemen. Everyone here applauded
the Stockholm Agreement reached between the Yemeni
Government and Ansar Allah. And now we are all
nervously keeping our fingers crossed and praying that
this still fragile agreement can be implemented. We
all welcomed the Khartoum agreement on the Central
African Republic, whose aim was also reconciling
some hitherto irreconcilable parties.
The goal of any peace process, and no one will
disagree with me, is to reach a political rather than
a military solution to a conflict through direct talks
between the conflicting parties. So why should Ukraine
be any different? Why do our Western colleagues not
make sure that Kyiv will finally agree to sit down at
the negotiating table with direct representatives of this
confrontation instead of trotting out the same wornout clichés about how Russia should do this, and this,
and this? But please do not bother. I can answer that
question myself, especially since no one else here cares
to try.
This is happening because the Kyiv authorities’
disingenuous chosen paradigm — “This is not a civil
conflict. It is a war with Russia” — suits them. And
one can chalk up a great deal to war, and that is what
Ukraine’s President Poroshenko is doing. It turns out
that all of Ukraine’s woes and misfortunes — not just
of the past few years but the past three centuries — are
the legacy of Russia’s occupation of Ukraine. Under
that lying paradigm, a new, falsified version of history
is being created at accelerated speed, cobbled together
from all the skeletons in its cupboard. Based on this
paradigm, the Kyiv authorities have to agree to nothing.
After all, according to them, the other party to the
conflict is not their own citizens but an aggressor
country, and therefore the Minsk agreements can be
torn up and thrown in the trash too. And that is exactly
what the Ukrainian authorities have done.
As a result of this fictional paradigm, there is no
need for Ukraine to talk to those of its citizens who live
in Donetsk and Luhansk. And yet for some reason the
residents of Donetsk and Luhansk have not observed the
presence among them of this so-called aggressor. They
have not protested against their de facto authorities and
they are not begging Kyiv to save them. However, Kyiv
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

has been able to continue to shed crocodile tears for its
citizens while groundlessly christening them terrorists.
But you do not negotiate with terrorists, you destroy
them. And there we have the Kyiv authorities’ entire
primitive construct — primitive, but effective. And it is
effective because our Western colleagues are complicit
in it. And that is shameful.
The situation in south-eastern Ukraine remains
explosive. Kyiv has not respected the ceasefire
agreement and has moved deep into the grey zone, as
President Poroshenko’s adviser Yuriy Biryukov recently
confirmed. Things have reached a point where the
positions of the parties in some areas are dangerously
close. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission’s recent
reports have confirmed the arrival in Donbas of new
units with Ukrainian tanks and artillery. Kyiv has also
been persistently evading its political commitments,
trying to marginalize the mechanisms of the Trilateral
Contact Group and launch a second round of discussions
on issues that have already been agreed on. That have
been indulged in that by our Western partners, saying,
for example, as Kurt Volker has done, that there is
no place in the Minsk agreements for the proclaimed
republics of Donbas and that they should disappear,
while President Poroshenko has declared that the Minsk
format does not exist. What kind of reaction to such
rhetoric does the Council expect from Donbas?
The result of the total indulgence with which Western
Governments have met any action by Kyiv has been
the creation of a continuing atmosphere of lawlessness
in which extremism and rabid nationalism flourish,
hatred of Russia is kindled and dissent is brutally
suppressed. Kyiv’s unwillingness to adhere strictly to
OSCE standards has become increasingly obvious over
the past few years. Everyone in this Chamber has been
trying to ignore that, partly because it is genuinely
difficult to find one’s way in the labyrinth of Ukraine’s
surrealistic internal politics without a translation or
first-hand information, and has continued to trot out
the tired clichés about democratic choice and the right
to a bright future in the family of democratic nations,
while occasionally gently scolding Kyiv for its lack of
progress in instituting reforms and fighting corruption.
But what they are really doing is knowingly ignoring all
the flagrant violations of democratic — indeed, merely
civilized — norms and the bacchanalia of lawlessness,
lies and emerging neo-Nazism in Ukraine.
Only the other day the OSCE Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) received an

S/PV. 8461

official refusal from the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry
for accreditation for Russia’s observers during the
March presidential elections, while Arsen Avakov,
the Minister of Internal Affairs, has promised to vet
all international observers, not just Russians, using the
database of the extremist Myrotvorets website, which is
banned in some countries. For those who do not know
about it, I should explain that this site contains personal
information about people whom Kyiv nationalists
do not like, in violation of rules on the protection of
personal information. Some of them have already been
killed. That amounts to giving people the black spot
or putting them on a hit list. And if anyone imagines
that only Russians are on those lists I can inform them
that they include personal information about politicians
from Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, the Czech
Republic, Slovakia and Hungary. These kinds of steps
on the part of Kyiv are yet another gross violation of
its international commitments and a serious assault on
ODIHR, which is supposed to be the gold standard for
monitoring elections. This is also the place to mention
that the Maidan authorities’ decision not to open polling
stations in Russia has deprived millions of Ukrainians of
the opportunity to vote there, which calls into question
the upcoming elections’ transparency and objectivity.
Of course, the people of Donbas — almost
4 million of them, or roughly 10 per cent of Ukraine’s
total population of 42.3 million — will have no chance
of voting either. Who would those Ukrainian citizens
vote — or rather never vote — for? Because they are
certainly not needed by the current Kyiv authorities,
weeping their hypocritical tears for them. For Kyiv
they long ago became self-supporting pawns in its
unscrupulous political games. Incidentally, we should
point out that in its obvious concern for its citizens,
Kyiv has imposed an economic, transportation, energy
and social blockade on Donbas.
I would like to hear something from Kyiv’s Western
mentors in this Chamber about their basic assessment
of Ukraine’s democratic development. Of course, it
should also include the situation of religious freedom
in Ukraine, where Orthodox churches are being openly
seized with the direct assistance of the legislative and
executive authorities. Amid the heat of the pre-election
campaigns, the Ukrainian authorities have completely
forgotten the separation between Church and State
that exists in civilized countries and that this principle
is guaranteed in Ukraine’s Constitution. And yet the
current authorities are shamelessly playing the religion

19-037179/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

card, tearing believers apart and flagrantly trampling
on religious freedom.
In conclusion, I would like to once again make it
abundantly clear that the key obstacle to resolving the
crisis and normalizing ordinary people’s lives is the lack
of a clear response from Western countries to Kyiv’s
unwillingness to implement the package of measures
that has been there for four years now. Essentially, this
means the sabotage of resolution 2202 (2015). As a
result, Kyiv is venturing new provocations that threaten
only to worsen the situation and ruin the peace process.
We hope and would like to believe that the participants
in today’s meeting will urge the Ukrainian authorities
to scrupulously implement their international
commitments. Kyiv must finally understand that the
implementation of the Minsk package of measures is
the only chance for peace and for resolving the conflict
in Ukraine.
And one more thing. We want to warn everyone,
both Kyiv and its sponsors, that they should forget
about hopes for a plan B, especially if anyone entertains
any illusions about military means for resolving this
intra-Ukrainian conflict.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Listening to Ambassador
Nebenzia, I was left with the impression that it was
Ukraine that had invaded Russia, not Russia that
invaded Ukraine.
At the outset, I would like to thank all the
briefers — Mr. Jenča, Ms. Mueller, Ambassador Apakan
and Ambassador Sajdik. I would particularly like to
thank Mr. Apakan for his five years or more of work
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. What
the monitors have accomplished in extremely difficult
circumstances over those years is incredible. I would
also like to thank Mr. Sajdik, who once again expressed
his commitment to the Minsk process, the Trilateral
Contact Group and the working groups.
I would like to remind Mr. Nebenzia that direct
meetings are actually taking place in those working
groups, and that is where the discussions with the
different parties to the conflict are being held, or
should be. When I heard that our Russian friends had put
this subject on the agenda, I did not feel uncomfortable
either, in fact quite the contrary. Exactly four years
after the signing of the Minsk agreements, I believe it
is quite right that we should discuss the situation. But
that is not the only anniversary of note right now. In
10/28

12/02/2019

particular, this year we are marking the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Budapest Memorandum. For those
who do not know what that is, it was signed in 1994.
At the time Ukraine still had nuclear weapons, and
it gave them up in exchange for Russia’s guarantee
of its territorial integrity and sovereignty. We have
seen what has happened since then with regard to its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, and what that
means for disarmament worldwide and for the rulesbased international order and international law.
Our Russian partners continue to violate
international law. The Treaty between the Russian
Federation and Ukraine on Cooperation in the Use of the
Sea of Azov is the most recent text in which it is clear
that the freedom of navigation is guaranteed. Ukrainian
soldiers — marines — who relied on the freedom of
navigation in the Sea of Azov, are imprisoned to this
day, which is a violation of international law. Over the
years, our Russian friends have said — and Vassily has
said — that it was an internal coup to overthrow the
Government. However, we must be aware of the fact
that it was a Russian invasion. Russian soldiers were
directly involved, both in the occupation of Luhansk
and of Donetsk.
There is a Russian television documentary that
clearly states that, on 23 February 2014, President Putin
ordered the security services to retake Crimea. Crimea
is still occupied. Donbas is still occupied — by “little
green men”— and its fate lies in their hands: Russian
soldiers. In 2014 and 2015, when it became increasingly
clear that many Russian soldiers had been killed, there
was a great deal of criticism on social media in Russia.
Then, in August 2014, Russia banned the Committee
of Soldiers’ Mothers of St. Petersburg and declared it
a foreign agent. There were many complaints about
Russian soldiers engaged in Donbas. Subsequently, in
a decree issued in May 2015, President Putin banned
reports about the death of members of the Defence
Ministry in peace time. That is how the situation was
handled in Russia.
Let us now turn to Minsk and the historical
circumstances. I do not know if it is a privilege, but
I was in Minsk and in negotiations for approximately
16 hours. There were several items on the agenda.
I will recap some of them. The key element at that
stage was the issue of the ceasefire. Russian troops
were advancing in Donbas at that time. They went
beyond the lines stipulated in the previous Minsk
agreement and attempted to occupy the city of
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

Debaltseve, which is a cross point for roads and trains
and of strategic importance. The main discussion was
focused on when the ceasefire would take place. The
Russian army wanted to have it as late as possible.
The members of the Normandy format, in particular
the non-Russians, insisted on an early ceasefire. In
the end, the ceasefire was agreed on the morning of
12 February 2015, following some back and forth
between Mr. Zakharchenko and Mr. Plotnitsky, who
signed the agreement. It was set to start on 15 February
at midnight. I agree with Vassily’s logic: you have to
see the package of measures in sequence.
The first paragraph stipulates an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire as of 15 February 2015. The
ceasefire never happened, because the Russian military
was actually right and they were unable to reach
Debaltseve at the time stipulated in the agreement. It
took them several days to arrive. Instead of having a
ceasefire, Russian troops continued until they finally
occupied Debaltseve. And that is, in a way, the original
sin committed when it comes to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Together with my French colleague
at the time, I visited Ukraine several times. We went
to the Rada and spoke with the members of Parliament
about adopting laws and so on. The scepticism was
very palpable. There was no trust that Russia would do
its part after having committed the original sin of not
honouring the ceasefire. We have seen no withdrawal
of heavy weapons to date. Ambassador Apakan also
highlighted that, with regard to the section of the Minsk
package pertaining free access to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, it is in particular in the occupied
territory of Ukraine where the Monitoring Mission does
not have free access. Russian-supported elections on
11 November last year again demonstrated that Russia
is not ready to adhere to the Minsk package.

S/PV. 8461

which was discussed. The mandate for it was proposed
by Russia and states that United Nations peacekeepers
should protect the Special Monitoring Mission. I think
that is a joke; for it to have free access and be able to
move around freely would require just one phone call
from the Russian President. We are ready for the United
Nations, but it has to have a serious mission.
Let me briefly turn to the worst outcome of what
happened in Ukraine — the humanitarian situation
in Crimea and Donbas. Ursula Mueller painted a
terrible picture of what is happening there: many dead,
injured, sick and impoverished and families separated;
industry more or less destroyed; mines flooded and
huge environmental risks. I think what should be done
now is to consider the humanitarian issues. I do not
understand why it is not possible to have an agreement
between Ukraine and Russia on the Stanytsia Luhanska
pedestrian bridge, which was mentioned by all of the
briefers. There are reports about the situation there
and how old people have to cross it. I would ask the
Ukrainian Ambassador, in view of his statement, to
make a commitment that everything will be done to
ensure that the bridge again becomes operational. The
exchange of prisoners and hostages, which was possible
at the end of 2017 with 300 people, should be possible
now. The essential infrastructure should be spared and
repaired, as mentioned previously.
The Minsk agreements have been severely criticized
and there is every reason for such criticism because
the original sin occurred in their implementation.
Nonetheless, it is the only show in town. The Normandy
format remains committed to the agreements and we
want them to be successful. We are therefore ready to
work on the issue, not least for the benefit of the people
who are suffering terribly.

There is distrust in Ukraine but, nevertheless,
the Rada adopted a number of important of very
important elements of the Minsk agreements. There
was a first reading of the constitutional amendments on
decentralization. The law on the special status and the
amnesty law were adopted. They are all key elements.
It was extremely difficult to convince the members of
the Rada and receive the necessary support.

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča and Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for their briefings. I would also like to welcome
my former colleagues, Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan
and Ambassador Martin Sajdik, and to thank them
for their insightful briefings on the implementation of
resolution 2202 (2015), the Minsk agreements and the
situation in eastern Ukraine.

Germany, together with France, will continue to be
active and to support in the Normandy format all efforts
to broker a ceasefire and reach a solution. We are also
ready to support the idea of a United Nations mission,

The United Nations was established in order to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. Its
fundamental role is to prevent conflict. Pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council has

19-0371711/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

the primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. The Council takes the initiative to
identify threats to peace and security and calls on States
parties to a conflict to settle their differences through
peaceful means in order to prevent an armed conflict.
This meeting falls on the fourth anniversary of the
Minsk agreements, which provide a road map to settle
the conflict in Ukraine. On this occasion, we would
have hoped to achieve lasting peace. However, there
continue to be violations of the ceasefire with weapons
that should have been withdrawn under the agreements.
Those weapons are still present in an environment
characterized by insecurity and a lack of trust, leading
to more acts of violence. We therefore call on all parties
to immediately cease hostilities and commit themselves
to fully respecting the ceasefire and refraining from
provocations that could lead to more tension.
We renew our support for the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders, as well as non-interference in its
internal affairs. We hope that all parties concerned
will fully implement resolution 2202 (2015), the Minsk
agreements and presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12
of 6 June 2018. We call on those parties to achieve a
comprehensive and balanced solution to this issue
through dialogue, as stipulated in Article 33 of the
United Nations Charter, and within the framework of
the Normandy format as well as the Trilateral Contact
Group in order to achieve immediate progress in all the
agreed areas.
We commend the Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and its efforts on the ground, in particular its
endeavours towards facilitating a dialogue among the
parties to the conflict. We call on Ukraine and the
Russian Federation to activate a dialogue between them
and take confidence-building measures to show greater
political will not only to strengthen the ceasefire
arrangements and implement previous agreements,
but also to revitalize a lasting and comprehensive
negotiation process towards a peaceful solution to
the crisis.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the crisis
in the eastern part of Ukraine is now in its fifth year.
The consequences are becoming increasingly serious
owing to the daily hostilities, which have an impact on
the infrastructure and undermine the daily life of the
people in the region. The conflict also affects more than
12/28

12/02/2019

5.2 million people, of whom 3.5 million people are in
need of urgent humanitarian assistance and protection,
as mentioned by Ms. Mueller. In addition, there are
1.5 million internally displaced persons, according
to the report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of 31 December 2018.
The humanitarian situation remains precarious
due to many obstacles impeding relief work and lack
of funding for the humanitarian response plan. The
situation in eastern Ukraine is still unstable despite
some improvements. We stress the importance of
providing humanitarian assistance to all the affected
areas in order to improve the living conditions of the
population there.
In conclusion, we urgently call for a peaceful
solution to the crisis in the eastern part of Ukraine in
line with the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the agreements signed by the parties involved. That
includes the Minsk agreements, which represent the
only agreed framework to settle the crisis in the region,
along with the mediation efforts of the stakeholders
who enjoy the respect and appreciation of the two
parties to the conflict and the international community
as a whole.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Miroslav Jenča, Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, Ambassador
Ertuğrul Apakan and Ambassador Martin Sajdik for
their comprehensive briefings, especially given the
short notice for this meeting.
We always underline the need for full implementation
of the Minsk agreements by all the signatories involved.
However, it must be remembered who the victim is and
who the aggressor is in this case. Despite what we may
hear today, much ill will would be required to suggest
that it is the country that has fallen prey to Russia’s
aggressive foreign policy that is failing to comply
with the Minsk agreements. It is Russia that allowed
the illegal elections conducted last November in the
so-called separatist regions in Donbas that constitute
a gross violation of the Minsk agreements. The tactic
is plain and simple: one will significantly reduce the
number of violations reported by the observers of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) if access to the separatist-controlled parts of
Ukraine in Donbas remains restricted. That has been the
reality on the ground. To truly de-escalate the situation
in Donbas, we need more effective OSCE engagement,
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

in particular, the unhindered implementation of the
mandate of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine. The OSCE must be allowed to permanently
monitor the Ukrainian-Russian State border.
Russian aggression against Ukraine remains a
security threat to the whole region. As we have already
stated in the Council on several occasions, the conflict
in and around Ukraine is not a domestic Ukrainian
crisis. It is a consequence of the Russian aggression
against a sovereign neighbouring State and, as often
depicted by the aggressor, a brotherly nation. That
aggression undermines the core principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. Poland fully
supports Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity,
including its maritime areas.
We are seriously concerned by Russia’s unjustified
use of military force against Ukrainian ships and naval
personnel on 25 November, which took place against
the backdrop of increasing militarization in the area.
We call on Russia to ensure unhindered access to
Ukrainian ports and navigational rights in the Sea of
Azov and the Kerch Strait. Furthermore, we call for the
immediate and unconditional release of the Ukrainian
vessels and their crew members.
Russia must stop destabilizing the socioeconomic
situation in eastern Ukraine through unjustified
discriminatory inspections of vessels bound for and
originating in the ports of Berdyansk and Mariupol.
Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea, an integral
part of Ukraine, is a glaring example of the violation
of the principles of international law. That was true on
16 March 2014, when the illegal referendum deciding
the status of Crimea was held and it continues to be true
today. Russia’s claims of sovereignty or sovereign rights
in maritime areas belonging to the Crimean peninsula
have no legal basis whatsoever. Ukraine’s decision to
institute arbitration proceedings against Russia under
the United National Convention on the Law of the Sea
is a step that will hopefully lead to a peaceful resolution
of its disputes with Russia.
While we are always grateful for the picture of
the humanitarian situation provided by Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller, we see the
need to take immediate action to ease the difficult
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. First, it
requires Russia to allow international humanitarian
organizations to operate freely in the areas of Donbas
controlled by militants. The humanitarian situation

S/PV. 8461

in the conflict areas is very difficult. Thanks to the
data provided by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, we are aware that humanitarian
aid and protection need to be provided to approximately
3.5 million people. The civilian infrastructure is also
being targeted and intentionally destroyed. The Russiabacked forces refuse to make basic improvements to the
crossing facilities at the entry-exit checkpoints along
the contact line, where thousands of civilians wait for
hours in order to meet their basic needs such as seeing
family members, and to collect medicine and food. The
Special Monitoring Mission is reporting a threefold
increase in deaths by natural causes at checkpoints
in comparison to the previous year. In mid-December
last year, when the temperature was below freezing,
local pipelines in Donetsk were shelled and damaged,
resulting in a water supply disruption for about 43,000
Toretsk inhabitants, including about 5,000 children in
21 educational facilities. Water supplies were resumed
after five days when the parties to the conflict agreed
to hold fire on the water supply infrastructure for
the repair of damaged pipelines. Moreover, despite
the safety guarantees, the water workers found
themselves under heavy fire on 25 December. That is
simply unacceptable.
Apart from supporting Ukraine at the political level,
since 2014 Poland has been providing the necessary
humanitarian aid to internally displaced people from
areas affected by armed conflict in eastern Ukraine, as
well as to the most vulnerable local population. Ukraine
is a priority State for Poland’s development assistance
and will remain one as long as our partners recognize
the need for it.
In conclusion on a positive note, we recognize
the latest amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine
introducing its European and Euro-Atlantic integration
perspective. Broad support is reflected both in the
Ukrainian Parliament and on the Ukrainian streets.
Despite all the uncertainties that will arise at some
point, we are sure that a lot can be built on that support.
We stand shoulder to shoulder with our friends to
overcome any obstacles.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretaries-General Jenča and Mueller and
Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik for their briefings
and for their calls for the full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.

19-0371713/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

We are nearing to the five-year anniversary of the
start of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine, which has
left more than 10,400 dead and 1.6 million displaced,
as well as 3.5 million more in dire need of assistance.
Let us be clear. It is Russia that must end this conflict.
Withdrawing its military troops from eastern Ukraine
and Crimea is the only acceptable outcome, and
the only one we should accept. The United States
underscores its unequivocal position on Ukraine. We
do not, and will not, recognize the Kremlin’s purported
annexation of Crimea. We will never accept anything
less than the full restoration of Ukraine’s control
over its own territory, whether in eastern Ukraine or
Crimea, including its territorial waters. Our Donbasrelated sanctions will remain in place until Russia fully
implements the Minsk agreements. Our Crimea-related
sanctions will also continue until Russia returns the
peninsula to Ukrainian control.
Russia called today’s meeting to discuss the Minsk
agreements. This is ironic given that Russia has clearly
failed to honour and implement them. The Minsk
agreements call for the sides, among other things, to
implement a ceasefire, allow the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to monitor that
ceasefire and withdraw support for “all military armed
formations”. Russia is clearly violating all three of
those key elements. Russia continues to arm, train,
lead and fight alongside its proxy forces in eastern
Ukraine, in direct contravention of its commitments
under the Minsk agreements, including establishing
an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire. Russia
has flouted its commitments from the very beginning
of the establishment of the agreements, using the
military forces under its control to capture new
territory. While Russia has ignored or undermined the
Minsk agreements, Ukraine, France, Germany and the
United States remain committed to supporting their
full implementation.
We welcome the Ukrainian Government’s continued
commitment to a peaceful resolution of the conflict
and the full implementation of the Minsk agreements.
Ukraine has demonstrated that commitment by taking
steps, including by extending the law on the special
status for Russia-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine.
For its part, instead of using the Minsk agreements as
the path towards the resolution of the conflict, Russia
reverts to distracting attention from its unmistakable
and unjustifiable central role in fomenting it. Moscow
disingenuously argues for a protection force that would
14/28

12/02/2019

use expensive international forces to cement the status
quo and end up protecting Russia’s proxies.
In a serious escalation — and another violation
of international law — in November Russia prevented
Ukrainian vessels from passing through the Kerch
Strait, firing upon and seizing the vessels and personnel.
We again call on Russia to release the detainees,
return the Ukrainian ships and end its restrictions on
international shipping transiting to Ukrainian ports in
the Sea of Azov.
The United States stands with the European Union
and its member States, and many other countries, against
Russia for its unacceptable conduct in Crimea, eastern
Ukraine and the Black Sea. We will continue to stand
with the people of Ukraine against Russian aggression.
In the name of international peace and security, which
members of the Council are committed to uphold, we
call on Russia to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity within its internationally recognized
borders, extending to its territorial waters.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking Equatorial Guinea for convening this very
important meeting. I would also like to thank Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs;
Ambassador Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine;
Ambassador Martin Sajdik, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine; as well as
Mr. Miroslav Jenča from the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace
Operations for their statements. All of the briefers have
provided us with a picture of the situation. For our part,
I would like to highlight the following points.
First, Indonesia reaffirms its principle and
consistent position that respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, including the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, is a fundamental
principle of relations among nations.
Secondly, Indonesia calls upon the conflicting
parties to fully adhere to and implement the Minsk
agreements in line with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Doing so could
provide a crucial boost of confidence that ultimately
paves the way for a sustained political solution and
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

the restoration of peace and stability in the affected
areas. Furthermore, the faithful implementation of
the Minsk agreements is also vital to ensuring safe
access to and the delivery, storage and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to those in need, on the basis
of an international mechanism. While underlining the
imperative for sustained peaceful actions, Indonesia
encourages the withdrawal of all heavy weapons by the
States concerned by equal distances in order to create
a security zone. We take note of the work undertaken
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Trilateral Contact Group in the
implementation of the agreements. We also encourage
the assurance of effective monitoring and verification
by the OSCE for the ceasefire regime and the withdrawal
of heavy weapons.
Thirdly, Indonesia reiterates its call on all the parties
concerned to exercise the utmost restraint, manage the
crisis responsibly, promote a peaceful settlement and
consistently uphold respect for international law. We
stress the importance of dialogue and diplomacy among
the States concerned to resolve the ongoing problems.
In doing so, Indonesia encourages the States concerned
to take the necessary measures to de-escalate tensions.
We are against any actions that exacerbate hostilities
and deteriorate the already fragile situation on the
ground. We might come from afar and from a different
geographical region, but we believe sincerely in
the value of dialogue and the need to settle disputes
amicably. Therefore, Indonesia further calls on the
Security Council to fully shoulder its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
For its part, Indonesia will fully support all
constructive efforts that are aimed at resolving the
conflict in Ukraine peacefully, in accordance with
international law and Charter principles.
Let me also end by reiterating that full respect for
non-interference in and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States are fundamental principles of
relations among nations and that each State Member of
the United Nations must abide by them, be it on this
issue or on others on the agenda of the Security Council.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has listened to the briefings by Assistant SecretaryGeneral Jenča; Assistant Secretary-General Mueller;
the Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring

S/PV. 8461

Mission to Ukraine, Ambassador Apakan; and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Representative to the Trilateral Contact Group
Ambassador Sajdik.
Four years ago, the Minsk agreement was signed
and subsequently endorsed by the Security Council.
The agreement has played a critical role in the political
mediation of the Ukrainian crisis. Over the past four
years, all parties have held the agreement in high regard,
and various mechanisms relating to the implementation
of the agreement have largely been functioning well.
Regrettably, however, many of the provisions
of the agreement are yet to be fully and effectively
implemented. The political mediation process of the
Ukrainian crisis has come to a standstill, and there is
no effective guarantee of the safety of civilian lives and
property in the conflict area. China calls on all parties
concerned to effectively implement the agreement,
remain committed to the general direction of a political
settlement and seek a comprehensive solution through
dialogue and consultation in order to facilitate the
achievement of peace, stability and development
in Ukraine.
A fundamental, long-term solution of the Ukrainian
issue requires that on the one hand the legitimate rights,
interests and aspirations of all regions and ethnic
groups in Ukraine be fully accommodated, and that, on
the other hand, attention also be paid to addressing the
reasonable concerns of all parties involved in order to
achieve a balance among all interests.
China has consistently maintained an objective and
impartial position on the Ukrainian crisis. We have
always believed that the crisis cannot be solved through
force and that dialogue and negotiation is the only
way out. China will remain committed to playing a
constructive role in the political settlement of the crisis.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting and
facilitating these discussions, as per the Russian
Federation letter dated 13 April 2014 (S/2014/264).
I wish to thank the briefers, Mr. Miroslav Jenča,
Assistant Secretary-General for Europe, Central
Asia and the Americas, Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and Department of Peace
Operations; Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan,

19-0371715/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine; and Mr. Martin Sajdik, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine and in the
Trilateral Contact Group. I welcome also my colleague
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine.
It is very clear from the briefings we have heard
that there remains an urgent need for the immediate
cessation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine. The
continued violation of the ceasefire, including the
presence of heavy weapons and their use, in violation
of the Minsk agreements, are of serious concern.
It is also of great concern that the ongoing tension
and conflict are exacerbating the dire humanitarian
conditions on the ground. The parties need to ensure
that there is an urgent de-escalation of tension through
the implementation of the Minsk agreements so as to
allow for a situation that is conducive to the alleviation
of the humanitarian crisis.
In this regard, it remains necessary for all parties
to fully implement all of their respective commitments
under the Minsk agreements. At this point, the Minsk
agreements, including the package of measures agreed
under Minsk II, provide the most promising road map
for peace. It is also of critical importance that the parties
refrain from actions that could be viewed as provocative
and that could further impede a peaceful resolution of
the situation in line with the Minsk agreements.
Furthermore, it is important that the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe be allowed
unhindered access to monitor and verify compliance
with the Minsk agreements, in line with its mandate.
South Africa encourages the various parties to
strengthen all political efforts to produce a sustainable
and peaceful solution.
In conclusion, we listened very carefully to the
remarks made by some of our colleagues on the issue of
Ukraine. We hope that those very same colleagues will
walk the talk on Venezuela: respect for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Venezuela; respect for
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
Nations, on refraining from military aggression against
other States Members of the United Nations; and,
thirdly, not to undermine the Venezuelan economy by
holding large sums of Venezuelan funds in their own
16/28

12/02/2019

banks and in their allies’ banks. If they do that, they
will win our respect.
Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting, which marks four years
since the signing of the Minsk agreements. We thank
the Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Miroslav Jenča,
for his informative briefing. His words remind us that
this anniversary, far from being a date to celebrate,
must motivate the parties to renew their commitment
to implementing the agreements. We would also like
to express our appreciation for the participation of
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller and
Ambassadors Ertuğrul Apakan and Martin Sajdik,
representatives of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
Peru believes that the Minsk agreements constitute
the legal basis for achieving a political solution to put
an end to the conflict in the eastern part of Ukraine.
In that regard, we support the package of measures for
their full implementation, which the Council backed in
February 2015. We encourage the stakeholders involved
to uphold fully these commitments.
In this regard, and in line with the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, we wish to welcome
the efforts made under the Normandy format and in the
Trilateral Contact Group to facilitate dialogue between
the parties and to contribute to restoring peace in
Ukraine and regional stability.
We deem vital adherence to the ceasefire agreed
on by the parties and backed by the Council, as is
the withdrawal of heavy artillery, which is very
often located near populated areas. In this regard,
we acknowledge the critical role played by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission, which its representatives
have recalled here today. It is alarming that in January
alone the mission registered more than 16,000 ceasefire
violations, many with weapons that should have been
withdrawn and that are prohibited under international
law, such as anti-personnel mines.
We are also concerned about the serious
consequences of that situation for the country’s
governance and development, notably the devastating
impact on its civilian population, especially those living
on either side of the line of contact. In just five years,
the conflict has claimed the lives of more than 3,300
civilians and injured more than 9,000 people. Another
4.4 million people, including 1.6 million internally
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

displaced persons, have had to leave their homes and are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance. We therefore
reiterate the need to ensure that this aid is delivered
unhindered and under international supervision.
In that regard, we commend the work of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, in supporting the efforts of the Ukrainian
authorities to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population affected by the conflict. Similarly, we
echo the call for the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to provide
assistance to the 2.3 million people living in extremely
vulnerable conditions.
In reiterating our commitment to the independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, in line
with the Charter of the United Nations and the Minsk
agreements, we underscore the importance of restoring
the control of the Ukrainian Government over the entire
conflict zone, and as a result, resume the essential
social and economic ties aimed at ensuring the wellbeing of its people.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Miroslav Jenča; the Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Ursula Mueller; the
Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, Mr. Ertuğrul Apakan; and the
Special Representative of the ОSCE Chairperson-inOffice in Ukraine and in the Trilateral Contact Group,
Mr. Martin Sajdik, for their insightful briefings on the
crisis that Ukraine has endured for almost five years.
While some may forget it, the Ukrainian conflict
remains one of the deadliest on the European continent
today. A few striking figures are worth recalling. A
total of 12,800 people have died since April 2014 in the
Donbas, including 3,300 civilians. Despite commitments
to respecting the ceasefire, the situation on the line of
contact remains as tense as ever. The OSCE Mission
identified more than 30 victims in January alone. Let
us not forget that Ukraine is now the third most mined
area in the world, after Iraq and Afghanistan, and that
it will take several decades to clear it.
As my German colleague and friend said, since the
onset of hostilities France and Germany, in conjunction
with the OSCE, have spared no effort in the so-called
Normandy format to bring the parties closer together,
facilitate the full implementation of the Minsk

S/PV. 8461

agreements by the latter and contribute thereby to
ending the conflict. In order to achieve that objective,
three points deserve our full attention.
First, much remains to be done to implement the
commitments that were made several years ago to
improve security conditions, which include respecting
the ceasefire; withdrawing heavy weapons from the
line of contact; disengaging from three pilot areas
that were identified by the September 2016 framework
agreement; clearing mines, on which no significant
progress has been noted; and lastly, protecting critical
civilian infrastructure and its workers. We regret the
lack of political will to implement commitments that
were made at the highest level.
Beyond the Donbas, France reiterates its concern
about Russia’s illegal use of military force in the Kerch
Strait. Equally worrying are the excessive inspections
that have been carried out by the Russian coast guard in
the Sea of Azov since last spring. Following the serious
naval incident in November, there is a greater need than
ever for commercial and military ships to enjoy safe,
free and unhindered passage, and for the 24 illegally
detained Ukrainian seamen to be released immediately
and without condition.
Secondly, in the context of open conflict in eastern
Ukraine and tensions related to the illegal annexation
of Crimea, the civilian population is on the front line.
Ukraine is facing one of the largest humanitarian
crises of the past 10 years. In total, as mentioned by
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller, 3.5 million
women and men, particularly the most vulnerable
older persons — representing nearly 10 per cent of the
population— depend on humanitarian assistance.
France once again calls on the parties to facilitate
the crossing of the line of contact by civilian populations
and spare them the suffering associated with waiting
in inhuman conditions, especially given the opening of
new crossing points. We must not forget that more than
10 people have died in recent weeks due to the extremely
harsh crossing and waiting conditions on both sides of
the line of contact. Similarly, every effort must be made
to ensure safe and unhindered access for humanitarian
organizations and United Nations agencies, particularly
in the territory controlled by separatist entities.
On 6 June 2018, in presidential statement
S/PRST/2018/12, the Security Council called for the
United Nations to take action to respond appropriately
to the humanitarian crisis. In that regard, we welcome

19-0371717/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

the humanitarian response plan for 2019-2020, prepared
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, as well as the upcoming launch of a common
finance fund for Ukraine. That initiative is a step
towards greater awareness, and we fully support it.
Thirdly and in conclusion, an end to the crisis is
first and foremost the responsibility of the parties,
especially Russia. We encourage them to stop posturing
and to implement all their obligations under the Minsk
agreements, in the interest of a civilian population that
is caught between heavy weapons and mines. Contrary
to what we heard some minutes ago, the actual conflict
is not the product of a so-called Western plot. Sitting
around this table there is an aggressor country and a
country that is subject to that aggression. The OSCE
Mission, the outstanding work of which we commend,
plays a central role in achieving that objective and
resolving the crisis. We urge the parties, in particular
the separatist entities, to allow observers to move freely
throughout Ukraine to the Russian-Ukrainian border.
Pending the return to a lasting peace, to which
we are striving tirelessly to contribute, the Ukrainian
people can count on the full and complete support
of France.

12/02/2019

Despite the parties recommitment to the ceasefire
on 29 December 2018, violations are increasing and there
continues to be military activity in the disengagement
zones. However, our understanding of the situation
within non-Government-controlled territory is limited
because the Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
is unable to carry out its mandate. It is unable to do
so because of Russia’s repeated refusal to support
the Special Monitoring Mission. That threatens the
ceasefire and ultimately the security of Ukraine and
the wider region. The raft of incidents that Russia has
yet to provide an explanation for only reinforces that
conclusion — for example, the downing of an SMM
long-range unmanned aircraft near the Ukraine-Russia
border, outside Ukraine Government control last
year. Just last week, the SMM twice observed the use
of the Russian electronic jamming system Zhitel in
the Donbas. I would ask the Russian Ambassador to
ensure his country’s support for the Special Monitoring
Mission and to allow its personnel to observe. I would
ask what people have to hide.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank all of our briefers. The Russian Ambassador
spoke at length and in colourful and imaginative
language about many other actors as he introduced
the topic, but he said nothing about Russia’s role. The
German Ambassador — an eyewitness to the Minsk
agreements — showed us why, with his account of the
events of the time and Russia’s actions.

A further example of Russian attempts to
destabilize Ukraine is the illegitimate elections in
the non-Government-controlled territories of the
so-called Luhansk People’s Republic and Donetsk
People’s Republic in the Donbas in November 2018.
That represents a clear breach of the Minsk agreements
and unnecessarily increases tensions. Russia could
use its considerable influence on the Russian-backed
separatists to encourage them to comply with their
Minsk commitments. Instead, Russia fuels the
conflict by supplying weapons and personnel to the
armed formations.

The United Kingdom welcomes this opportunity to
discuss the repeated violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity at the hands of Russia. Russia’s
aggression towards Ukraine is not limited to the Donbas
and Crimea. Russia seeks to undercut Ukraine at every
opportunity, undermining the ceasefire, supplying the
Russian-backed separatists with weapons and calling
illegitimate elections — all in breach of the Minsk
agreements. Those actions have a tragic impact on the
lives of Ukrainian civilians. As the French Ambassador
said, in the five years since this conflict began, more
than 12,800 people have lost their lives. Almost 25,000
have been injured, and 3.4 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance. Russia bears a heavy
responsibility for the ongoing loss of life.

Next month marks the fifth anniversary of the
illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia, and it is
worth reminding ourselves of the facts. In response to
Russia’s plans for an illegal and illegitimate referendum
in Crimea, on 15 March 2014 the Security Council
voted on draft resolution S/2014/189, which reaffirmed
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, and noted that Ukraine had not authorized the
referendum and that it had no validity. Russia vetoed that
draft resolution. Following the illegal and illegitimate
referendum in Crimea on 16 March 2014, on 27 March
2014 the General Assembly adopted resolution 68/262,
which was supported by 100 member States and
affirmed the General Assembly’s commitment to the
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally

18/28

19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

recognized borders and underscored the invalidity of
the referendum.
We object to the illegal annexation of Crimea not
only because it is illegal. We also object to it owing
to the Russian Government’s appalling treatment of
many of those who live there. Human rights violations
are prevalent. Ethnic and religious groups such as the
Crimean Tatars are persecuted. Despite calls in the
relevant General Assembly resolutions for the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
visit Crimea, Russia continues to refuse. We, the
international community, must stand united and call
on Russia to release all political prisoners and allow
urgently needed, unrestricted access for human rights
monitoring organizations immediately. Again, what
does the Russian Federation not want the world to see?
Less than three months ago, the Russian authorities
admitted to using force in the Black Sea to seize three
Ukrainian naval vessels, injuring three Ukrainian
servicemen. Those actions are not in conformity with
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
and they are a blatant attempt to destabilize Ukraine by
harming the economic activities of the other ports of
Berdyansk and Mariupol, hampering Ukraine’s ability
to manage its economy.
Let me be clear. Russia’s actions in Ukraine have
no basis in international law. We cannot and will not
ignore such actions. They represent a serious challenge
to the international rules-based order. This is an order
that benefits us all and keeps us safe. In order to protect
it, the international community must continue to stand
united and remain focused on Russia’s behaviour and
its attempts to integrate Crimea into Russia, including
through the construction of a bridge across the
Kerch Strait.
In conclusion, I reiterate the United Kingdom’s full
support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, including within its internationally
recognized borders and territorial waters. We look
forward to discussing the situation in Ukraine further
at the forthcoming General Assembly debate on
20 February. I take note of the Russian Ambassador’s
enthusiasm for Security Council meetings on Ukraine
and will look forward next time to hearing about what
Russia will be doing to meet its obligations and end to
the suffering of the people of Ukraine.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank Assistant Secretaries-

S/PV. 8461

General Mueller and Jenča and Mr. Apakan and
Mr. Sajdik, representing the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, for their enlightening and
informative briefings.
Four years since the conclusion of the Minsk
agreements, we note that large-scale violent clashes
have subsided. However, we also note that ceasefire
violations continue almost every day, resulting in
deaths and injuries not only among combatants, but
also within the civilian population. The implementation
of the agreements’ key provisions remains a dead letter,
even though it represents the only means to achieve a
lasting political solution to the conflict. We therefore
call on both sides to fully and swiftly implement the
Minsk agreements, pursuant to resolution 2202 (2015),
and to honour their commitments. We support the
efforts of the Trilateral Contact Group, as well as those
under the Normandy format, to that end.
We call on Russia to immediately stop fuelling the
conflict by providing financial and military support to
armed groups. We call on Russia to use its influence
on those armed formations to encourage them to
fully respect their commitments under the Minsk
agreements. We regret that obstacles have prevented the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine from properly
carrying out its monitoring and reporting tasks there.
The Mission plays a crucial role in de-escalating
tensions. We strongly encourage the parties to the
conflict to respect the Mission’s mandate and allow it
safe and unhindered access to all Ukrainian territory,
including along the border between Ukraine and Russia
and in the Crimea.
The lack of progress in the implementation of the
Minsk agreements is being felt on the ground. We remain
deeply concerned about reports of Russian military
equipment and personnel present in areas controlled by
armed formations. The presence of heavy weapons, in
contravention of the Minsk agreements, continues to
pose a threat to the civilian population on both sides of
the line of contact. We call for the complete withdrawal
of those weapons and the disengagement of troops from
those areas. We commend the Ukrainian authorities
for extending the special status law for the Donbas
region, which is one of the cornerstones of the Minsk
agreements. On the other hand, Belgium condemns
the November 2018 holding of elections in the rebel
Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Those elections violate
both the letter and the spirit of the Minsk agreements.

19-0371719/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

Belgium remains deeply concerned about the
humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine. We urge
all parties to allow full, continuous and unhindered
access in accordance with humanitarian principles.
We are particularly concerned about the fact that
critical civilian infrastructure, such as that associated
with water supply, is being targeted. As the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs mentioned
earlier, 3.5 million people are in need of assistance
and protection owing to the widespread presence of
mines, increasing psychological trauma and the lack of
access to basic services. We share a deep concern about
their suffering and underscore the importance of the
multi-year humanitarian response plan for 2019-2020.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our unwavering
commitment to the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Ukraine. We therefore do not
recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia,
which we consider to be contrary to international law.
Recent tensions in the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait
due to Russian actions have only widened the gap
between the two sides. The only way to bridge that gap is
through dialogue, which we wholeheartedly encourage.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s informative meeting
on the situation in Ukraine. We also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General
Mueller, Ambassador Apakan and Ambassador Sajdik
for their briefings.
Today’s meeting coincides with the fourth
anniversary of the Minsk agreements, which, when
signed on 12 February 2015, had raised great hopes in
the international community. The Minsk agreements,
in the Normandy format, set out not only the
commitments of each party, but also a precise timetable
for implementation. However, my delegation notes
with regret the lack of progress in the implementation
of the agreements, due to differing interpretations
of the sequencing of the measures to be taken. The
situation continues to be marked by recurring ceasefire
violations and obstructions to the movement of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. Those
facts, including the serious incidents that occurred
on 25 November 2018 in the Kerch Strait, undeniably
constitute major obstacles to the implementation of
the Minsk agreements and thwart the international
community’s efforts to ensure the sustainable return of
peace and stability in the region.
20/28

12/02/2019

The deterioration of the security situation in
Ukraine, as illustrated by the continued fighting along
the line of contact in the east of the country, continues
to cause many casualties and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure essential for the provision of basic social
services to civilians. That is why my country, whose
position has always been in favour of the peaceful
resolution of crises through dialogue, calls on Ukrainian
stakeholders to fully implement the Minsk agreements,
including by complying strictly with the ceasefire in
force, in order to put an end to the suffering of the
Ukrainian people. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire supports
the efforts of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
and the Joint Centre for Control and Coordination to
de-escalate the conflict. It therefore calls on the parties
to the conflict to take all appropriate measures to
ease the situation, in particular by allowing the Joint
Centre for Control and Coordination to play its role in
supporting OSCE in monitoring the ceasefire.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its support
for all efforts to find a political solution to the crisis in
Ukraine. To that end, it encourages all stakeholders to
respect their commitments to effectively implement the
Minsk agreements and resolution 2202 (2015), which
endorsed them.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, we thank our invited
speakers for their important briefings.
The Dominican Republic takes this opportunity to
encourage all actors on the ground to pursue their efforts
to bring peace to Ukraine and restore the conditions
that will make it possible to lay the foundations for the
stability and sustainable development of the country.
It is very timely to reiterate our country’s commitment
to respecting the best practices of international law
and the principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations, to contributing to the maintenance
of international peace and security, and to complying
strictly with international treaties and conventions to
which we are signatories.
With regard to the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, four years after they were signed major
challenges continue to be reported on the ground. We
note with concern that the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine reported 9,500 ceasefire violations
between 24 and 27 January this year. We are disturbed
to learn that the conflict continues to wreak havoc on
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

S/PV. 8461

civilians; hunger and poverty have affected more than
3.5 million people, not to mention more than 1.5 million
internally displaced persons.

concerted efforts to make significant progress towards
stability and peace in Ukraine, thereby contributing to
international peace and security.

The Dominican Republic understands that, despite
all of the setbacks and continued violations of the Minsk
agreements, those agreements nonetheless constitute
the legal basis for achieving a political solution that
will put an end to the conflict in eastern Ukraine and
all its repercussions in the region. We express our
strong support for the package of measures endorsed
by the Council in 2015 in order to achieve the effective
implementation of the agreements. In that regard, we
encourage the resumption of the prisoner exchange as
an expression of the goodwill of the parties to move the
peace process forward.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.

We welcome the statements made by the parties in
support of the implementation of the Minsk agreements
and hope that the conditions will be met for the
establishment of a joint United Nations and OSCE
peacebuilding mission in the conflict zone. We also
take this opportunity to encourage the parties to heed
the call for a ceasefire and to strive to honour their
responsibilities and commitments under the agreements
in order to make progress in the process and put an end
to a conflict that is a source of concern for international
peace and security, in particular for the region.
We welcome the solidarity of the international
community and the efforts made by the United Nations
not only to alleviate the problems suffered by civilians
affected by the conflict, but also and above all for the
high level of commitment to building sustainable peace
for the Ukrainian people. We must continue supporting
all actions to improve access to assistance and basic
services for the most vulnerable.
Our delegation takes this opportunity to express
our commitment to defending Ukraine’s independence,
territorial integrity and sovereignty, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. We encourage
respect for the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and express our rejection of any violation of
international norms, international law and international
humanitarian law. We also join efforts to ensure that
those violating such international provisions are
brought to justice.
Lastly, as we commemorate the fourth anniversary
of the Minsk agreements, we encourage the parties
to maintain dialogue in the current Normandy
format and the Trilateral Contact Group. We call for

At the outset, we thank Assistant Secretary-General
Miroslav Jenča, Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller and Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for their comprehensive briefings.
We also thank the delegation of the Russian
Federation for requesting today’s important briefing on
the situation in Ukraine and the commemoration of the
implementation of the Minsk agreements, which were
signed on 12 February 2015, exactly four years ago, by
the leaders of Ukraine, Germany, Russia and France
in an effort to end the war in the country. Regrettably,
four years later not even one provision of the Minsk
agreements has been fully implemented. We therefore
remind the parties that the only way to achieve peace and
stability in the region is through the full implementation
of the Minsk agreements, which remain the basis for
the international community’s commitment to finding
a peaceful solution to the conflict.
The situation in eastern Ukraine remains a source
of concern. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to
Ukraine reports ongoing violations of the ceasefire in
the areas of Donetsk and Luhansk, leading to an increase
in tensions and the exacerbation of the situation in the
east of the country. Reducing tensions and violence in
the region in the east of the country must remain one
of the main priorities for paving the way to a peaceful
solution to the crisis.
The path to stability in Donbas is still long but
it cannot be achieved if the parties do not show the
political will with that first step. In that regard, we call
for a ceasefire and urge the parties concerned to respect
the full implementation of the Minsk agreements,
endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015). We also urge them
to continue to make use of the means established to
help resolve the conflict, such as the Normandy Four,
the Trilateral Contact Group and other key actors.
Cooperation, efforts and political will are essential to
achieving a peaceful and political solution to the crisis.
Finally, we appreciate the efforts of the OSCE on the
ground to uphold the ceasefire and ensure compliance

19-0371721/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

with the Minsk agreements. We also appreciate the
work and efforts of the humanitarian workers on the
ground and the support of the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and his team for humanitarian
assistance in the region to provide vital aid to the
population. In that regard, we call on the parties to take
the necessary steps to comply with their international
obligations to respect international humanitarian law
and human rights.
In conclusion, we believe that a solution to the crisis
in the region can be achieved only by peaceful means
through direct, frank and inclusive negotiations, aimed
at a lasting and just solution that will help to strengthen
harmonious relations among Ukraine’s different
ethnic groups. As we have said on other occasions, a
sustainable solution to the crisis in Ukraine can only be
political. The international community must therefore
focus its efforts to that end.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to start
by expressing my delegation’s appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to participate in the
Security Council discussion of an issue of the utmost
concern to us. I also thank all our briefers — Mr. Jenča,
Ms. Mueller, Ambassadors Apakan and Sajdik — for
their inputs. We are profoundly grateful for their devoted
efforts to assist my country. We would also like to
express our gratitude to all Security Council members,
in particular the new members, who spoke in support of
Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Since we cannot exclude the fact that the Russian
delegation may make it a customary practice to call for
thematic meetings related to the Russian-Ukrainian
conflict based on the dates of certain significant events,
let me try and put together an indicative list of dates,
which is by no means exhaustive, for Council members
to keep in mind while making preparations for the
upcoming months. It is as follows.
On 20 February 2014, Russia started its invasion
of Crimea. A week from now there will be a General
Assembly debate on that date, but perhaps someone
will come up with the idea of having a discussion also
in the Security Council. It is better to be prepared, just
in case. The day of 16 March marks the holding of the
infamous so-called referendum in Crimea. On 27 March
22/28

12/02/2019

2014, the General Assembly adopted resolution 68/262,
asserting that the so-called referendum had no validity
and could not form the basis for any alteration of the
status of Crimea.
Incidentally, the Russian side is consistently
pushing the narrative of the peaceful nature of events
in Crimea. I will cite just one episode from 2014 for the
Council’s consideration. On 18 March, the Ukrainian
warrant officer Serhiy Kokurin, a native of Crimea, was
shot in the heart by two bullets during an assault by the
Russian special forces on the Ukrainian cartographic
station near Simferopol. He was the very first Ukrainian
soldier killed by Russia in this war.
On 14 June, the Russian forces shot down a Ukrainian
transport aircraft over the Luhansk airport, killing 40
Ukrainian paratroopers and nine crew members.
The day of 17 July marks the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17, which was another terrorist
attack by Russia. All 298 people onboard were killed.
On 23-24 August, four battalion tactical groups
of the Russian armed forces invaded the territory
of Ukraine.
The day of 5 September marks the signing of the
Minsk Protocol, which, together with the Memorandum
outlining the parameters for the implementation of
commitments of the Minsk Protocol, constitutes the
core of the Minsk agreements, with the package of
measures for their implementation. For the record,
on the Russian side, the document was signed by the
Ambassador of the Russian Federation to Ukraine,
Mikhail Zurabov. That is with regard to the issue as to
whether Russia is a party to the conflict or whether it
has nothing to do with the conflict in Ukraine.
On 22 October, at a meeting of the Permanent
Council of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Russia blocked the adoption
of the decision to extend the mandate of the OSCE
observer mission at the Russian checkpoints Gukovo
and Donetsk to the entire uncontrolled part of the
Ukrainian-Russian border. Incidentally, paragraph 4 of
the aforementioned Minsk Protocol reads as follows:
“Ensure permanent monitoring on the
Ukrainian-Russian state border and verification by
the OSCE, together with the creation of a security
area in the border regions of Ukraine and the
Russian Federation”.
19-03717

Ukraine

12/02/2019

On 2 November, illegal elections were held in the
occupied areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
That was yet another violation of the Minsk Protocol,
of which paragraph 9 reads:
“Ensure the holding of early local elections
in accordance with the Law of Ukraine ‘With
respect to the temporary status of local selfgovernment in certain areas of the Donetsk and the
Lugansk regions’”.
Worse, the recent holding in late November 2018 by
the administration of the Russian occupation of another
illegal so-called election in the occupied areas added
insult to injury. It was a clear and deliberate provocation
to undermine the Minsk agreements.
The day of 25 November 2018 marks another
significant development, when the Russian navy
attacked Ukraine’s two armoured boats and a tugboat
in the Azov Sea.
On 13 January 2015, the Russian forces shelled
a checkpoint near the town of Volnovakha. Twelve
civilians were killed and 18 more were wounded. Later
the same month, on 24 January, the Russian forces
randomly shelled the outskirts of Mariupol, killing
31 civilians.
Let me now answer the question of the colleague
from Germany about the Stanytsia Luhanska crossing
point, which, by the way, was visited a couple of
days ago jointly by the Foreign Minister of Ukraine,
Mr. Klimkin, and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office,
Slovak Foreign Minister Lajčák. Our Minister of
course repeated the commitment of the Ukrainian side
to the opening of the checkpoint but, unfortunately, that
is not enough because, as members may know, there
is a bridge connecting the two sides. The bridge is
almost completely destroyed. It needs to be repaired.
The Ukrainian side needs access to the area and to the
bridge for that, but to date that has unfortunately been
denied by the other side.
I now turn to the subject of today’s meeting. I
must immediately ask my colleagues around the table
for indulgence, since even an abridged account of the
state of implementation of the Minsk agreements is
quite extensive and, in all probability, my statement
will last more than five minutes. I count on the
Council’s understanding.
Today we heard
interpretation — or,

an
to

already well-known
be more precise,

S/PV. 8461

misinterpretation — of the implementation of the Minsk
agreements by the Russian representative. But the
reality is quite different. All daily developments prove
that it is only Russia and its ongoing military activity
in the occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions of Ukraine, as well as in Crimea, that for now
constitute an unsurmountable obstacle to the peaceful
resolution of the conflict. The Russian side proposes a
very selective approach to the implementation of the
Minsk agreements, emphasizing the political elements
in its own interpretation. However, it completely
ignores its own obligations in the security and
humanitarian spheres. Let me start with some numbers.
As of the beginning of February, the Russian armed
formations in Donbas have in their possession 496 main
battle tanks — comparable to the arsenals of countries
such as Germany, France and Indonesia — 938 armoured
combat vehicles — similar to Peru and Kuwait — 128
multiple launch rocket systems — somewhat less than
Indonesia — 776 artillery systems, including selfpropelled ones — again, comparable to the numbers
of such former Council members as Kazakhstan
or Ethiopia.
The armed force of 35,000 in occupied Donbas
is supported by over 2,100 Russian regular military,
mostly in key command and control positions. Many of
them already have a lot of experience in Syria. The total
number of the Russian offensive strike group personnel
along the Russian-Ukrainian border, including the
groups adjacent to the occupied territories of Donbas
and Crimea, is 87,750 military. Those are quite some
numbers, are they not? Now the question: what do these
numbers speak of in terms of Russia’s real intentions?
Do they show that the party in question wants to
de-escalate the situation? I will let the Council draw its
own conclusions.
Since the Russian representative decided to quote
some of the provisions of the Minsk agreements, but not
as many as during the most recent meetings, I would also
like to remind him that it was Russia that violated its
commitments almost instantly following the signing of
the Minsk documents. In particular, the Russian forces
attacked and seized the city of Debaltseve on 16 to
18 February 2015, immediately after the Minsk package
of measures, which established the comprehensive
ceasefire as of 15 February, had been signed by the
leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France.

19-0371723/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

The logic of the Minsk agreements envisages
the immediate implementation of initial security
provisions — a ceasefire and heavy weapons
withdrawal. From 2015 on, Russia has effectively
sabotaged the implementation of ceasefire agreements
18 times — I repeat, 18 times. During this period
there were over 54,000 cases of ceasefire violations.
In almost 6,000 cases the Russian forces used weapon
systems prohibited by the Minsk agreements.
Now, with regard to the heavy weapons withdrawal,
Ukraine has withdrawn all the prescribed weapons as
per paragraph 2 of the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements. We regularly
provide the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission with
detailed inventory lists of such weapons. The most
recent list was sent to the Mission on 9 February. There
are numerous and regular cases of blatant violations
of stationing heavy weapons by the other side in the
immediate vicinity of the actual contact line, not
the withdrawal line. There has been no progress in
negotiations about creating a heavy-weapon-free area
near Mariupol. Do I need to say that it is the Russian
representatives that block any discussion of the issue?
What about the withdrawal of all foreign armed
formations, military equipment and mercenaries from
the territory of Ukraine, in accordance with paragraph
10 of the package of measures? The picture is crystal
clear. Reports of the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission offer an additional insight into the presence
of the Russian weapon systems and, by extension, of
the Russian military, including radio reconnaissance
systems, four different distinct electronic warfare
systems, the latest radars and jamming stations in the
occupied territories of Ukraine.
Let us now have a look at how the sides implement
the provision relating to the monitoring and verification
by the OSCE Mission, as referred to in paragraph
3 of the package of measures. Ukraine provides the
maximum support possible to the work of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission, which is deployed in
Ukraine at the invitation of its Government. Again, I
will let the numbers speak for themselves. During the
latest ceasefire period the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission reported just one case of a Mission convoy
being stopped by the Ukrainian forces. What do we have
on the other side? There have been 37 cases of limiting
the freedom of movement of the OSCE monitors.
24/28

12/02/2019

In 2016 and 2017 all OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission long-range unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)
were shot down over the occupied territories. In 2018
the Mission restarted their use for monitoring purposes.
The latest long-range UAV downing was on 27 October
2018. As a result, all UAVs are under constant threat.
In 2018 alone, the Special Monitoring Mission
encountered over 900 restrictions of access in the
Russia-occupied parts of Donbas, especially near the
State border and in southern parts of the Donetsk region
adjacent to the Sea of Azov.
Again, some facts: in 2018 there were 153 cases
of illegal crossing of the Ukraine-Russia border by
automobile and rail transport carrying military goods,
fuel, arms and weapons, armaments and munitions.
There have already been 19 cases in 2019, in just over
one month.
That is why we still believe that a peacekeeping
operation under United Nations auspices can bring
peace to Ukraine. We are ready for constructive
discussions on this initiative. For Ukraine it is a
matter of principle that any decision on establishing a
peacekeeping operation in Donbas extend its mandate
over the entire occupied territory, provide for the
withdrawal of all foreign troops and mercenaries and
their weaponry from the territory of Ukraine, as well
as the dissolution of all illegal bodies and structures. It
no less important that any peacekeeping operation be
based on key United Nations peacekeeping principles,
first and foremost, impartiality, even-handedness
and neutrality.
We call on Russia to give up its attempts to misuse
the United Nations peacekeeping toolbox in order
to legitimize the gains of aggression in Donbas. The
only way for Russia to prove its declared willingness
towards de-escalation is to stop the talk and walk the
walk — and to join Ukraine and partners in constructive
work on a peacekeeping operation. It must be a fullfledged mission, deployed to all Russia-occupied areas
of Donbas, including along the uncontrolled segment of
the Ukrainian-Russian State border.
Having discussed in detail the implementation of the
Minsk agreements and the respective Security Council
resolution, I would also like to bring to the attention
of Council members another document of this body,
that is, the statement by the President of the Security
Council S/26118, of 20 July 1993, which was adopted
following the Council’s consideration of the agenda
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

item entitled “Complaint by Ukraine regarding the
Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation
concerning Sevastopol”. That is not a forgotten story.
The document contains the following words:
“The Security Council reaffirms in this
connection its commitment to the territorial
integrity of Ukraine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations. The Security Council recalls
that in the Treaty between the Russian Federation
and Ukraine, signed in Kiev on 19 November 1990,
the High Contracting Parties committed themselves
to respect each other’s territorial integrity within
their currently existing frontiers.”
The Russian representative at that time said at that
Council meeting:
“As we remain dedicated to the principle
of the inviolability of the borders within the
Commonwealth of Independent States, inter alia
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine, Russia
intends strictly to abide by the fundamental norms
of civilized behavior for States in the international
arena, based on the firm ground of international
law, respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and the principles of the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe.” (S/PV.3256, pp. 14-15)
As we see, the Russian firm intention of 1993 to
conduct itself as a civilized State has not, unfortunately,
evolved into a principled and consistent policy, as
its invasions in Georgia in 2008 and in Ukraine in
2014 clearly reveal. And that is the State that is fond
of accusing others of “недоговороспособность”,
which is a Russian word that means being incapable
of fulfilling one’s contractual obligations. It can be
quite fascinating to see the Russians declaring one
thing, doing the complete opposite and simultaneously
attempting, figuratively speaking, to turn the tables
and convince everyone that black is white and white is
black. At this point, I would like to cite Matthew 7:16:
“Ye shall know them by their fruits”. The Russian fruits
are rather obvious.
In conclusion, as our rhetorical exercise here has
continued for nearly three hours already, and as our
friends have already reminded us, I would like to
remind the Council that tomorrow the Trilateral Contact
Group will hold what is already its 103rd meeting. For
many months, the Minsk process participants have
desperately tried to convince Russia to at least agree
to the exchange of prisoners, based on any formula

S/PV. 8461

agreeable to them, including all for all. Ukraine has sent
13 official written proposals with different formulas
for exchanging Ukrainian prisoners and detainees in
Russia and the occupied territories for Russian citizens
in Ukraine who have been sentenced for crimes against
my country’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. We
have received no response. We care about our people,
and Russia is sending a clear signal to all its soldiers
fighting in Ukraine that it will do nothing to bring them
back home. The issue at stake in Minsk tomorrow is
the fate of three Ukrainians who have been captured
and held in Donetsk for nearly four years now. Their
names are Bohdan Pantyushenko, Oleksandr Korynkov
and Serhiy Hlondar, whose three-year-old daughter has
never seen him. Let us make our meeting meaningful
and jointly call on Russia to release them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Russian Federation has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would naturally like to comment on some
of the remarks that we have heard here today. I am not
going to get into a direct argument with my Ukrainian
colleague, but will merely point out that he went to a
great deal of trouble to substitute the Russian military
for one of the parties to the conflict, the separatists
in Donbas. It is a disingenuous but effective approach
because talking about how the Russian military
participated in the conflict is a way of tying Russia
to the non-implementation of the Minsk agreements. I
could see what he was doing there, and we will come
back to it again. However, Ukraine’s representative said
nothing about Kyiv’s failure to implement point after
point of the Minsk agreements, and I will come back to
that as well.
Unfortunately, we heard nothing new today, just the
same tired mantras that we have been hearing for years
now. That is sad, because we have spent the greater part
of our statement on it. Despite that, the Council is still
willing to do anything to cover for its protégés whatever
they do. Russia, Russia, Russia, Russia, Russia — that
is practically all we have heard today. Even Ukraine has
barely been mentioned — and in the context of the Minsk
agreements — and virtually no one has mentioned the
4 million residents of Donbas, who also have a voice.
And live in that region. Or perhaps the Council does not
count them as people, so as to avoid asking about their
opinion of what is happening in south-eastern Ukraine.
And overall, in fact, today we heard more discussions

19-0371725/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

of the Sea of Azov and Crimea — which we will also
come back to — neither of which is mentioned in the
Minsk agreements. The representative of France said
that we had an aggressor country and a country that
is a victim of that aggression sitting at the table today,
and then spoke of his support for the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). But there
is no provision in the OSCE’s mandate that says that
the OSCE should be working to disengage Russia and
Ukraine in this conflict. And, incidentally, that is not in
the Minsk agreements either.
A new chapter has recently emerged in our Council
meetings in the form of our dialogues with our friend
Christoph Heusgen, the Permanent Representative
of Germany, who devoted a significant part of his
statement to conversing with me. I am delighted with
his initiative and would like to comment on some of his
remarks. To start with, thanks to his own admission,
we learned today that he is one of the authors of the
Minsk agreements. Now at least we know whom to
hold accountable. My friend Christoph said, probably
in a Freudian slip, that in 2015 Russia took Minsk. I do
know that Russia took Berlin, but that was a long time
ago, and before that we liberated Minsk. But in 2015
we were not in Minsk and had no intention of being
there. It is where our friends, brothers and allies live.
We certainly have no plans to take anything or invade
anywhere. That is not how we do things. Interference is
how our Western colleagues do things, something we
are seeing a clear example of today in one country in
Latin America.
Whether intentionally or not — I incline to the
former — my friend Christoph tried very hard to insert
Russia into his statement, both to the point and not.
Even when he was talking about repairing a bridge it
came out as if it was something that Ukraine should
agree on with Russia. My friend Christoph said that our
proposal for a Security Council resolution was a joke. I
would like to remind him that it is a joke that President
Putin discussed with Chancellor Merkel, and it was at
her request that we added to the proposed mandate of
the mission described in the resolution the function
of protecting the OSCE Monitoring Mission not only
at the line of contact but also in travelling throughout
the region.
A great deal has been said today about Russia’s
occupation of Donbas and the presence there of the
Russian military. Today the Permanent Representative
of Ukraine showered us with statistics in that regard.
26/28

12/02/2019

I would like to take advantage of the presence
here — well, not here, but with us — of Mr. Apakan
and Mr. Sajdik to ask them if they have seen many
Russian forces in Donbas, if they are familiar with the
figures that the Permanent Representative of Ukraine
shared with us today, and if they can confirm them. We
have also heard a lot today about the disengagement
of heavy weaponry. At one point an agreement was
reached through the mediation of the OSCE that
disengagement would take place after the first seven
days of quiet on the line of contact. There have been
dozens of days of quiet on the line of contact, as the
OSCE Mission has confirmed. So go on, then, they
would say to the two sides, disengage. At which point
our Ukrainian colleagues would say, “No, our numbers
are different. There have been violations”. And so it has
gone on to this day. We could have questioned many
other aspects, including Ukraine’s role in the Trilateral
Contact Group and its sub-groups. And we could have
talked about how it is sabotaging the processes on the
political, economic and humanitarian and other fronts,
but then I fear we would be here all night.
Someone today mentioned the Budapest
Memorandum, which was related to the agreements
having to do with Ukraine’s renunciation of the nuclear
weapons that remained in its territory after the collapse
of the former Soviet Union. It outlines the obligations
of all the countries party to the Memorandum to
refrain from using nuclear weapons against Ukraine
and to abide by all the OSCE principles. We are fully
committed to those obligations. But the Budapest
Memorandum contains no obligations or agreement
to support unconstitutional coups d’état or violent
power grabs, which are directly included in the OSCE
principles. Incidentally, we recognize Ukraine’s
territorial integrity and independence, something that
was implicitly cast into question today. Ukraine has
only itself to blame for the fact that Crimea escaped
it in March 2014. The situation there would be much
worse than it is in the Donbas region today if it had
not done so. In general I find it laughable to listen
to the stories about what is going on in Crimea from
people who have never been there and their sententious
pronouncements about the dire situation and suffering
of its inhabitants, which my British colleague spoke
about earlier. I think he cannot even guess how far he
is from the truth. We invite him to visit. They will be
pleased to see him. He also asserted that we do not
allow monitoring missions to enter Crimea. That is not
true either. We have frequently invited United Nations
19-03717

12/02/2019

Ukraine

missions to Crimea and declared our willingness to
welcome any such missions as long as the necessary
legal conditions are met.
What I would like to know is where many
Council members have seen Ukraine’s commitment
to implementing the Minsk agreements. Under what
microscope or jeweller’s loupe? It is a mystery. And of
course this is the real joke. They do not want to hear
or listen to what is being said. What commitments and
which provisions of the Minsk agreements is Russia
supposed to implement? I urge Council members once
again to re-read the Minsk agreements. If they can free
themselves from the notion that it is Russian military
forces rather than the residents of Donetsk and Luhansk
who live there, if they can delete that, they will then
clearly see that those who are not implementing the
Minsk agreements are the very people who are directly
party to them.
We are ready to celebrate every date that we are
asked to observe, and we too have something to say
about that. I hope that we will have the opportunity
to talk about this again. As I said at the beginning of
the meeting, we are happy to take advantage of any
opportunity to discuss the situation in Ukraine, and I
think that life will present us with those opportunities.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine, who has asked to
make a further statement.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I too have heard nothing
new in the statement by my Russian colleague, barring
a very few things. First, I am very glad that the issue
of Crimea is once again part of the Security Council’s
discussions. It is the first time that I have not heard my
colleague say that Crimea is not an issue. It is a good
thing that we are discussing it. Another exception that
I forgot to mention in my initial statement is that there
certainly is one new element in the Russian delegation’s
rhetoric, and no doubt its new favourite topic, which
is the upcoming holding of presidential elections in
Ukraine. Sometimes I think that the results of Ukraine’s
presidential elections are even more important to
Russians than their own are. With regard to the millions
of Ukrainians living in Russia who will be deprived of
the right to vote and whom the Russian representative
mentioned in his statement, I would like to remind my
colleague that when I was Ambassador to Moscow in
2012 during the last Ukrainian elections that were held
during my time there, 12,000 Ukrainian citizens voted

S/PV. 8461

all over Russia. In 2014, the number dropped to 1,200.
I therefore wonder about the millions he mentioned.
With regard to the 4 million people in the Donbas
region who will be unable to vote in the presidential
elections, if he would like them to vote as the people did
in Crimea, under the barrels of Russian guns, perhaps
they could vote. So how about allowing the 2.2 million
Ukrainian citizens in Crimea to participate and vote in
the elections? Then we would see what the equilibrium
of support really is.
Finally, to sum up, I would like to quote from
the latest opus published yesterday in the Russian
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, an article by Mr. Vladislav
Surkov, whose name, I believe, is well known, at least
around this table. He writes,
“Having fallen from the level of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to that of the Russian Federation,
Russia has ceased to fall, has begun to recover and has
returned to its natural and only possible status as a
great, expanding and community of nations gathering
lands unto itself”. I believe that Ukraine is probably not
the last country on that list.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Germany has asked to make a
further statement.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I heard the pleas from
both the Ukrainian Ambassador and our Russian
colleague — at length — to consider the 4 million people
in Donbas. To hark back to what some of our briefers,
particularly on humanitarian issues, said earlier, why is
it not possible to do something practical and, after this
meeting, send a message home and say that tomorrow in
the Trilateral Contact Group, with Ambassador Sajdik,
they are determined to work on fixing the bridge in
Stanytsia Luhanska. If they could do just that one
thing — engage there and get the bridge done, which
I believe the International Committee of the Red Cross
is ready to do it immediately — and demonstrate some
political commitment and compassion for the people,
we really will have achieved something during these
three hours.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mr. Apakan to respond to the comments of the
representative of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Apakan: The question that has been raised
has been handled in the daily and weekly reports
of the Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) of the

19-0371727/28

S/PV.8461

Ukraine

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
And if one goes through those SMM reports one can
observe accounts of illegal activities, fighting, shelling
and other ceasefire violations. In that regard, I would
not like to make any comments here that would go
beyond the scope of our reports, because the reports
are based on established facts, and our teams are
patrolling, monitoring and producing reports. That
is the reason why instead of making a concrete and
tangible observation here, I would like to refer to the
reports of the SMM. In that respect, we have received
reports of people in uniforms, claiming to be from
the Russian Federation and other countries, as well

28/28

12/02/2019

as mercenaries. The Special Monitoring Mission has
reported its observations of vehicles bearing Russian
flags, but has not identified their origin.
I have to say that, in order to avoid any
misunderstanding, there has been no reference in these
reports to military units. I am referring to reports and
not making any personal observation or judgment.
These are the elements that we have reported over
the course of four or five years. They are nothing
new and have been reiterated on several occasions by
the Mission.
The meeting rose at 5.50 p.m.

19-03717
