90

General Assembly-Twenty-ninlh Session

with a view to facilitating the Secretary-General's task
in the elaboration of the report on the subject which
he is to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session;
5. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
draw up a programme of work taking into account the
reports of the Secretary-General, the reJ>!ies of Governments and other relevant sources, with a view to
undertaking in particular the formulation of standards
in the areas which would appear to be sufficiently
analysed, without prejudice to other activities carried
out pursuant to the above-mentioned resolutions, and
to transmit that programme to the &:onomic and Social
Council at its sixtieth session;
6. Invites the organs referred to in paragraph 2 of
Economic and Social Council resolution 1897 (LVII)
of 1 August 1974, in the event that it is decided to
convene a further United Nations conference on science
and technology, to take into consideration, in their
preparatory work, the question of promoting human
rights.
2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974
3269 (XXIX). Draft declaration on the use of
scientific and technological progress in the
interests of peace and for the benefit of
mankind

The General Assembly,
Having considered the draft declaration on the use
of scientific and technological progress in the interests
of peace and for the benefit of mankind,40
1. Decides to defer further consideration of the
draft declaration until its thirtieth session and to take
it up at that session as a matter of priority;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the draft
declaration and the amendments thereto41 to the attention of Member States for any comments or suggestions
they may wish to make on them.
2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3270 (XXIX). Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social arid Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
arid Political Rights42

The General Assembly,
Having nQted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Inter;national Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol
to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, 43
Recalling its resolutions 2200 A (XXI) of 16 December 1966 and 3142 (XXVIII) of 14 December
1973, and in particular its belief that the coming into
force of the International Covenant on &:onomic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant
40 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 56, document A/9937, para. I I.
41 Ibid., paras. 13, 14 and 15.
42 See also p. 95, item 58.
43 A/9720 and Add. I.

on Civil and Political Rights and its Optional Protocol
will greatly enhance the ability of the United Nations
to promote and encourage respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion, and will contribute to the attainment of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation that following its appeal
several Member States have acceded to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Recalling also its resolution 3060 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 relatin~ to the observance of the twentyfifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, in which the General Assembly invited States
which had not yet done so to ratify, inter alia, the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and the Optional Prntocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
Desiring to assist in hastening the process of ratification and bringing into force those instruments,
l. Recommends that Member States should give
special attention to the possibilities of accelerating as
far as possible the internal procedures that would lead
to the ratification of the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights;
2. Expresses the hope that the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights will come into force
in the near future, if possible by the thirtieth session
of the General Assembly, and thus promote and encourage -respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, pursuant, to
General Assembly resolutions 2200 A (XXI) of t 6 December 1966, 2788 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971 and
3142 (XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, to prepare,
on the basis of communications from Governments,
and submit to the Assembly at its thirtieth session a
report on the progress of the ratification of the International Covenants on Human Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights;
4. Invites all States to become parties to the International Covenants on Human Rights.

231 Ith plenary meeting
10 December 1974
3271 (XXIX). Report of 1he United Nations High
Commissione.r for Refugees
A

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations

High Commissioner for Refugees on the activities of
his OfficeH and having heard his statement,4~
44 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/9612 and Corr. I). Supplement
No. 12A (A/9612/Add.l ), Supplement No. 12B (A/9612/
Add.2) and Supplemmt No. 12C (A/9612/Add.3).
4 :, Ibid.. Twe11ty-11i111/1 Session, Third Commillee. 20981h
me{·ting, pa.ras. 1. I 2.

91

Resolution11 adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting with appreciation the efforts of the High
Commissioner in carrying out his duties, including the
special humanitarian tasks undertaken by him,

B

Commending accessions to the Convention relating
to the Status of Refuf.!ees of 1951, 46 the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967 47 and other
relevant instruments,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1166 (XII) of 26 November 1957 and 2956 B (XXVII) of 12 December 1972
in connexion with the Emergency Fund of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Noting the recommendation of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, as
mentioned in paragraph 80 ( k) of the addendum to
the report of the United Nations High Commissioner,••
Authorizes the United Nations High CommissioJ,
for Refugees to allocate from the Emergency Fund,
under the general directives of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's ~rogr_amrm:, up_ to
$2 million annually for emergency s1tua_t1ons, 1t bemg
understood that the amount made available for one
single emergency shall, as heretofore, not exceed
$500,000 in any one year.
2311th plenary meeting
JO December 1974

1. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the efficie_nt
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish their humanitarian tasks;

3272 (XXIX). Elaboration of a draft Convention
on Territorial Asylum

Noting with satisfaction the positive trends in ~fr.ica
that open the possibility for the voluntary repatriation
of large numbers of refugees from Te11ritories emerging
from colonial rule,
Recognizing the importance of permanent sol~ti_ons
to refugee problems, including voluntary repatnat1on,
and of the role played by the High Comi:nissione~ in
co-operation with other members of !he Umted Nations
system and non-governmental agencies,
Noting the generous attitude adopted by Governments in supporting and contributing towards the
activities of the High Commissioner,

2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
activities on behalf of those of concern to his Office
and takes note, in this connexion, of the decision of
the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme inviting the High Commissioner, within
the framework of programme budgeting, to report to
the Executive Committee on his special humanitarian
tasks in the same manner as he reports on other activities financed from trust funds under his regular
programme;48
3. Requests the High Commissioner to take appropriate measures, in agreement with the Gov~r~ments
concerned, to facilitate the voluntary repatnabon of
refugees from Territories emerging from colonia~ -rule
and in co-ordination with other competent bodies of
the 'united Nations, their rehabilitation in their countries of origin;
4. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue his efforts, in co-operation with Governments,
United Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to
promote permanent and speedy solutions through voluntary repatriation and assist:mce in rehabilitation, where
necessary, through integration in countries of asylum
or resettlement in other countries;
5. Urges Governments to intensify their support for
the High Commissioner's humanitarian tasks by:
(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his tasks in
the field of international protection;
(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to the problems faced by his Office;

( c) Providing the necessary financial means to attain
the objectives of his programmes.
2311th plenary meeting
10 December 1974
4G

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.

41 Jbid., vol. 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
411 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement No. 12 A (A/9612/Add.l), para. 38.

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on the question of
territorial asylum, 50
Reaffirming the importance it attaches to the international protection of refugees ·as a principal function
of the United Nations High CommissionerforRefugees,
Noting the view of the Executive Committee of the
High Commissioner's Programme51 that a conference
of plenipotentiaries on territorial asylum should be
called as soon as possible,
Further noting the recommendation of the Executive
Committee51 that the conference should be preceded
by a meeting of a group of governmental ex~rts to
review the present text of the draft Convention on
Territorial Asylum, 52
I. Decides to consider at its thirtieth session the
question of holding a conference of plenipotentiaries on
territorial asylum;
2. Further decides to establi~h a Group of Experts
on the Draft Convention on Territorial Asylum, composed of representatives of not more than twenty-seven
States, designated by the President of the General Assembly after consultation with the different regional
groups, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to convene the Group of Experts,
not later than M~y 1975 and for a maximum of ten
working days, to review the present text of the draft
Convention on Territorial Asylum;
4. Decides that the costs of convening the Group
of Experts be met from th~ volunt~ry fun~s which ~re
at the disposal of the Umted Nations High Comnussioner for Refugees;
49/bid., Supplement No. 12A (A/9612/Add.t).
oo Ibid., Supplement No. 12C (A/9612/ Add.3).
5t Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/9612/Add.1), para. S2 (f).
02 Ibid., Supplement No. 12C (A/9612/Add.3), annex.
