2. Bodies for which travelling expenses will he
paid:

2. Organcs pour lesquels les frais de voyage
seront payes :

(a) General Assembly : five representatives of each
Memhrr;
(b) Commissions of the Economic and Social Council to which representatives are nominated by
Governments in consultation wi:h the SecretaryGeneral and subsequently confirmed by the Council.

a) Assemhlee generale : cinq representants de
chacun des Etats Memhres;
b\ Commissions du Conseil cconomique et social
po~r lesquelles les Gouvernements, apres s'Mre
concertes avcc le Secretaire general, designcnt leurs
reprcs'.•ntants, dont le Conseit confirme ensuite lcs
pouvo1rs.

3. Bodies for which no travelling expenses or
11ubsistence allowances will be paid :

3. Organes pour lesqucls ii ne sera paye ni frais
de voyage, ni indemnites de suhsistance :

a) Security Council;
b) Economic and Social Council;

(c) Special conferences to which Governments are
invited to send representatives;
(h) Regional economic commissions.

a) Conseil de scrurite;
b) Conseil economique el social ;
c) Conseil de tutelle;
d; Commission de l'energie atomique;
P; Commission des armements de type classique:
/) Commission interimairP de l'AssPmLlce generak;
cl Conforc11c('S spe~ial,·s auxqudlcs on invite lcs
Gouvrrneml'nts a rnvoyer dt>s represPntanls;
h'. Commissions economiqups regionales.

232 (III). Organization of a United

232 (III). Organisation d'une adminis•

c) Trusteeship Council;
d) Atomic Energy Commission ;

e) Commission for Conventional Armaments;
/) Interim Committee of the General Assembly;

Nations postal administration

tration postale des Nations Unies

The General Assembly

L 'Assemblee generale

1. Takes note of the rcport1 of the SecretaryGeneral on th,i question of a United Nations
postal administration and of thr, rrport 2 thereon
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions ;

1. PrenJ acte du rapport1 du Secretaire general
concernant la question d'une administration postale des Nations Unies ainsi quc du rapport' du
Comite consultatif pour le~ questions administratives et budgetaires relatif la m~me question;

2. Appi•m;es in principle the idea of establishing
a United Nations postal administration;

2. Est d'accord en principe avec l'idee d'etablir
une administration postale des Nations Unies;

3. Invites the assistance of the Universal Postal
Union in attaining this objective;

3. Fait appel, cette fin, au concours de !'Union
postale universelle;

4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to conclude
arrangements with various Governments, beginning with the Governments of those countries
in which the main United Nations offices are
situated, for the issue of special or over-printed
postage stamp,, subject to the provisions that :

4. Autorise le Secretaire general
conclure,
en vue de !'emission de timbres-paste speciaux
ou a surcharge, des accords avec divers Gouvernements et, notamment, en premier lieu, avec
ceux des pays sur le territoire <lesquels se trouvent les bureaux principaux des Nations Unies,
sous reserve que :

(a) Words, designs and face values of such
issues ,hall be approver! by thP Secretary-General;
(b) No arrang,m1ents entered into under this
paragraph shall inrolve financial loss to the
United Nations;

a) Le Secretaire general approuve les libelles,
vignettes et vuleurs nominales de ces emissions;

5. Request., the Secretary-General to pursue
the inquiries and nego'iations which he has
already initiated and to present a report to the next
regular session of the General Assembly.

5. Ini•ite le Secretaire general a poursuivre le~
recherches et les negociations entreprises, et a
faire rapport la prochaine session ordinaire de
l'Asscmblee generale.

a

a

a

b) Qu'aucun accord conclu en vertu du present paragraphe n'entra1ne de prrtc financierc
pour les Nations Unies;

a

Hundred and jifiietlt plenal'y meeting,
8 Octobe1· 1948.

Cent-cinquantieme seance pUniere,
le 8 octobre 19 48.

1
Se,· tlocumPnl A/G:i .-, .
' See rlornmrnt .\/till:',.

l
2

95

Voir fo document A/6 ~, ., ,
\'oir lr document .\. 1(\1;:1.
