S/2017/591

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 July 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)
Reporting period from 9 March to 21 June 2017

I. Introduction
1.
The present report provides a comprehensive assessment of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) since my report of
8 March 2017 (S/2017/201). During the reporting period, the situation in the area of
operations of the United Nations Interim Force in Leba non (UNIFIL) remained
generally calm. On the political front, following considerable delay, agreement on a
new electoral law was reached in Lebanon, with parliamentary elections to be held
in May 2018. Meanwhile, the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic co ntinues to
place a heavy burden on Lebanon, with 1,011,366 Syrian refugees registered with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as at
20 June 2017.

II. Implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
A.

Situation in the area of operations of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon
2.
The environment in the UNIFIL area of operations remained stable overall, but
heightened rhetoric by both parties led to some anxiety among the local population.
The United Nations continued to urge both parties to refrain from potentially
inflammatory comments, including through intensified UNIFIL engagement with
local leaders and communities in its area of operations. Commemorations of
Palestinian Nakba Day, on 29 April 2017, and “Liberation and Resistance Day”, on
25 May, were held in the area of operations without incident.
3.
On 20 April 2017, Hizbullah conducted a tour for Lebanese and international
media in part of Sector West of the UNIFIL area of operations, including along
sections of the Blue Line. The Lebanese Armed Forces notified UNIFIL less than an
hour before the media tour started, stating that Lebanese Armed Forces personnel
would be on the ground. The notification did not include reference to any Hizbullah
involvement. UNIFIL saw the media group on three occasions and encountered it
twice in different locations, including close to the Blue Line. As a UNIFIL patrol
attempted to stop the convoy, a senior representative from the Lebanese Armed

17-11606 (E)

170717

*1711606*

S/2017/591

Forces insisted that the group be permitted to pass, given that the tour had been
approved. Another UNIFIL patrol, which was providing security for the ongoing
tripartite meeting, stopped the convoy from moving closer to the United Nati ons
position in Ra’s al-Naqurah.
4.
While UNIFIL personnel did not observe unauthorized armed personnel when
they encountered the media group, a UNIFIL investigation, based on reliable media
reports and information gathered, found it credible that unautho rized personnel and
weapons had been present in the area of operations during the event, most likely as
part of a staged display of combatants in an orange grove, at a point on the road
between Naqurah and Alma al-Sha‘b (approximately 5.5 km from the Blue Line).
The presence of such unauthorized personnel and weapons constituted a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
5.
The incident prompted an immediate reaction from the Government of
Lebanon. The Prime Minister of Lebanon, Saad Hariri, accompanied by the Minister
of Defence, Yacoub Sarraf, the Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces, General
Joseph Aoun, and senior Lebanese Armed Forces officers, visited the Blue Line the
next day, demonstrating the Government’s commitment to resolution 1701 (2006).
At UNIFIL headquarters, the Prime Minister expressed appreciation to UNIFIL and
to the troop-contributing countries. He stressed the importance of moving towa rds a
permanent ceasefire. My Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the UNIFIL Force
Commander welcomed the visit.
6.
Separately, UNIFIL observed civilians carrying unauthorized weapons, the
majority of which were hunting weapons, mostly in Sector East. The overall number
of armed hunters decreased during the reporting period. UNIFIL once observed
individuals carrying assault rifles and handguns. On one occasion, in the vicinity of
Naqurah, civilians fired shots in the air out of their car while passing in f ront of a
UNIFIL vehicle. UNIFIL observed, on several occasions, the presence or firing of
small arms, including during weddings and funerals. In all cases, UNIFIL informed
the Lebanese Armed Forces of the violations.
7.
Apart from the substantiated reports mentioned in paragraph 3 to 5 above,
during the reporting period, UNIFIL did not receive specific information nor did it
find evidence of armed personnel, weapons or infrastructure either being present in
or being transferred into its area of operations. The Israel Defense Forces continued
to allege that Hizbullah maintains military infrastructure and equipment in southern
Lebanon. UNIFIL monitors the area of operations and the Blue Line and reports all
violations of resolution 1701 (2006) that it observes, including the presence of
unauthorized armed personnel or weapons. In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL
does not proactively search private property for weapons in the south unless there is
credible evidence of a violation of resolution 1701 (2006), including an imminent
threat of hostile activity from that location. Where specific information is received
regarding the illegal presence of armed personnel, weapons or infrastructure inside
its area of operations, UNIFIL, in cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces,
remains determined to act with all means available within its mandate and
capabilities. The Lebanese Armed Forces command continued to con firm that it
would act immediately to put an end to any illegal activity in contravention of
resolution 1701 (2006) and relevant Government decisions.
8.
Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued on an almost daily basis, in
violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese sovereignty. UNIFIL observed an
increase in the number and duration of such violations. On 22 May 2017, an Israeli
unmanned aerial vehicle crashed north of the Blue Line in the Ayta al -Sha‘b area
(Sector West). UNIFIL protested all air violations to the Israel Defense Forces and

2/16

17-11606

S/2017/591

called upon the Government of Israel to stop them immediately. The Government of
Lebanon also protested the air violations to UNIFIL.
9.
The Israeli occupation of northern Ghajar and an adjacent area north of the
Blue Line continued, in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and Lebanese
sovereignty. To date, Israel has not provided a response to the proposal submitted by
UNIFIL to both parties in 2011 aimed at facilitating the withdrawal of the Israel
Defense Forces from the occupied area. The Lebanese Armed Forces informed
UNIFIL, in July 2011, of Lebanon’s agreement to the proposal.
10. Ground violations of the Blue Line occurred mostly as a result of Lebanese
shepherds with their flocks crossing the Blue Line in the areas of Bastrah, Kfar
Shuba and Shabʻa Farms (Sector East), as well as Rumaysh (Sector West). On
several occasions in April and May 2017, Lebanese workers removing sand with
excavators and trucks violated the Blue Line in the vicinity of Kfar Kila (Sector
East). On two occasions, civilians who crossed south of the Blue Line were
apprehended by the Israel Defense Forces and subsequently returned. On 1 March, a
woman of non-Lebanese nationality crossed south of the Blue Line in the vicinity of
Shabʻa Farms, claiming that she had lost her way. Israel Defense Forces personnel
returned her north of the Blue Line shortly afterwards, where she was taken into
custody by the Lebanese Armed Forces. On 27 April, a Leb anese man crossed south
of the Blue Line near Kfar Kila and was reportedly apprehended by the Israel
Defense Forces in Kiryat Shmona. The following day, the Israel Defense Forces
transferred him to UNIFIL at Ra’s al-Naqurah; UNIFIL, in turn, handed him over to
the Lebanese Armed Forces.
11. Tensions rose intermittently in some areas along the Blue Line owing to
activities or work in close proximity to the Line. UNIFIL undertook extensive
liaison and coordination efforts with the parties to ensure calm and d e-escalate
tensions. On three occasions, UNIFIL also observed Israel Defense Forces soldiers
pointing their weapons across the Blue Line at individuals in civilian clothes taking
photographs of an Israel Defense Forces position east of Houla. On another
occasion, an Israel Defense Forces soldier threw rocks towards people north of the
Blue Line. From 7 to 10 April 2017, workers cleaned the Wazzani riverbed in the
area of the Lebanese resorts (Sector East) along the Blue Line. UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces maintained a monitoring presence during the cleaning.
UNIFIL also liaised closely with the Israel Defense Forces to ensure calm in the
area. On 26 April, tensions increased in the eastern part of the UNIFIL area of
operations as a result of the Israel Defense Forces resuming excavation work in the
Shabʻa Farms area south of the Blue Line. The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force
Commander requested the Israel Defense Forces to suspend the work and to agree
on a way forward using the tripartite forum, in view of the sensitive nature of the
area and the potential that an incident across the Blue Line could lead to an
escalation.
12. The freedom of movement of UNIFIL was respected, with some isolated
exceptions. Only a marginal number of incidents of unfriendly behaviour against
UNIFIL took place, including stone-throwing and damage to UNIFIL vehicles. On
10 March 2017, UNIFIL observed that three of its basic temporary observation posts
in the vicinity of Blida had been pulled down. On each occasion, UNIFIL
immediately engaged the Lebanese Armed Forces to help calm the situation and
investigate the circumstances to prevent recurrence. On two separate occasions,
Israel Defense Forces tanks tracked the UNIFIL Liaison Branch and Observer
Group Lebanon personnel and positioned the cannon in the direction of United
Nations personnel. UNIFIL addressed the matter through its liaison channels with
the Israel Defense Forces.

17-11606

3/16

S/2017/591

13. Relations between UNIFIL and the local population remained largely positive.
UNIFIL public engagements provided opportunities to clarify its operational
practices and requirements and address the concerns of local communities. In line
with the recommendations of the UNIFIL strategic review, UNIFIL explored with
the Lebanese Armed Forces ways to expand capacity for civil-military cooperation
and collaborative efforts on the ground, including through the establishment of a
Lebanese Armed Forces regional centre for civil-military cooperation in southern
Lebanon.
14. UNIFIL continued to implement quick-impact projects focused on supporting
the extension of State authority and meeting the critical needs of the local
communities, thereby complementing the wider United Nations humanitarian and
development presence in southern Lebanon, in line with the United Nations
strategic framework for Lebanon (2017-2020). UNIFIL contingents, using their own
resources as part of civil-military cooperation efforts, continued to provide medical,
dental and veterinary assistance to communities. UNIFIL also continued regu lar
training courses for municipal police and civil defence volunteers in firefighting
tactics and rescue missions to enhance local capacity and support community
resilience. In March 2017, the Minister of State for Women visited southern
Lebanon to mark the Open Day on Women, Peace and Security. Twenty elected
women members of municipal councils received training from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and non-governmental organization (NGO)
experts in municipal management.
15. UNIFIL conducted an average of over 13,500 operational activities per month,
including vehicle and foot patrols, “market walks”, checkpoints and observation
tasks. UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces jointly conducted approximately
17 per cent of UNIFIL operational activities, taking into consideration only those
activities that could be conducted jointly with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
16. The Lebanese Armed Forces remained deployed with two reduced -strength
brigades in the area south of the Litani River. The Lebanese Armed Forces
maintained a reinforced presence in the northeastern part of the UNIFIL area of
operations, including Shab‘a village and the Arqub area.
17. While the Mission’s threat and risk assessment remains unchanged and no
imminent threat of physical violence against civilians was identified, Mission-wide
planning efforts and training in the protection of civilians continued, including
exercises with all relevant United Nations partners. Tailored training modules were
developed for UNIFIL personnel on the specific requirements emanating from the
Mission’s protection of civilians mandate and to help to ensure a shared
understanding of the UNIFIL protection of civilians strategy and implementation
plan.
18. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force carried out maritime interdiction operations
on a 24-hour basis and capacity building for the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy.
During the reporting period (until 15 June 2017), the Maritime Task Force hailed
2,279 ships, of which 569 were inspected and cleared by the Lebanese a uthorities.
Joint and coordinated exercises with UNIFIL, complemented by training courses
covering a range of land and maritime operational issues, contributed to improved
common operational standards between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces on
land. In addition, the training courses resulted in Lebanese Armed Forces Navy
units capable of conducting maritime surveillance and maritime interdiction
operations that, in turn, enhanced cooperation with UNIFIL and its Maritime Task
Force. Lebanese Armed Forces Navy personnel assumed command for maritime
interdiction operations for limited periods of time, in close coordination and
consultation with Maritime Task Force personnel. The Maritime Task Force
4/16

17-11606

S/2017/591

maintained a visible presence in the southern part of the area of maritime operations
to prevent tensions between Israel and Lebanon. The Maritime Task Force does not
have a mandate to monitor the line of buoys installed unilaterally by Israel, which is
neither recognized by the Government of Lebanon nor by the U nited Nations. The
Israel Defense Forces continued to carry out maintenance activities at the buoys, at
times with divers. On several occasions, Israel Defense Forces patrol boats south of
the line of buoys fired warning shots or flares and dropped explosi ve charges to turn
away Lebanese fishing boats.

B.

Security and liaison arrangements
19. The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander intensified his regular
bilateral engagements with Lebanese and Israeli authorities to maintain the
relatively stable situation in areas north and south of the Blue Line. Those efforts
were complemented with three tripartite meetings that were chaired and facilitated
by UNIFIL. The parties strongly expressed their commitment to the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006), to respect the Blue Line and to maintain stability along
and across the Line.
20. UNIFIL actively continued to use open channels established with both sides,
in combination with a proactive deployment of its liaison component, military
observers and units on the ground, to help to prevent violations of the Blue Line and
build trust and confidence between the parties. As noted above, those measures were
particularly important when tensions increased, including as a result of activities in
the Wazzani River and Shabʻa Farms areas.
21. In meetings of the tripartite forum, the parties engaged in substantive and
constructive exchanges on issues pertaining to resolution 1701 (2006). The Israel
Defense Forces expressed concern about their stated observation of an increase in
Hizbullah activity and recurrent Blue Line violations in the vicinity of Mays
al-Jabal and Kfar Kila, while noting a marked reduction in the number of armed
hunters. The Lebanese Armed Forces protested the continuous Israeli air violations
over all of Lebanon and the continued occupation of northern Ghajar by Israel, and
raised concerns over incidents of weapons-pointing and over extensive monitoring
of the Lebanese population in the south, including through electronic means, by the
Israel Defense Forces.
22. During the reporting period, discussions were ongoing with the parties about
points proposed for the marking of the Blue Line. In parallel, work continued on
completing the construction and the refurbishing of other Blue Line markers.
23. To date, the establishment of a UNIFIL liaison office in Tel Aviv, Israel, is still
pending.
24. The Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL continued to engage through the
strategic dialogue process, which is an integral part of the capability development
plan for the Lebanese Armed Forces, and continued to promote the role of
international assistance in support of the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed in the
UNIFIL area of operations. Pursuant to a request of the Prime Minister,
consultations are also ongoing with the Government of Lebanon and the
International Support Group for Lebanon to sustain and galvanize support from
Member States to Lebanese security institutions.
25. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2305 (2016), the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations completed a strategic review of UNIFIL, the
recommendations of which were outlined in my letter dated 8 March 2017 to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/202). The review confirmed the need for

17-11606

5/16

S/2017/591

the continued good offices of my Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the Head of
Mission and Force Commander of UNIFIL, to preserve the cessation of hostilities
and make progress towards a permanent ceasefire. Priorities identified included
support to the efforts of the Government of Lebanon in increasing the capacity and
presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern Lebanon and in its territorial
waters. The implementation of those recommendations is under way.
26. UNIFIL has conducted consultations with the Government of Lebanon and the
Lebanese Armed Forces on the possibility of establishing what the Lebanese Armed
Forces now refers to as a “model Lebanese Armed Forces regiment” to cooperate
closely with UNIFIL, in particular along the Blue Line. The Government has
reconfirmed its commitment to increasing the presence of the Lebanese Armed
Forces in the UNIFIL area of operations, including through such a regiment. On
21 April 2017, the Prime Minister emphasized that the Government was also
committed to strengthening the Lebanese Navy with equipment and training in order
to control its territorial waters and maritime border.

C.

Disarming armed groups
27. The maintenance of arms outside the control of the State by Hizbullah and
other groups continues to restrict the ability of Lebanon to exercise full sovereignty
and authority over its territory. Illustrating the heightened rhetoric during the
reporting period, in a televised speech on 11 May 2017, the Secretary -General of
Hizbullah, Hassan Nasrallah, stated that “any future confrontation could be inside
the occupied Palestinian territories. There will be no place safe from the rockets of
the resistance and the feet of the resistance fighters”. On 30 March, the head of
Hizbullah’s parliamentary bloc, Mohammed Raad, publicly stated that “the Dimona
reactor is one of the targets we have prepared for the enemy”. On 30 April, a
Hizbullah Member of Parliament, Nawaf al Moussawi, publicly stated that “we are
capable of inflicting severe damage deep inside Israel, and our capabilities are
increasing day by day to inflict this damage deep inside Israel”. On 23 May, another
Hizbullah Member of Parliament, Nawar al Sahli, publicly referred to Hizbullah’s
“force of arms, perseverance, science, the use of modern technology and
development of weapons”.
28. Several statements by Israeli representatives pertaining to the use of force
against Lebanese targets were reported. Media sources quoted the Minister of
Education and Diaspora Affairs of Israel, Naftali Bennett, as having stated that
“Lebanese institutions, its infrastructure, airport, power stations, traffic junctions,
Lebanese Army bases should all be legitimate targets if a war breaks out,” with the
result of “sending Lebanon back to the Middle Ages”. The Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations strongly condemned those
warnings in his statement to the Security Council on 20 April 2017. Media sources
also reported the warning by Israel Defense Forces Chief of S taff, General Gadi
Eizenkot, that “in a future war, there will be a clear address: the state of Lebanon
and the terror groups operating on its territory and under its authority,” adding that
any future confrontation would take place on Lebanese territory.
29. Against that backdrop, mutual accusations of violations of resolution 1701
(2006) by the parties continued. The Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations addressed identical letters to me and the President of the Security
Council, dated 25 April 2017 (S/2017/356), emphasizing that it was “extremely
disturbing that armed Hezbollah militants feel free to move openly in the UNIFIL
area of operation, without being challenged by UNIFIL or Lebanese Armed Forces
personnel”. In a previous letter to the Security Council, dated 13 March
(S/2017/216), the Permanent Representative of Israel reiterated ac cusations that

6/16

17-11606

S/2017/591

Hizbullah’s purported armed presence in southern Lebanon had been “actively
encouraged” by the Government of Lebanon. The Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, in identical letters to me and the President o f the Security Council, dated
3 April (S/2017/295), transmitted comments from the Armed Forces Command of
the Lebanese National Ministry of Defence to refute allegations pertaining to
Hizbullah activity contained in the Israeli letter of 13 March (S/2017/216), called
the allegations “mendacious and baseless”. On 25 May, the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Israel stated in the presence of the Security Council that
Hizbullah had amassed over 100,000 missiles that were pointed at Israel, in
violation of Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). In his letter dated
19 June (S/2017/523), the Permanent Representative of Lebanon denied the
presence of armed fighters and weapons in villages in southern Lebanon, adding
that Israel encroached on the daily lives, livelihoods and security of Lebanese
civilians with “surveillance towers and listening devices all along the southern
border”. In a letter dated 20 June (S/2017/526), the Permanent Representative of
Israel alleged that, over the past few months, Hizbullah had “established
observation posts near the Blue Line” under the guise of an agricultural NGO.
30. On the issue of commitment to resolution 1701 (2006), on 16 March 2017, the
Government of Lebanon, in a letter addressed to me and the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/228), reiterated that it had “implemented all the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)”, while denouncing what it
considered to be threatening Israeli rhetoric. On 21 March, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Lebanon, Gebran Bassil, publicly stated that there was agreement among
the Lebanese on the need for “resistance against Israel”. On the same day, Prime
Minister Hariri told Egyptian media that he continued to oppose weapons outside
the control of state institutions. Both Foreign Minister Bassil and Prime Minister
Hariri referred to a national defence strategy, yet to be developed, as the framework
to address the issue of Hizbullah weapons.
31. Since my last report, the Lebanese Armed Forces and security forces have
arrested a considerable number of individuals suspected of affiliation with extremist
groups or involvement in terrorist activities throughout Lebanon, with 127
terrorism-related arrests since 1 March 2017. Arrests included those of alleged
recruiters, weapons suppliers and financiers for Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Jabhat Fath al-Sham (formerly known as Nusrah Front). Weapons caches and
illegal arms dealerships were uncovered on several occasions.
32. There was no progress in dismantling the military bases maintained by the
Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada, which continue to compromise Lebanese sovereignty and impede the
ability of the State to monitor and effectively control parts of the border.
33. The security situation in the majority of Palestine refugee camps in Lebanon
remained generally stable, although violence in Ein el Helweh between extremist
groups and the joint Palestinian security forces remains of serious concern. Between
7 and 12 April 2017, intense clashes over several days resulted in 12 people being
killed and 44 injured, the displacement of several hundred families and extensive
physical damage to camp infrastructure. Basic service delivery in the camp by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) had to be briefly suspended. Extremist groups remain present in Ein
el Helweh amid concern regarding possible linkages between radical groups in the
camps and terrorist cells outside the camps. The Lebanese Armed Forces and
security forces intervened on several occasions to thwart suspe cted joint plots. The
construction of a security perimeter around the Ein El Helweh camp continued.
Intermittent incidents of violence also occurred in Beddawi, Burj al -Barajinah and
Shatila.
17-11606

7/16

S/2017/591

D.

Arms embargo and border control
34. Regular reports of alleged arms transfers to Hizbullah remain of serious
concern. In his letter of 25 April 2017 (S/2017/356), the Permanent Representative
of Israel alleged that “Hizbullah has been building up its arsenal” by smugg ling
weapons from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon and was assembling “military
infrastructure in the towns and villages of southern Lebanon”. The Permanent
Representative also cited publications according to which Hizbullah had utilized
weapons production factories built by Iran on Lebanese territory. The United
Nations takes such allegations seriously, but is not in a position to substantiate those
allegations independently.
35. Since my last report, there have been sporadic incidents of cross -border fire
from the Syrian Arab Republic into Lebanon. The situation along the border
remained tense as the Lebanese Armed Forces stepped up efforts against militant
threats, in particular in the outskirts of Arsal, where the presence of extremist
groups remains of concern. Robust operations were carried out on 22 and 24 April
2017, in the Arsal, Qa‘ and R’as Baʻalbak areas, among others, resulting in the
death and arrest of a number of militants. Heavy clashes were also reported between
militants, including ISIL, Jabhat Fath al-Sham and Saraya Ahl al-Sham. Hizbullah
also reportedly remained engaged in efforts to prevent the infiltration of militants
from the Syrian side of Lebanon’s eastern border, as stated by Hizbullah Secretary General Nasrallah on 11 May. A number of Lebanese nationals were also alleged to
have participated in fighting with non-State armed groups in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
36. On 10 June 2017, following what appears to have been an agreement between
non-State armed groups, a group of refugee families from Arsal was escorted by the
Lebanese Armed Forces to the Syrian border to resettle in Assal al -Ward, Syria.
Neither the Government of Lebanon nor the United Nations were associated with
that relocation. UNHCR, in accordance with its mandate, is compiling data on all
refugee families in Lebanon originating from the area in order to assess their
intentions.

E.

Landmines and cluster bombs
37. The Lebanese Armed Forces, through the Lebanese Mine Action Centre,
continues to clear lands contaminated by mines and unexploded ordnance, mostly
remnants from the July 2006 war. Around 76 per cent of contaminated Lebanese
lands have been cleared thus far, although incidents continue to occur. On 31 May
2017, one youth was reportedly injured by a landmine in the vicinity of Yarun
(Sector West). On 3 May, my Special Coordinator and the Ambassador of the
European Union to Lebanon visited a demining site to stress the importance of
continued progress in order to reduce potential harm to the safety and security of all
and as an important factor for economic regeneration, especially in southern
Lebanon. The Lebanese Armed Forces is operating with half the capaci ty needed to
implement its action plan owing to a lack of financial resources and limited donor
funding for demining activities. Through a Mines Advisory Group project funded by
the OCHA Lebanon Humanitarian Fund, the Lebanese Armed Forces has initiated
demining activities close to Syrian refugee settlements in the Biqa‘ governorate.
38. Mine clearance and explosive ordnance disposal continued also in the UNIFIL
area of operations, with the clearing 163 m2 of land. The United Nations Mine
Action Service conducted quality assurance visits, training and safety monitoring
for UNIFIL troop-contributing country demining teams. Safety training and

8/16

17-11606

S/2017/591

awareness briefings with respect to landmines and explosive remnants of war were
provided to United Nations personnel. On 4 April 2017, mine awareness events
were held on the occasion of International Day of Mine Awareness and Assistance in
Mine Action and the twentieth anniversary of the United Nations Mine Action
Service that involved over 750 children and over 200 UNI FIL personnel.

F.

Delineation of borders
39. No progress was made towards the delineation or demarcation of the border
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, including in areas where it is
uncertain or disputed. During his visit to southern Le banon on 21 April 2017, Prime
Minister Hariri called for the delineation of the international borders, especially in
those areas where the border is disputed or uncertain, and reiterated Lebanon’s
request for United Nations good offices in that regard. There was no progress in
addressing the matter of the Shabʻa Farms. The Syrian Arab Republic and Israel
have yet to respond to the provisional definition of the Shabʻa Farms area proposed
in my report of 30 October 2007 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2007/641).
40. On 20 March 2017, in a note verbale, the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to
the United Nations protested the claim by Israel, as reflected in its note verbale of
2 February, that Lebanese offshore blocks 8, 9 and 10 were in “maritime areas that
belong to the State of Israel” (see S/2017/201, para. 57). Emphasizing that “Israel is
not entitled to interfere in any way whatsoever with the exercise by Lebanon of its
sovereign rights and jurisdiction, and is not allowed to conduct any economic
activity in Lebanese maritime areas”, the note reiterated Lebanon’s commitment to
the Convention on the Law of the Sea regarding the delimitation of its maritime
borders.

G.

Political and institutional stability
41. On 16 June 2017, following several delays, the Parliament of Lebanon
approved a new electoral law that provides for proportional representati on in 15
electoral districts and introduces an additional “preferential vote”. By the same
token, the Parliament extended its own tenure until May 2018, when elections are
projected to be held, pending the decision of the President and the Prime Minister.
The International Support Group for Lebanon welcomed the agreement in a joint
statement. An extraordinary session of Parliament opened on 21 June and is
projected to last until 16 October.
42. The Cabinet has met regularly and passed a number of decrees, i ncluding
those relating to important appointments to the helms of security institutions. On
8 March 2017, General Joseph Aoun was appointed to the post of Commander of the
Lebanese Armed Forces; Major-General Imad Othman was appointed to the post of
Director General of the Internal Security Forces; and Major-General Abbas Ibrahim
was reappointed to the post of Director General of the General Security Office.
43. Lebanese efforts to strengthen the security forces continued with the approval
by the Cabinet on 17 May 2017 of the enlistment of 2,000 new recruits into the
Lebanese Armed Forces. On 23 May, the Minister of Interior, N ohad Machnouq,
announced a five-year development plan for the Internal Security Forces as part of
capacity-building efforts. Other Cabinet decisions included: a draft State budget for
2017, subsequently sent to Parliament for ratification, which remains pending; a
new electricity plan; and the renewal of the term of the Governor of the Central
Bank until 2023.

17-11606

9/16

S/2017/591

44. The Government of Lebanon, with the support of the United Nations, is in the
final phase of developing Lebanon’s national strategy for the prevention of violent
extremism, in line with the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, presented in 2016. The strategy is undergoing a consultative
interministerial process aimed at ensuring ownership and a concerted effort by all
line ministries in its implementation.
45. The Committee Against Torture, established under article 17 of the 1984
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, made a number of recommendations following its review, in April
2017, of the first report by Lebanon to the Committee, submitted with a 15 -year
delay. The Committee highlighted the need for a law criminalizing torture as a
serious human rights violation and additional measures to address impunity. The
Committee recalled the absolute prohibition on extraditing individuals to countries
where they may face torture. The Committee also reite rated the need for a national
human rights institution that would also serve as a national preventive mechanism
against torture. The Government of Lebanon established such a national human
rights institution by law in late 2016, but the nominations for its members have yet
to be endorsed.
46. Six years into the Syrian conflict, over 70 per cent of Syrian refugees in
Lebanon, of which 53 per cent are children, live below the poverty line. It is
estimated that 93 per cent of the Syrian refugee population exp eriences some degree
of food insecurity, a trend that continues to worsen. More than half of refugee
households are not able to afford the Survival Minimum Expenditure Basket, which
is a measure of the minimum amount of basic items needed by the average re fugee
household each month. In addition, the dwellings of 42 per cent of households do
not meet minimum humanitarian standards. Children remain especially vulnerable,
with nearly half of primary-school age refugee children out of school.
47. Almost three-quarters of Syrian refugees resort to negative coping
mechanisms, such as early marriage, begging or child labour, as well as reducing
essential expenses, including for education and health care. As remaining savings
and assets increasingly run out, households are also sinking deeper into debt: 90 per
cent of refugee households are borrowing money or receiving credit. While Syrian
refugees are now allowed to work legally in the sectors of agriculture, construction
and waste management, their livelihood opportunities are limited. The Government
of Lebanon also started to implement its previously announced decision to waive
residency renewal fees for Syrian refugees registered in Lebanon. The 2016
Vulnerability Assessment of Syrian Refugees pointed to the need of Syrian refugees
for increased access to technical and vocational education and training as being key
to reducing their socioeconomic vulnerability and their dependency on aid.
48. In follow-up to the London and Brussels conferences on supporting Syria and
the region, my Deputy Special Coordinator/Resident Coordinator/Human itarian
Coordinator for Lebanon is leading a United Nations joint effort to facilitate an
easing of the restrictions that face refugees in Lebanon, while also ensuring parallel
support for Lebanese host communities. That effort is guided by a focused action
and advocacy plan developed by relevant United Nations agencies, which calls for
pragmatic solutions to support vulnerable Lebanese individuals and refugees (Syrian
and Palestine refugees), including through the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan.
49. At the Brussels conference, Prime Minister Hariri warned of increasing
indications of tensions between host communities and refugees. He presented the
parameters of the Government’s vision for stabilization and development, including
the contours of a capital investment plan for large infrastructure projects, which
would be used as a main vehicle for job creation for the next seven to eight years.
10/16

17-11606

S/2017/591

50. Donors continue to generously support Lebanon in mitigating the impact of
the Syrian conflict and to assist Syrian and Palestine refugees in the country, but the
disbursement of pledges is slowing down. As at 31 May 2017, re sources committed
amounted to $1.41 billion for the year 2017, which includes $1.1 billion in donor
assistance and $309 million carried over by United Nations agencies from the
previous year. In addition, donors have already committed $940.7 million in support
of Lebanon for 2018 and beyond. United Nations agencies and NGOs reported a
total of $236.3 million received under the Lebanon Crisis Response Plan in 2017.
That represents 8.6 per cent of the overall appeal for 2017 of $2.8 billion, which
constitutes a downward trend compared with the preceding year.
51. Palestine refugees remain one of the most vulnerable populations in Lebanon,
an estimated 65 per cent of whom live in poverty. Palestine refugees from the Syrian
Arab Republic, estimated by UNRWA to number around 32,000, are particularly
vulnerable. Approximately 90 per cent of them live in poverty, of which 9 per cent
live in extreme poverty. An estimated 98 per cent of them rely upon UNRWA
assistance as their main source of income; those refugees also find it increasingly
difficult to maintain legal residency in the country. UNRWA has asked the Lebanese
authorities to permit that category of refugees to renew their residency permits free
of charge. An official census of Palestine refugees in Lebanon was launched by the
Lebanese authorities and is in its initial stage. Due to conclude by the end of the
year, the exercise will also generate new vulnerability indicators.
52. In the Nahr el-Bared camp, in northern Lebanon, protests took place from
mid-March to early June 2017, with protesters calling upon UNRWA to resume
rental subsidies for families displaced by the 2007 clashes that have yet to return to
their homes. The protests disrupted UNRWA operations, which have now resumed
in full. My Special Coordinator visited the camp on 8 June and emphasized the
urgent need for the completion of the entire camp’s reconstruction and support for
the families most in need. United Nations-wide support and cooperation with the
Lebanese-Palestinian Dialogue Committee continues with a view to improving the
situation of Palestine refugees in Lebanon, without prejudice to the resolution of the
refugee question in the context of a comprehensive peace settlement.

III. Security and safety of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon
53. UNIFIL continuously reviewed its security plans and risk mitigation measures,
in particular following security threat warnings, in close coordination with the
Lebanese authorities. In view of the armed clashes in the Ein El Helweh Palestine
refugee camp in Sidon, situated along the main supply route connecting the UNIFIL
area of operations with Beirut, local authorities and UNIFIL made adjustments to
their movements.
54. UNIFIL continued to monitor proceedings in the Lebanese military courts
against individuals suspected of planning or perpetra ting serious attacks against
UNIFIL. With regard to the attack against UNIFIL peacekeepers serving with the
Spanish contingent in 2007, a hearing at the Permanent Military Court planned for
29 May 2017 was rescheduled to 5 July. In the case of terror inten t, opened in
January 2014, the Court held a hearing on 20 March 2017; the next hearing is
scheduled for 5 July. In the case of an attempted serious attack against UNIFIL in
2008, in which one of the four sentenced perpetrators filed an appeal, the Military
Court of Appeal held a hearing on 9 May 2017 and scheduled the next hearing for
2 November. In three cases of serious attacks perpetrated in 2011 against UNIFIL
peacekeepers from France and Italy, investigations are ongoing. In the case of a
17-11606

11/16

S/2017/591

homicide committed in 1980, when three UNIFIL peacekeepers from Ireland were
shot dead, hearings at the Permanent Military Court were held on 17 March and
16 June 2017; the next hearing is scheduled for 26 July.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
55. As at 15 June, UNIFIL comprised 10,409 military personnel, including 412
women, or 4 per cent of the Force, from 40 troop -contributing countries; 235
international staff, including 76 women; and 579 national civilian staff, including
147 women. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force comprised five corvettes, one fast
patrol boat, one offshore patrol vessel, two helicopters, and 845 of the Force’s total
military personnel, including 11 women. In addition, 50 military observers,
including 3 women, of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, serve
with Observer Group Lebanon, under the operational control of UNIFIL.

V. Conduct and discipline
56. UNIFIL and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
continued to strengthen existing preventive measures against sexual exploitation and
abuse, inter alia, by conducting an in-depth assessment of the risk of sexual
exploitation and abuse and implementing a comprehensive internal and external
communications strategy to ensure that all Mission personnel, as well as members
of the local community, are aware of the expected standards of behaviour for United
Nations personnel and of how to report any shortcomings, including with respect to
sexual exploitation and abuse. In collaboration with the United Nations country
team and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, the
UNIFIL standing sexual exploitation and abuse task force reviewed the risk
management framework for sexual exploitation and abuse and developed a
workplan to implement additional measures to reinforce the framework. During the
period under review, UNIFIL received one allegation of sexual exploitation and
abuse, which was promptly processed within the applicable timelines. No
allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were received by the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon.

VI. Observations
57. I am encouraged by the continued progress made by Lebanon towards the
genuine reactivation of all of its State institutions. Positive momentum needs to be
maintained to reinforce the country’s ability to withstand the challenges that lie
ahead. The stability of Lebanon remains a regional public good. United Nations
efforts will continue to be guided by the need to ensure stability while prioritizing
prevention, including through the implementation of the United Nations strategic
framework for Lebanon (2017-2020).
58. I welcome the agreement on a new electoral framework as the result of a
Lebanese-owned process and as a positive sign that hard-won political progress can
be sustained. I am hopeful that that achievement can pave the way for additional
political and economic recovery and further the overall stability of Lebanon.
Political leadership, responsibility and accountability will remain key to ensuring
timely, peaceful and transparent parliamentary elections that honour Lebanon’s
democratic tradition and respond to the pressing concerns of Lebanon’s citizens.
The United Nations stands ready to provide electoral a ssistance to support the

12/16

17-11606

S/2017/591

Ministry of Interior and Municipalities and other relevant authorities in promptly
addressing any factors that have the potential to cause delays.
59. I note the absence of a quota for women in the new law and count on the
political leaders and civil society of Lebanon to continue to promote progress
towards the full and effective participation of women in political life, as set out in
the Sustainable Development Goals. I encourage the relevant decision makers to
ensure that the commitments of Lebanon are fulfilled and that there will be adequate
representation of women in the upcoming elections.
60. The continued commitment of Lebanon and Israel to Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) is of crucial importance. I commend in that regard the visit
on 21 April 2017 by Prime Minister Hariri, Defence Minister Sarraf and Lebanese
Armed Forces Commander Aoun to southern Lebanon and the Blue Line as a sign of
the determination of the Government and the Lebanese Armed Forces to ensure that
they are the sole authority and protector of the calm and stability of a sovereign
Lebanon.
61. I also welcome the Prime Minister Hariri’s public statement that a permanent
ceasefire must be pursued. Given that it remains the best guarantee for long-term
stability, I reiterate the readiness of the United Nations to further assist in that
regard. I encourage the parties to actively explore with my Special Coordinator for
Lebanon and the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander tangible
confidence-building measures that can help sustain calm and gradually pave the way
towards a permanent ceasefire. I urge the parties to refrain from provocative actions,
exercise restraint and desist from rhetoric, which exacerbates the risk of
miscalculation and heightens the risk of renewed conflict.
62. While the situation along the Blue Line has remained relatively calm, the
underlying risks posed by the presence of unauthorized weapons and factors of
regional instability should not be underestimated. I remain concerned about the
continuing presence of unauthorized weapons in the area between the Litani River
and the Blue Line, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006). I note with grave concern
the highly provocative presence of uniformed and armed combatants during the
media tour organized by Hizbullah in the UNIFIL area of operations, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). Hizbullah’s continued public acknowledgement of its
possession of weapons outside the control of the State clearly contravenes
resolution 1701 (2006). Both warrant strong condemnation.
63. As stipulated in resolution 1701 (2006), I call upon the Government of
Lebanon to take all actions necessary to ensure the full implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Taif Accords and of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006), which require the disarmament of all armed groups in Lebanon so that,
pursuant to the Lebanese Cabinet decision of 27 July 2006, there will be no
weapons or authority in Lebanon other than those of the Lebanese State. The United
Nations remains committed and ready to support the Lebanese authorities in that
endeavour. It also remains important that earlier decisions of th e national dialogue
be implemented, specifically those relating to the disarmament of non -Lebanese
groups and the dismantling of the military bases of the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah al-Intifada.
64. I reiterate my condemnation of all violations of Lebanese sovereignty, in
disregard of the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006). The Israel Defense Forces
continued to occupy northern Ghajar and an adjacent area nort h of the Blue Line, in
violation of resolution 1701 (2006). I also reiterate my call to Israel to cease
immediately its overflights of Lebanese airspace and to withdraw its forces from
northern Ghajar and the adjacent area north of the Blue Line.

17-11606

13/16

S/2017/591

65. UNIFIL liaison and coordination arrangements and the good offices of my
Special Coordinator remain critical for information exchange between the two sides
and have helped prevent misunderstandings, de-escalate tension and prevent small
incidents from evolving into larger-scale violence. The tripartite mechanism remains
an effective forum, and I am encouraged by the active engagement of the parties in
it. I also reiterate the strategic importance of the Blue Lin e marking process.
66. I commend the Lebanese Armed Forces for their performance in contributing
to calm along the Blue Line and in the conduct of counter -terrorism operations
along the border with the Syrian Arab Republic and throughout the country. In
shielding Lebanon against threats from extremism and the proliferation of illicit
weapons, the Lebanese Armed Forces continues to demonstrate its essential role in
the extension of State authority throughout the territory of Lebanon, defending the
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and acting as the protector of the
country’s security.
67. I reiterate my call to President Michel Aoun to work towards a resumption of
the national dialogue with the objective of arriving at a national defence strate gy.
That would, inter alia, address the issue of arms outside the control of the State and
other outstanding provisions of resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
68. I call upon Member States to continue to support the capacity development of
the Lebanese security institutions, including through demining and clearance
activities, and to coordinate their assistance through the International Support Grou p
for Lebanon. An updated capability development plan for the Lebanese Armed
Forces will be instrumental to identifying needs and set priorities in that regard.
69. As part of the implementation of the strategic review recommendations, I am
pleased to note the close engagement between UNIFIL and the Lebanese authorities
on the concept of deploying a “model Lebanese Armed Forces regiment” that would
work closely with UNIFIL in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). I
encourage Member States to direct their assistance, within the wider framework of
the capability development plan for the Lebanese Armed Forces and the UNIFIL Lebanese Armed Forces strategic dialogue, to supporting such a model regiment to
further strengthen the capabilities of the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy with respect
to securing the territorial waters of Lebanon.
70. The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force has proved its operational effectiveness in
its maritime interdiction operations at the request of the Government of Lebanon.
The Mission’s close cooperation with the Lebanese Armed Forces Navy in that
context forms an important contribution to the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). Those operations are a significant deterrent against the illegal entry of
weapons or related materiel. Daily interaction and exercises with the Lebanese
Armed Forces Navy have helped develop the Navy, which remains constrained
however by a lack of adequate maritime vessels.
71. I take note of the 20 April 2017 request of the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon for an update on efforts to assist with the delineation of the exclusive
economic zone between Lebanon and Israel. Contacts continue with all partie s
concerned as part of the United Nations good offices on the basis of the exchange of
letters between my predecessor and the former Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Tammam Salam. Prime Minister Hariri has reaffirmed the request by Lebanon for
the United Nations to play a role in that regard, and the parties remain closely
engaged with my Special Coordinator for Lebanon. I remain hopeful that Lebanon
and Israel can commit to a constructive approach to exploiting maritime oil and gas
resources, which is a shared economic interest, in a consensual way that minimizes
tensions and serves as a confidence-building measure.

14/16

17-11606

S/2017/591

72. It is the responsibility of the Government of Lebanon, as the host Government,
to ensure the safety and security of UNIFIL personnel and their freedom of
movement throughout the area of operations. I call upon the Lebanese authorities to
continue their close cooperation with UNIFIL to guarantee adequate protection of
peacekeepers, including by bringing to justice the perpetrators of acts committed
against them.
73. The participation of Lebanese nationals in the Syrian conflict constitutes a
breach of the policy of disassociation, pursuant to the Baabda Declaration agreed by
all Lebanese political parties, and poses a risk the stability of Lebanon at a time
when it must remain shielded from regional turmoil. I reiterate my condemnation of
the participation of any Lebanese national in the Syrian conflict and call upon
Hizbullah and all Lebanese parties to cease any involvement in it.
74. I condemn the movement of fighters and weapons across the Lebanese-Syrian
border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the shelling and shooting into
Lebanese border areas from the Syrian Arab Republic. The continued lack of a
delineated, demarcated Lebanese-Syrian border is no justification for violations of
Lebanese sovereignty by any party. I call upon all concerned to cease violations of
the border and to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.
75. I look forward to progress towards a fully staffed and functioning national
human rights institution and its mechanism to prevent torture, pursuant to Lebanon’s
commitments under the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and recently adopted legislation. The capacity
to prevent human rights abuses will be an important element of the stability and
prevention agenda for Lebanon.
76. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and the resulting refugee presence
continue to pose daunting challenges to Lebanon. I am grateful to the people of
Lebanon, whose hospitality in hosting refugees has continued for many years now.
The Government’s decision to waive the residency renewal fees will have a positive
impact on the protection of the Syrian refugees eligible for that waiver, if applied
consistently. I hope that the residency renewal fee waiver will be extended to all
Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
77. The Brussels conference, held in April 2017, reaffirmed the international
community’s solidarity with the host countries in the region. Despite pledges
received in that forum for the Lebanon Crisis Response Fund and for humanitarian
and development assistance through grants and concessional loans, I am concerned
that a slowdown in funding will affect the Government’s response. I therefore call
upon all Member States to provide the means necessary to ensure the provision of
urgently needed basic assistance and to mobilize additional longer-term
development resources.
78. The renewed violence in Ein el Helweh is one illustration of the persistent
risks to Lebanon that result from a combination of political fragility, dire
socioeconomic conditions, radical ideologies and the presence of weapons outside
the State’s authority. I call upon all Palestinian factions to unite against extremist
group violence, especially since militant elements that are still hiding in camps
expose the entire community to the risk of a resumption of violence. I welcome the
efforts to preserve stability in Ein El Helweh by the joint Palestinian security forces,
which must remain able to perform their duties in order to shield the camp’s
residents. It is important that cooperation continue between the Lebanese authorities
and Palestinian factions in that regard. Security measures should at all times be
compatible with humanitarian principles and human rights standards.

17-11606

15/16

S/2017/591

79. The lack of funding for UNRWA remains of serious concern. Greater donor
support, including for the reconstruction of Nahr el-Bared, remains key to
maintaining stability in the camps and surrounding areas and as a matter of ensuring
dignified conditions for Palestine refugees in Lebanon.
80. I welcome the steps taken by the Government towards the development of a
national strategy for counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism in
Lebanon and encourage the Government to avail itself of the full support of the
United Nations and other stakeholders to that end. I encourage national and
international partners to engage in that effort in close coordination with the United
Nations and international partners.
81. The message of tolerance and coexistence of Lebanon remains a rare
commodity in a region in turmoil. I urge efforts by the parties to the conflict and all
stakeholders concerned, including all communities in the country, to prevent any
resurgence of conflict, negative impact of regional tensions or relapse into political
paralysis. The United Nations will continue to work as one in support of Lebanon,
in close partnership with the Government, civil society and its international
partners.
82. I wish to extend my appreciation to all countries contributing troops and
equipment to UNIFIL and Observer Group Lebanon. I thank my Special
Coordinator, Sigrid Kaag, the staff of her office, the UNIFIL Head of Mission and
Force Commander, Major General Michael Beary, and the civilian and military
personnel of UNIFIL for their continued efforts.

16/16

17-11606
