TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR

th
MEETING: 4 NOVEMBER 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

,,............................

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent Representative of the
United Arab Republic to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8878);
(b) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8879) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a..

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l457)

S/PV. 1457

i

NOTE
Symbols of Untied Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Securitjt Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Senrn’ty Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that,date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SEVENTH

MEETING

Held in’New York on Monday, 4 November 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Otto R. BORCH (Denmark).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l457)

Council. We have long been familiar with his qualities of
intelligence; rectitude and impartiality. We are glad that we
shall be able to benefit from them ln a very special way
during the present month.
4. I should also like to welcome Mr. Wiggins, the new
representative of the United States. I do so the more
cordially sincehis predecessor’s
suddendeparture prevented
him from taking leave of us, and us of him, aswe should all
sincerely have desiredto do.

1. Adoption of the agenda,
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/8878);
{b) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8879).
, Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
fa) Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of the Wited Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressedto the President of the
Security Council (S/8879);
(61 Letter dated 1 November 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8879)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken by the Council at its 1456th meeting,I propose,with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representativesof
the United Arab Republic and Israelto take placesat the
Council table in order to participate without vote in the
discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. A. El Kony
(United Arab Republic) and Mr, Y. Tekoah (Israel) took
placesat the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its considerationof the questionbefore it.
3. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): I
should like, first of all, to offer the Presidentmy sincere
congratulations on his assumptionof the presidencyof the

5. We are gathered here once more asa result of incidents
which have again disturbed the, Near East. How many
meetings the Council has held during the past year and
more to deal with similarsituations! And how many other
incidents have occurred, in addition to those which we have
examined round this table! The length of that list might
give grounds for discouragementand lead someto conclude
that it is impossible for the Security Council to take
effective steps to remedy events which we deplore and
forestall dangerswhich we apprehend.
6. That difficulties exist we realize only too well. But that
they are impossibleof solution we refuse to accept. The
Security Council has a duty to face the responsibilitieslaid
upon it by the Charter. It hasa duty not to disappoint the
expectations of the peoples or the hopes which, despite
everything, are still placedin it. The concern which we feel,
the difficulty of our task, should, on the contrary,
strengthen our determination to find a solution to these
problems.
7. Such a determination appears to us a.lI the more
necessaryas the incidents consistently increasein number
and in gravity. A day no longer passeswithout some
incident occurring somewherein the occupied territories.
As they multiply, one cannot escapethe feeling that the
fire threatens to be rekindled along the entire length of the
front.
8. Increasingly large-scaleoperations are launched. The
Israeli attack of 31 October, following the actions of 26,28
and 30 October, showsthat operationsnow extend to areas
far distant from the cease-fireline and penetrate deeply
into enemy territory. There is no hesitation about aiming
theseoperations at civilian installations.
9. Two doctrines are now proclaimed: that of preventive
defence and that of a policy of warnings. What we have
here, in theory as well as in practice, is a particularly
disturbing escalation, and we cannot overemphasizehow
dangerousthe consequencesmay be.

16. Two considerations suggest prompt action along these
lines. We were glad that Mr. Jarring was willing to extend
his mission for another month, and we thank him for this.
The parties concerned must be aware of their grave
responsibilities in failing to adopt the positions requested of
them, as well as in provoking, or countenancing incidents
which further jeopardize any chances of progress-progress
which must, it appears, be made before the end of the
present month.

10. My delegation has carefully studied all the information
we have received, all the documents and all the papers
which have been circulated to us on the incidents which
have taken place for over a year and particularly on those
of the past few weeks. It has done so with a view to
determining the causesof these incidents and finding means
of preventing their recurrence. Wence it has paid particular
attention to General Bull’s report to the Council of 28
October [S/793O/Add.96/ and to the conclusions which he
draws from his observations.

17. At the same time, the scale of the incidents of 28 and
31 October was sufficiently alarming to compel us to
measure the gravity of the situation and of its potential
consequences.

11. It is, of course, useful for the Council to endeavour in
each case to establish the immediate responsibilities of each
party in these incidents. However, we are bound to admit
that these responsibilities are sometimes shared or successive, and that they vary from one incident to another. This
endeavour cannot, therefore, be sufficient.

18. My delegation greatly welcomed the most praise.
worthy step which has just been taken to settle the conflict
in the Far East. We hope that an equally courageous effort
will be made on the eastern banks of the Mediterranean by
those whose responsibility it is to make it. A gleam of hope
has arisen on the shores of the Pacific; we hope that it will
spread in the course of the coming weeks. In the Near East,
too, the dawn, as the Scriptures say, must be forced to
come. That dawn must be that of peace.

12. Some previous speakers have expressed the wish that
strict observance of the cease-fire should be imposed by
every means available to us, and they have suggested a
reinforcement of the UNTSO personnel, My delegation
sincerely supports this suggestion. It believes that the
Security Council should protest vigorously against violations of the cease-fire. It will willingly associate itself with
any decisions to that effect; its only fear is that the
measures open to us will not be sufficiently effective and
will prove inadequate to restore calm and open the way to
the return to peace.

19. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
France for the over-generous comments which he wasgood
enough to make about me.
20. The next speaker is the representative of the United
Arab Republic, on whom I now call.

13. For many months now my delegation has feared and
deplored the developments which we witness today; for
many months it has expressed its concern that incidents
might increase in number and in gravity if no attempt was
made to correct the situation from which they spring. I feel
compelled to repeat: what needs to be done is to strike at
the root of the evil.

21. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): Mr. President,
I should like, with your permission, to reply to a number of
points raised by Mr, Tekoah in his statement before the
Council on 1 November 1968 (1456th meehg]. Before
doing so, however, I should like to address myself to a
question of a general but disturbing character. A statement
of unprecedented arrogance and unbound defiance was
made before this august body. In his futile attempt to
justify the criminal armed attack by Israeli aircraft against
civilian targets in the United Arab Republic, the represell.
tative of Israel declared that Israel had struck in an effort to
bring home the necessity of the maintenance of the
cease-fire. He further affirmed that Israel will continue to
strike until the Arab States bow to the terms dictated by
Israel.

14. For the past year we have been emphasizing, repeatedly and consistently, that such incidents are the more or
less inevitable result of the absenceof a basic settlement. If
we want to be realistic and effective, then what we have to
do, essentially, is to see to it that this situation, and the
occupation, are brought to an end. The means was
indicated long ago by the Council: it is the implementation
of resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. That
resolution was adopted unanimously. It is a document
whose provisions were studied carefully and in which
equitable concessions and equitable compensation were
requested and granted to both sides. That resolution must
be carried out without further delay if we are to prevent
developments fraught with the most serious dangers.

22. The Council and the world at large must have been
gravely disturbed by such an escalation of defiance of the
authority of the Security Council. Israel is conveying an
ultimatum to the whole world, in which it declares its own
doctrine of disregarding the norms of the Charter and
taking the law into its own hands.

15. My delegation deeply regrets that both sides have not
been equally willing to agree to the implementation of this
resolution. According to the great majority of observers,
the United Arab Republic has recently made an effort to
facilitate the execution of Mr. Jarring’s mission. We hope
that a comparable effort will be made by the other side, We
understand very well, of course, the hesitations which may
arise in connexion with such an effort, but we are
convinced that that effort is essential and that, if it is not
made, the possibility of a settlement may elude us and,
possibly, never recur.

23. According to this doctrine Israel is giving itself the
self-proclaimed right to attack in order to expand and to
strike thereafter, and to restrike in order to persuade the
victim of its aggression to acquiesce in and bow to its
dictates.
24. In his letter to the President of the Security Council
/S/8879/ the representative of Israel requested an urgent
meeting of the Council. In view of the doctrine enunciated
2

4

in his last statement, one might question either the urgency
or the importance attached by the Israeli authorities to
such a meeting. Should we assume that the motives behind
such a request were to elaborate before the Council the
newest manifestation of this long-established Israeli policy?

30. Thev claim that thev are observing the Council’s
cease-fire- resolution; yet their aggressive-shelling of the
civilian centres in the Canal-not to speak of their latest
blatant attack in upper Egypt-reveals beyond any doubt
that their lip service to the cease-fire resolution is but a
subterfuge to obstruct and procrastinate about the Security
Council resolution of 22 November 1967.

25. Some of the statements which were made during the
last meeting of the Council seemed to imply that this air
attack could be viewed as a simple incident within the
framework of cease-fire violations. Such a view overlooks
the serious and real character of the new phase which Israeli
aggression is assuming through the premeditated and
wanton attacks on civilian targets far removed, by hundreds
of miles, from the cease-fire lines and from any military
positions and concentration of troops. Israel is trying to
destroy the vital economic structure of the United Arab
Republic by attacking the main irrigation utilities of the
country.

31. It should be borne in mind that the cease-fire
injunctions were only a first, though essential, step to put
an end to the Israeli-initiated armed aggression against the
Arab States. It was never envisaged asanything more. When
resolution 233 (1967) was adopted on 6 June 1967, all the
members of the Council emphasized its preliminary and
provisional character.
32. I should like to quote a few excerpts from the
verbatim record of the 1348th meeting of the Council. The
United States representative described the cease-fire as a
“first step” [134&h mesting, para. 121; the United Kingdom representative described the cease-fire as a “first
essential step” [ibid., para. 391; the representative of
Argentina described the cease-fire as ‘$a provisional
measure” [ibid., para. .54/; and the representative of Brazil
described it as “a first step” [ibid.,para. 65j.

26. This is a new phase in the execution of Israeli plans for
continued aggression. My Government feels duty bound to
bring to the urgent and solemn attention of the Council the
serious character of this new phase and its grave implicti
tions.
27. The representative of Israel has alleged that the report
of General Odd Bull leaves no doubt as to the responsibility
for the exchange of fire on 26 October 1968. His
conclusions, as usual, have been drawn through distorting
some parts and ignoring other relevant parts of the report.
He has therefore deliberately omitted to refer to the
additional information which has been made available to
the members of the Council in document S/7930/Add.99.
This information indicates that the military observers were
shown an Israeli missile which had not exploded.

33. It is therefore clear from the language of the cease-fire
resolution and the statements made in the Council when
the resolution was adopted that it was a preliminary and
provisional step, to be followed by the withdrawal of Israeli
forces and the establishment of a just and peaceful
settlement.
34. Provisions to that effect were embodied in Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). Those provisions emphasized the basic principles of the Charter and international
law-namely,
the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by war-and affirmed that the fulfilment of
Charter principles requires withdrawal of the Israeli forces.
The cease-fire resolution cannot, therefore, be interpreted
in a vacuum. It must be viewed in the light of its provisional
character and construed in conjunction with the substantive
resolution of the Security Council, namely, resolution
242 (1967).

28. As stated in my letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 October’ 1968 /S/8870], the Israelis have
set up missile sites facing the Suez Canal cities with the
intention of shelling the populated centres in the Canal
area. As the Council may recall, this is not the first time
that Israel has resorted to the use of missiles. What makes it
most dangerous is the increase of missile sites and the
escalation of their use. My Government did not fail to
inform General Bull of the fact in time, on 24 October
1968. It requested him to undertake the necessary steps to
avert the consequences of the existence of missile sites
opposite the Canal cities and warned that the movement of
missiles to the east bank was a prelude to new aggression by
the Israeli armed forces. Unfortunately, our fears materialized when the Israeli forces used missiles again, on 26
October, on the city of Port Tawfiq.

35. On such a basis the United Arab Repu,blic has
accepted, adhered and continued to adhere to the cease-fire
resolutions and to Security Council resolution 242 (1967).
Israel, however, opposes this position of the Council and
views the cease&e as a means of freezing the situation
resulting from its aggression.
36. I regret that the representative of Israel saw fit to
repeat his distortions about the protective defence measure
taken by the United Arab Republic authorities We have
stated and shall not tire of repeating that these are measures
adopted out of consideration for human lives, those of the
citizens in the Suez Canal cities, and aimed at their
protection. No amount of invective on the part of
Mr. Tekoah can change their human character.

29. The Israeli occupation on the east side of the Suez
Canal has been systematically used by their armed forces to
inflict death, havoc and destruction on the innocent
civilians of the Canal area. In order to maintain their illegal,
aggressive occupation and thus continue their criminal
actions, the Israelis have clearly manifested their insistence
on undermining and disregarding the obligations incumbent
upon them by resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967. All that Israel is doing now contradicts the fundamental elements on which that resolution wasbased.

37. Mr. Tekoah pretends in his statement that Israel is
defending itself against the Arabs. In this connexion he says
that Israel has had to defend itself first from behind truce
3

lines, then from behind armistice lines, and now from
behind cease-fire lines. I wonder what kind of defence this
is which always leads forward. Is it really defence or is it
expansion? One has only to look at the maps since 1947.

dispute, who, to a pessimisticobserver, would appear to
shun both war and peace and to insist on a stalemate
pregnant with acrimony and occasional outbu&ts of
violence. World public opinion is thus shakenin its faith in
the United Nations and in the organ which bears the
primary responsibility for world peace and security, The
crisisin the Middle East, seriousand ominousin itself, is
now being compounded by a seriouscrisisin the Security
Counc?l.We should try to settle both, if we are intent on
preservingboth peace and the machinery for peace. The
problem is no longer purely political. Severalcircumstances
of varioustypes have likewisemadeit institutional. We have
been unanimousand yet unanimity has not kept us from
collective failure. In the particular caseof the Middle East
the Council is neither blocked nor paralysed:it is inoperative.

38. We have repeatedly stated that the continued occupation by the Israeli forces of the Arab territories constitutes
a situation fraught with the gravest .dangers for peace and
security in the Middle East. The normalization of this grave
situation can be effected only through the insistence of the
Council that its resolution 242 (1967) should be strictly
and speedily implemented. I need hardly reiterate our
position, which has been clear from the start and was
recently reaffirmed by the United Arab Republic Minister
for Foreign Affairs in his memorandum to Ambassador
Jarring to which I referred in my last intervention.
39. In conclusion, it is my duty to stress to the Council
once again the serious nature of this new phase of Israeli
policy and the grave implications it entails. Israel should
realize that the course of action it has embarked on is
fraught with danger. The Council should bring this fact
home to the Israeli authorities by taking prompt action in
discharging its responsibilitie’s for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

44. The permanent members, which are so prone to
disagreeon world issues,have, potwithstanding, agreedon
the terms of resolution 242 (1%7), but this hasnot been
enough to secure the implementation-and here we wish
againto circumvent the over-all problemsof semantics-of
the self-same resolution. It appears that power, even
permanent power, never exists without certain sobering
limitations. And it is obvious by now that the unanimity
achieved on the text of resolution 242 (1967) does not
extend to the exact interpretation to be given to all
paragraphsthereof. Whether it embodiesa solution or just a
safe and sound basis for agreement, this resolution
242 (1967) is definitely the text on which we have to base
our earnest endeavours towards peace. The problem of
interpretation is therefore largely academic.What really
countsis the will and the determination to proceed.

40. Mr. DE ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): Mr. President,
allow me first of all to express my satisfaction at seeing you
preside over our proceedings during the current month,
November. We count on your leadership and proven ability
to guide us in the crucial debates ahead of us. TOO many
problemsremain unsettledandsomenewonesarecropping
up. We feel bound likewiseto render our tribute to your
distinguishedpredecessor.

4.5. Our concern is enhancedby our apprehensionthat the
unanimity achievedon 22 November 1967may not endure
for ever. It is an indisputablefact that relationsamongthe
major Powershave deteriorated considerablysinceAugust
last. We shall not be more specific lest our remarksshould
give rise to somepoints of order, It is quite plausiblethat
this unfortunate deterioration is already being reflected in
the pattern of the Middle East crisis,through the operation
42. We are engagedin a debatewhich is neither new nor
unprecedented.On the contrary, it strikesus as a re-enact- of a systemof alliancesor allegiances.Difficult to settle on
ment of previous meetingsand of previous discussions. its own terms and on its own merits, the dispute in the
Middle East may become downright insoluble if it k
Again we are confronted with the sameold concern and
converted into another chapter of the long instalment story
with the all too familiar frustrations.In other words,we are
confronted with renewedactsof violence,artillery barrages of the cold war. That is a clear possibility which we should
ponder andconsider.
and retaliation. What, may I ask,is the courseopen to the
Security Council at this stage?To try to ascertainall the
46. Furthermore, the unanimity reachedon 22 November
facts, to trace all the violence,assignresponsibility,identify
1967 may prove to be the maximum area of agreement
aggressors
and victims, to allot blameand to passjudgeamong
the major Powers on the question of the Middle
ment? Are we to meetagain,in informal consultations,and
to embark again on a drqft resolutionbasedon the same East. It is highly arguable and uncertain that the same
unanimity of views should be possibleon any courseof
ingredients of the past, “the Security Council, deeply
action other than the one contemplated in resolution
concerned”, “deploring”, “recalling” and “reminding”,
242 (1967), which constitutes a bold step out of the cold
“urging” and “calling upon”, “emphasizing” and “warnwar and our of war itself.
ing”? As we have pointed out on previousoccasions,we
are running short of possiblemeasuresand even running
47. For it should be stressedthat if the Council hasfailed
short of vocabulary, sinceall termsandwordshaveby now
becomepolemicalandcontroversial.Anything, evenseman- so far in its executive functions, if it has perhapsoverindulged in judicial and fact-finding activities, it has
tics, is likely to becomecontroversialin the Middle East.
none the lessrespondedwith high statesmanship
and constructivenessin the normative field. Indeed,seldomhasthe
43. The authority and the prestigeof the Security Council
have been challengedtime and againby the partiesin the
Security Council respondedto a given situation with the
41. It is with pleasureandgratification that we extend our
warm welcometo AmbassadorWiggins,the new representative of the United States of America. His wisdom,
tactfulnessand high qualificationsconstitute a surepledge
of the valuable contribution he will maketo the proceedingsof the Security Council.

4

P

dexterity and imagination it showed when it adopted
resolution 242 (1967), which still strikes us as the safest
and most equitable approach to the whole problem.

52. The Charter confers specialpowersand responsibilities
upon the permanent membersof the Security Council. We
are therefore entitled to expect adequatediplomatic assistance and adequate restraint and caution from those major
Powers. We should strive to remove not only the seeds,but
also the implements and instruments of war. We cannot
think of a better field of action for the major Powersin
which to exercise their influence and to offer tangible
evidence of their determination to securea real dktente in
world affairs.

48. As was pointed out last Friday by Lord Caradon
[145&h meeting], we have already a preestablished goal
and a pre”established solution, although we are not sure of
the road towards that ultimate goal. We have set up the
machinery and even today Ambassador Jarring is at the
disposal of both parties for the pursuit of peace, through a
mutual adjustment of views and positions. A complete and
undisturbed cease-fire is both unlikely and inadequate as a
permanent solution. Only a political settlement will bring
peace back to the Middle East and it is incumbent upon the
Security Council, as a diplomatic body, to strive towards
such a settlement. Otherwise, the Security Council will be
convened time and again to deal with specific acts of
violence, artillery barrages and retaliation.

53. On the other hand, it is obvious that the parties
concerned, before agreeingto a permanentsettlement, will
request, and demand,someassurances
asto the permanence
and. stability of the terms of the settlement; and, in the
world of today, only the major Powersare in a position to
offer such assurancesand guarantees.This is not wishful
thinking; this is sheer realism. May I recall, on this
particular aspect of the problem, that resolution
258 (1968) clearly states the conviction of the Security
Council to the effect that “all Members of the United
Nations should co-operatetowards a peacefulsettlement in
the Middle East”.

49. We are determined to insist upon a point that we have
raised on four different occasions in this very Chamber. So
far, we have been unable to secure any response to, or even
any comment on our suggestion. Perhaps we have not made
ourselves quite clear. While we pile up words, apprehensions
and recommendations in this room, the parties are piling up
weapons and ammunition in their respective territories.
Each of the parties to the dispute has made references to
purchases and preparations undertaken by the other side,
but it is our contention that the solution to the problem
may lie in a mutual basic understanding among the major
Powers with a view to restricting, regulating or balancing
the supply of arms and implements of war. While the arms
race remains unchecked, the dangers of a new conflagration
are thereby increased day by day and may soon compel us
to forsake all hope of a peaceful solution. Weapons are the
ingredients of war and they may be utilized in a new round
of fighting. Weapons are not the components of a fair and
permanent settlement.

54. On the specific points before the Council, it is clear
that we deplore and condemn both the aggressiveacts
undertaken by one side and the retaliation to which they
have given rise. The Brazilian delegation will do its utmost
to contribute to the strengthening of the cease-fire,
although we believe that a cease-fireis not enough and is
not a goal in itself. It is clear, at any rate, that such attacks
and counter-attacks are serious, not only for what they
signify in and of themselves,but as an indication, I am
sorry to say, of the lack of will to composedifferencesand
to forgo violence. Each such attack and counter-attack
represents an additional difficulty along the road to a
permanent solution. Cease-fireis not a permanentgoal, but
it is definitely the prerequisite for peace.As hasbeensaid,
no war is ever inevitable: it is always the product or the
consequenceof somefailure in humanwisdom.

50. We raise this point once again because we earnestly
believe that, some day, somehow, the Council will have to
face squarely this issue of the arms race, which cannot be
ignored any longer, lest we be confronted with irreversible,
gloomy events in this critical area. We are disappointed to
see that no serious efforts are being made towards a basic
understanding on this problem. This has been a recurrent
theme of all the statements of the Brazilian delegation on
the questron of the Middle East and the point was recently
emphasized in our Foreign Minister’s statement in the
general debate of the twenty-third session of the General
Assembly. 1

55. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representativeof Brazil
for his kind remarksaddressed
to me.
56. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): I wish to join the
speakerswho preceded mo in congratulating you, Sir, as
President of the Council and to wish you successin the
dischargeof the duties of this high function in accordance
with the Charter.
57. The Hungarian delegation also joins you, Mr. President, and other representativesin expressingour congratulations to your predecessor,AmbassadorIgnatieff, who
showed indisputable competenceduring his term of office.

5 1. We must be realistic enough to admit that, without the
full diplomatic co-operation of the major Powers on this
particular question of the arms race and on other aspects of
the question of the Middle East, no significant progress can
be achieved. Although the primary responsibility for that
settlement ought to fall on the parties to the dispute, as
sovereign nations, it is inescapable that only restraint,
statesmanship and constructive efforts on the part of the
major Powers will pave the way to peace in the area.

58. May I also be permitted, on behalf of my delegation,
to welcome our new colleaguein the Council, Ambassador
Wigginsof the United States.
59. The Security Council is again convened to deal with
the Middle East situation. Again it was the United Arab
Republic which was obliged to turn to the Council
following the aggressioncommitted againstit by Israel on
31 October. This is not the first time that Israel has

1 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1617th meeting.

5

hastened to ask for a meeting of the Council after an Arab
country, victim of its admitted aggression,has done so. It is
not out of place, perhaps, to remind members of this fact
after hearing the accusations put forward by Israel against
the United Arab Republic during the 1456th meeting on
1 November.
60. Israel, having repeatedly resorted to open aggression
against the United Arab Republic, continues to .violate the
Charter provisions forbidding the use of force in international disputes. The mere fact that Israel, true to its
traditional policy practised during the two decades of its
existence, feels free to come to this Council to enunciate
the “doctrine of free aggression”-what it calls “reprisals”
-only showsIsrael’s approach to international relations.
61. Allow me now, to make a few observations on the
issue before us. First, as I have already said, Israel wishes
this Council to accept its contention that whenever Israel
feels or says that it has been wronged, it has the right to
practise a policy of unilateral military actions. Israel does
not seek that the Council should establish the facts and
provide a remedy for the situation. It acts in a manner
which is clearly outside the scope of the Charter and then
comes here to accusethe victim of its aggression.It acts as a
one-State Security Council, establishes the facts at its will,
and then proceeds to take enforcement actions.
62. Even if, ignoring the existing realities, we were to
assume that the allegations presented to this Council by
Israel could not be contested-which is not the case-Israel
would have no right to attack any of its neighbours at will.
63. We have often underlined the fact that the idea of
military reprisals is clearly rejected by the ‘Charter and more
specifically by resolutions of this Council. In resolution
248 (1968), adopted on 24 March 1968, it is stated in
paragraph 3 that the Council “declares that such actions of
military reprisal and other grave violations of the cease-fire
cannot be tolerated and that the Security Council would
have to consider further and more effective steps as
envisaged in the Charter to ensure against repetition of such
acts.”
64. It is common knowledge that the Council has had to
condemn Israel repeatedly in the course of the past year for
resorting to offensive military actions and other grave
violations of the cease-fire,Unfortunately the Council has
SO far been unable to take the kind of action envisaged in
the above-quoted resolution, The responsibility for that
state of affairs rests on those members which have
consistently protected Israel from the application of
measures listed in Chapter VII of the Charter, The
consequencesof our failure are there for everyone to see.
65. Secondly, attempts are made here by Israel and its
protectors to place Israel and the Arab victims of its
repeated aggressions on an equal footing. It is being said
that all parties must respect the cease-fire and we are
advised to adopt resolutions whose provisions have one
objective and one objective only, namely, to enable Israel
to maintain its occupation over the Arab territories
conquered during last year’s aggressionagainst the United
Arab Republic, Syria and Jordan.

66. In that connexion I feel obliged to say that the
cease-fire cannot in our view serve as a cover for continued
Israeli occupation. It cannot be utihzed to Iet Israel
consolidate its hold over these territories, to annex them, to
settle them with its citizens, to utilize their natural
resources, to obstruct navigation on international waterways, and so on. All those actions run counter to Charter
principles and to General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions.
67. Thirdly, the attempts of Israel and of its friendsattempts which I have just described-are designed to
conceal the fact that whatever military actions have taken
place in the Middle East since June 1967 have taken place
on the territories of the Arab countries. When Israel tells us
that it is defending itself, it is actually setting fire to the
refineries of Suez, shelling Ismailia, damaging the bridges on
the Nile or transformer stations in the United Arab
Republic.
68. The other day we heard the representative of Israel
describe the aggression that Israel’s armed forces committed
against the United Arab Republic on 31 October as a
matter of self-defence. He stated that Israel acted to protect
its security. One is constrained to ask: What about the
security of its Arab neighbours? Are we really concerned
with the security of Israel when it is the cities, the
industries, the bridges, the canals of the United Arab
Republic, the villages and territories of Jordan, Syria and
Lebanon which are systematically and wantonly attacked
and destroyed? There has not been a single case where the
representative of Israel in this hall could accuse Israel’s
neighbours of bombarding its cities, deporting its citizens,
declaring curfews in its towns, and so on. It is necessary to
recall these matters to put the situation into proper
perspective.
69. Consequently, no appeals to mutual restraint can
change the fact that what we are dealing with here is not a
dispute between several Member States but the flagrant
aggression of one State against others. And let me stress
this: as long as there is occupation of Arab territories
conquered by the use of arms, the Israeli aggression
continues, Almost a year ago the Council adopted resolution 242 (1967), which sought to put an end to the
continuing aggression on the part of Israel against the Arab
States. We know that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Jarring, is now engaged in
serious talks with a view to finding a settlement on the basis
of the provisions of resolution 242 (1967). The primary
provision of that resolution is the withdrawal of the Israeli
forces from occupied Arab territories. Everyone in this hall
knows perfectly well who accepts resolution 242 (1967),
thus facilitating the task of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and who puts obstacles in his way.
70. The fact that Israel felt it advisable to extend its
aggression to objectives deep in the territory of the United
Arab Republic prompts us to ask: Is a deliberate extension
of the area of savage military attacks contributing to the
efforts to improve the prospects for peace in the Middle
East? Were the bridges on the Nile the intended objectives
of Israel’s latest aggression or was it simply the peace
mission of Ambassador Jarring that was the target? If Israel

feels that the road to a political settlement in the Middle
East leads through the illegal and discredited policy of
military actions called “reprisals”, then Israel is badly
mistaken. The Council should reject this notion which is
favoured so much by Israel. To do this, it should resolutely
condemn the latest wanton aggression by Israel. By doing
SO the Council will help Ambassador Jarring’s
mission
because it will clearly say that the solution to the problems
created by Israel’s aggression against its neighbours should
be expected not through the policy of terror, but rather
through peaceful and political means.
71: The PRESIDENT:
I thank
Hungary for his good wishes.

the representative

77. Whatever the links between the acts of violence on
both sides between the dates of 26 October and yesterday,
3 November, when we received a further report from
General Bull, it must be clear that retaliation begets further
retaliation and that in this cycle there can be no winners,
Such a process can lead only to an escalation of violence in
which the cause of peace is the loser.
78. It may be said that repeated acts of violence spring
from the absence of a settlement some seventeen months
after the cease-fire was established to end hostilities, But if
the frustrations caused by this situation find expression in
continued acts of hostility, whether surreptitious or overt,
the achievement of a peaceful and accepted settlement will
not be hastened but obstructed and further delayed, In
speaking of violence and its causes and the recurrent
hostilities and the escalation I should like to acknowledge
the timely warning issued more than once in this Council
by my neighbour, the representative of Brazil, regarding the
dangers of an unlimited escalating arms race in the Middle
East. We should heed his words and consider what needs to
be done with this very urgent and difficuIt problem.

of

72. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): I have already extended
the best wishes of the Canadian delegation to you at our
previous meeting. They are very sincere and I only wish to
repeat them.
73. Before entering into the substance of the item before
us it gives me great pleasure to join other members of the
Council in extending a warm welcome to Ambassador
Wiggins of the United States. I should also like to thank
those who have addressed undeserved cordial remarks in my
direction with regard to the term of hard labour which the
President served in September.

79. It seems clear to my delegation that any and all
violations of the cease-fire must be condemned and that
each party bears its full responsibility for the maintenance
of the cease-fire. More important still, it must be recognized
that the parties themselves carry the majn responsibility in
the search for a peaceful settlement. The SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative, Ambassador Jarring, can
of course assist the parties, but he needs their full
co-operation in order to do so, for the responsibility of the
parties themselves is paramount. Each must show deeper
understanding of the deep-rooted fears and suspicions of
the others and of their common desire to live in dignity and
security.

74. The latest serious incidents in the Suez Canal sector
and inside the United Arab Republic focus attention once
more, particularly in this Council, on the precarious nature
of the cease-fire in the Middle East. Despite all too
frequently repeated calls of the Council for scrupulous
observance of the cease-fire, most recently in September
when I was President, the Council is once again meeting to
consider serious breaches of the cease-fire, admitted on the
one hand by one of the parties and reported on the other
hand by the United Nations observers on the spot. We have
been reminded that cease-fire arrangements are of value
only if scrupulously observed and rigorously respected by
all concerned on both sides, Neither party is entitled to
interpret the cease-fire arrangements to its own advantage.

80. In the whole course of the efforts made since the June
war in 1967 to reach a solution there has not been a more
fateful moment than the present one, 1 think we all realize
that. I do not think it is an exaggeration to say that the
days which lie ahead may well show whether the current
efforts for peace have a chance of success or not. It is to
those efforts and only to tho,se efforts that the parties
concerned should now lend their fullest support and devote
all their energies.

75. The significance of the cease-fire should be clear
enough by now. It is not of course meant to be a
permanent solution. On the contrary, the Council intended
that it should be followed by a peaceful settlement of the
issues in dispute. The cease-fire is important because it
provides for a halt to death, injury and destruction,
enabling an atmosphere to develop in which serious steps
towards a peaceful settlement can be taken.

81. As the representative of France reminded us only a
few minutes ago, the Special Representative has consented
to extend his mission until the end of this month, and that
time should be given up fully to the continuing and
sustained quest for peace by the parties.

76. This is my delegation’s understanding of what a
cease-fire means: the abandonment of violence for the
pursuit of peace. Consequently, we can only deplore the
latest developments and deeply regret the loss of life and
damage to property. Both the United Arab Republic and
Israel have in fact committed violations, and their actions
are obviously interrelated. Reports submitted by General
Bull indicate that the United Arab Republic was the first to
initiate fire in the incident of 26 October. This action must
be deplored. I must point out however that this does not
mean that Israel’s retaliatory raid can in any way be
condoned or that it does not deserve equal censure.

82. Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): I wish first
of all to present to you, Sir, the congratulations and best
wishes of the Ethiopian delegation upon the occasion of
your assumption of the high office of President of the
Security Council for the present month. By your dedication
to duty and your active participation in all efforts aimed at
consultation and conciliation you have already made a
mark on the Council’s proceedings during your few months
of association with us and we, your colleagues, can say with
satisfaction and pride @at you have proved worthy of your
country and of the high standards set by your predecessors
7

in the office of the Danish representative to the United
Nations. Please accept the renewed assurance of my
felicitations and best wishes. I should also like to include
the two colleagues who preceded you in the Chair in the
friendly sentiments I have expressed in your regard. Allow
me also to join with my other colleagues around the table
in extending a warm and friendly welcome to our new
colleague, the distinguished representative of the United
States.
83. When the twenty-third session of the General Assembly convened some five weeks ago the world community
focused its attentiori on New York, hopefully expecting
that the unique opportunity of this year’s session would
help speed up the peace-making effort that the Secretary
General’s Special Representative has undertaken on our
behalf. The Security Council had itself he!ped to encourage
those high hopes on the part of the international community by, so to speak, preparing the ground for the
contacts and consultations that everybody expected. In its
resolution 258 (1968) of 18 September 1968 the Council,
after expressing great concern with the deteriorating situation in the Middle East declared in clear and strong terms in
its two operative paragraphs that the Security Council:
“1. Insists that the cease-fire ordered by the Security
Council in its resolutions must be rigorously respected;

;

“2. Reaffirms its resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967, and urges all the parties to extend their fullest
co-operation to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in the speedy fulfilment of the mandate
entrusted to him under that resolution.”
84. This time the call for the fullest co-operation of the
parties with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral was given even greater significance by the meaningful presence here in New York both of the Foreign
Ministers of the countries directly concerned and of
Ambassador Jarring, who came here to United Nations
Headquarters for consultations with the Secretary-General.
These events and happenings could not but create a genuine
and understandable feeling that now at last something
could be in the air which might help move the Middle East
peace effort from its present state of dangerous stalemate
to that of a start in the direction of progress towards the
final goal of a just and lasting settlement. But, alas, the
events of the last few weeks have dampened the hopes of
the international community just as much as they have hurt
the prospect of peace-building in that troubled region.
Moreover, recent statements and attitudes reported on both
sides have underscored the gravity and the urgency of the
situation we are facing.
85. It must be obvious to everyone that the cause of peace
in the Middle East can in no way be served by military
actions and counter-actions which can only intensify and
perpetuate the military confrontation and conflict. The
cease-fire is a necessary, albeit temporary, arrangement the
maintenance of which is an essential condition for the
peace effort that has been initiated by the United Nations.
There must therefore be the utmost restraint on the part of
all concerned to respect and maintain the cease-fire,
Moreover, any incident or incidents in connexion with the

cease-fire should be brought to the attention of the Council
for its appropriate judgement and action and must never be
made the justification or excuse for one side or the other to
take the law into its own hands. If a cycle of violence and
counter-violence is allowed to continue, the chain of events
will lead inevitably to the gradual escalation of the conflict,
to such an extent that we shall have total war before we are
aware of it.
86. So the Council must insist that no violation of the
cease-fire and no military action based on the premise of
retaliation or reprisal can be allowed and that all incidents
and disputes must be referred to the United Nations
representatives in the area for settlement through the
machinery that the United Nations has established for that
very purpose.
87. While that should be the general line of action that we
should follow with regard to the complaints contained in
our present agenda, we must always look beyond current
incidents and concentrate our efforts on healing the deep
wound in the Middle East body politic of which the current
incidents are only the painful symptoms. It is in an
endeavour to obtain a just and speedy settlement that we
should concentrate all the force of our attention and our
effort.
88. I was most impressed in this respect by the advice
given us by our distinguished and learned colleague,
Ambassador Baroody of Saudi Arabia, during his statement
before the Council last Friday evening (1456th meeting].
He emphasized the need for a new and positive approach
that deals with the roots of the problem and does not rely
solely on temporary and inadequate palliatives. I believe
that by its unanimous resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 the Security Council has indeed initiated such a
positive approach that goes to the roots of the problem in
the Middle East. The mandate defined in resolution
242 (1967) provides the only hopeful way by which we can
bring just and lasting peace to that area and it is to the
speedy fulfilment of the objectives of the mandate entrusted to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
that we and the parties should turn our concerted attention
so that the gathering storm of impending conflict overhanging the skies of this meeting-ground of continents can
be forestalled and removed before it is too late.
89. I shall limit myself to that short statement at this stage
and shall, with your permission, Mr. President, intervene
later on if necessary in the light of the future deliberations
in the Council.
90, The PRESIDENT: May I thank the representative of
Ethiopia for his good wishes and for his kind words not
only with regard to my distinguished predecessor but also
with regard to myself. Fortunately in less than a month I
shall be given an opportunity to reciprocate properly.
91. I now call on the representative of Israel.
92. Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): I regret to inform the Security
Council of another Egyptian act of aggression. Yesterday,
United Arab Republic Mig-21 aeroplanes violated the
cease-fire line in the Suez Canal area. They were challenged

by Israeli fighter aircraft and driven back. In the ensuing
interception one Egyptian plane was hit and trailing smoke
behind it. No Israeli aircraft was lost.

Egypt’s aggression of 26 October is a rather lame attempt
to deny what is by now general knowledge and to suggest
that the Security Council should accept the very opposite
of what is being told by the Egyptian Government itself to
its own people. In Cairo then? is no hesitation in taking the
credit for launching the attack along the Suez Canal, The
responsibility
for the attack is also recorded clearly by
General Bull, who states in his report: “At I445 GMT OP
Lima observed mortar and heavy artillery fire initiated by
United Arab Republic forces . . . .” (S/7930/Add.9.5,
para. 2.1

93. On 26 October 1968 in a wanton and sudden
aggression the Egyptian army mounted a treacherous attack
along the entire cease-fire line. Fifteen Israeli soldiers were
killed and thirty-four wounded. This was, proportionately,
as if an enemy attack had killed in a single day 1,500
American or Soviet soldiers and wounded more than 3,000.
94. The Israelis killed and maimed were young men who
were on the cease-fire line at the Suez Canal for one reason
only, because Egypt and other Arab States have not
allowed Israel to live in peace on other demarcation, lines.
They were confronting Arab aggression as their fathers and
elder brothers had done ever since the Arab States launched
war against Israel in 1948 and even before. They fell like
many before them, simply because Egypt continues to deny
their people the right to life, to peace, to security. They
were buried, and every home in Israel mourns them. In
them we see ourselves and our children, embattled,
menaced and bleeding, defending our independence, securing our future.

101. General Bull goes on to describe how the Egyptian
forces initiated fire at other points along the cease-fire line
and used rockets. Indeed, it is clear from his report that the
United Arab Republic was the first to attack; it is cle’arthat
it was the last to cease-fire and that it had escalated the
dimensions of the confrontation by using rockets.
102, To this unequivocal attribution of responsibility to
Egypt, the only answer which the representative of the
United Arab Republic is able to produce is that on the
following afternoon the United Arab Republic authorities,
according to General Bull’s additional report of 1 November, showed to the United Nations military observers “a
weapon in Port Tawfrq which the UAR authorities alleged
was one of the missiles fired by the Israeli forces on Port
TawAq on 26 October ” [S/7930/,4&99].
The United
Nations military observers themselves had not seen or heard
such missiles being fired. The United Nations military
observers did not report that such missiles had been used.

95. This is the tragedy of the Middle East. It has
continued for twenty years. It has been a nightmare of
daily bloodshed and murder. It has made each one of us live
in the shadow of death. It must end. We shall not allow it
to continue.

103. This is not the first time that the United Arab
Republic authorities have resorted to such fabrications. The
degree of veracity in the story about missiles that we heard
today from the representative of the United Arab Republic
is the same as that in the Egyptian version of how the
Israeli measure of 31 October was carried out-a version
scoffed at and denied in the meantime by Egyptim
eye-witnesses.

96. Whatever the distress of others, our pain is not born of
living, whether in the cold of a winter wind, or in a refugee
tent instead of a house. Our anguish comes from the
attempt to deny us the right to live; our grief comes from
having to fight desperately for our very survival; our
sorrow, from the endless sacrifice of young lives to the
Moloch of hate and aggression.
97. This is the tragedy that hovers over the Middle East
and all others pale before it. We regret suffering and the loss
of life on either side. However, to remove the threat to the
life of a whole people is surely of the highest political and
humanitarian priority.

104. The sudden and unjustified
recrudescence
of
Egyptian acts of aggression has evoked widespread concern.
105. The Times of London of 31 October interpreted the
United Arab Republic aggression as follows:

98. How grave and urgent this is, how real the threat of
which I am speaking, was illustrated at our previous
meeting when the Security Council’s Arab member spoke
openly and unabashedly of the destruction of Israel as the
only solution of the Middle East crisis. This spectacle of
Algeria, .a member State of the Council, defying international law, the United Nations Charter and United Nations
resolutions is an affront to the Security Council. It
highlights the problems and dangers which menace Israel.

“Egypt appears to have adopted a new strategy in
relation to its cease-fire line with Israel along the Suez
Canal, whereby it will not consider pre-emptive artillery
strikes against Israel positions on the occupied east bank a
breach of the cease-fire agreement.
“The new Egyptian move, which was explained by
Mr. Salah Gohar, Under-Secretary at the Foreign Ministry, to Lieutenant-General Odd Bull, the Chief United
Nations Observer in the Middle East, marks a dangerous
turn in the Arab-Israel situation. It means that short of
launching an offensive across the Canal, the Egyptians
have declared that they will no longer respect the
cease-fire line between the two armies.”

99. I may remind the Council that Algeria has not yet
accepted the cease-fire of June last year. This is documented by the Secretary-General in his note of 30
November 1967 [S/8279]. Algerian public information
media have boasted about their participation in the 26
October aggression. I have reported this to the Council.

106. The distinguished political commentator
dleton wrote in yesterday’s New York Times:

Drew Mid-

“Egyptian comments on the Arab raid of October 26,
echoing the boasts of Egyptian leaders before the war of

100. The attempt made today by the representative of the
United Arab Republic to distort General Bull’s reports on
9

):

i

i

June 1967, indicate a renewal of political aggressiveness 113. The November 1967 resolution calls for the establishment of a just and lasting peace with Israel, The United
in Cairo.”
Arab Republic Government has carefully avoided any
specific
mention of this central provision and has not yet
107. On 1 November, for instance, radio Cairo, in a
undertaken to reach a just and lasting peace with Israel, The
statement notable as much for its candid acceptance of
November resolution calls for agreement between the
initial responsibility as for its bombast, declared: “Israel’s
parties. The United Arab Republic Government has not
act is a cheap retort to Egypt’s glorious
action.” This
given any indication of its willingness to conclude agreebroadcast was simply echoing a campaign in the Egyptian
ment with Israel.
press, radio and television extolling the new policy of
intensified aggression and calling for the use of force against
114. Instead, the United Arab Republic seems to suggest
Israel.
that a political solution should be imposed on the parties
from the outside by means of the so-called time-table, This
108. The Swissdaily La Suissewrote on 29 October 1968:
is a distortion of the November resolution. The resolution
does not speak of a time-table for matters which have not
“Cairo’s policy tends to sabotageeverything by creating
been
agreed. It speaks of agreement. It does not call for a
incidents aimed at spreading conviction that we are on
mere “political solution”. It calls for something more
the verge of war rather than two pacesawayfrom peace.”
far-reaching: a just and lasting peace.
This does seem to be a possible motivation for the United
115. With Israelis falling under Egyptian bullets and shells,
Arab Republic’s new policy of “preventive” military
with
the United Arab Republic Government publicly
operations: to sabotage the peace-making efforts. There
announcing
the adoption of the policy of aggressive
appears to be no other logical reason for such unprovoked
military operations against Israel, with the United Arab
aggression.
Republic refusing to enter into meaningful clarifications of
views through Ambassador Jarring, it might have been
109. The Paris newspaper Le Monde of 28 October
natural to conclude that the pursuance of peace-making
accuses Egypt of renewed aggression and attributes it to
efforts with Cairo would at this stage be fruitless.
Cairo’s desire to demonstrate its strength, raise the morale
of its army and emphasize its opposition to negotiations.
116. Yet, the Government of Israel has decided to persist
Recently, President Nasser openly announced that the stage in its search for agreement, Mr. Abba Eban, Israel’s Minister
of resistance is over and that the United Arab Republic has for Foreign Affairs, has returned to New York with further
now entered upon a new stage of deterrent, preventive
proposals and additional clarifications. This morning he has
actions against Israel. The next stage, according to President
resumed his contacts in a constructive spirit with Ambassa.
Nasser, will be the “stage of liberation”.
dor Jarring, He is prepared to maintain these contacts: for
without the utmost perseverance complex international
110. This is an ominous statement of Egyptian policy and
problems cannot be resolved. It will now be up to the
intentions. Is it of peace that Egypt is thinking, or of war?
United Arab Republic to determine whether those contacts
Is it the sword that it will persist in wielding?
will, as we hope, develop into a serious exchange of views
leading to understanding and permanent peace.
111. The United Arab Republic’s intransigent posture is
reflected in its attitude towards the peace-making efforts
117. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) ltranslnted front
that are being pursued by Ambassador Jarring. The United
French): If this statement had been made by someone
Arab Republic refused to enter into direct peace negotiaother than the spokesman for the Zionist authorities which
tions with Israel. Then it rejected the proposal for joint
are occupying Palestine, my delegation could have exercised
meetings under Ambassador Jarring’s auspices. Today, it
its right of reply. A number of gratuitous and provocative
has not yet shown any readiness to join us in a meaningful
statements have just been made, and my delegation wishes
preliminary exchange of viewsthrough Ambassador Jarring.
to clarify a number of points.
Instead, it indulges in frivolous misrepresentations of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
118. I shall not dwell on the contribution which the
1967, which it then hastens to cover up by claims that it
Algerian delegation can or cannot make to the work of the
accepts the resolution. This is simply not good enough. The
Security Council. Others are in a better position to judge of
Egyptian Government has never had any difficulty in
the quality of the contribution which we can make to the
making professions of faithfulness to international obligaCouncil’s labours. Indeed, Algeria was elected by an
tions;’ only to, ignore them completely in practice. For
overwhelming majority to the seat which it now occupies in
twenty years it has waged overt war against Israel while
the Security Council. As far as we are concerned, that is the
claiming allegiance to the Charter. It has always been ready
best proof of confidence that can be given to a country.
to announce its loyalty to some United Nations resolutions
while defying others that called on it to make peace with
119. Algeria, of course, has not contributed, as have the
Israel and refrain from active belligerency against Israel.
Zionist authorities, to the deterioration of the international
atmosphere. We have not, for over twenty years, violated
that fundamental principle: the right to self-determination.
112. Now Egypt again waves pious declarations in the
Security Council’s face while its political intransigence and
Algeria has not occupied territories other than Algerian
territories. From that point of view, it has clearly not made
military aggressivenessbelie its own words. As an old Arab
a major contribution to international relations.
proverb states, it is “a mouth that prays, a hand that kills”.
10

i

120. In order the better to dissimulate the motives and
intentions of their policies, the Zionist spokesmen frequently bring up the well-known problem of the existence of
Israel. On this subject, I should like to repeat what my
delegation has had occasion d say several times before: the
basic problem is that of the existence of the Palestinian
people; that is the people to which all national existence is
denied. The basic problem is that of recognizing the
Palestinian people’s right to self-determination, of recognizlng its national rights. The basic problem is not and
cannot be the recognition of a fait accompli, whatever it
may be.

that laid and justice cannot be based on discrimination and
that the people of Israel also have a right to self-determination, to independence, to peace and to security.
127. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): Perhaps because I was using a language which is
not familiar to the spokesman of the Zionist authorities
estabIished in Palestine, he was unable to grasp even the
meaning-not to speak of the whole significance-of the
statement I made a few minutes ago.
128. I shall simply say that, for Algeria, when the right to
self-determination is at issue, when the effective recognition
of that right is at issue, a cease-fire must be conditional on a
political settlement; a political settlement cannot be conditional on a cease-fire. The events in Algeria proved it; the
events in Viet-Nam are proving it.

121. We have said, we repeat now and, if necessary, we
shall repeat it again: we cannot recognize colonial rBgimes
which have been imposed by force and which suddenly set
themselves up as States, whether in Palestine, or, in a few
weeks’ time, in Rhodesia or, as happened many years ago,
in South Africa. We cannot have one position about
Palestine and another about Rhodesia or South Africa, or
vice versa,

129. I have to say, and to repeat, what my President has
said, to repeat what my Minister has said, for in so doing,
we remain true to ourselves, true to our past, true to our
contribution to international relations. The problem is
indeed that of the creation of Israel, the problem is indeed
that of the right to self-determination of the Palestinian
people-the only authentic people of Palestine. The problem is identical-1 have said it and I repeat it-with the
Rhodesian problem, with the South African problem.
Those are the three cases: the problem of the creation of
Israel, of Ian Smith’s Rhodesia, of South Africa with its

122. With regard to the cease-fire, my Government and
my delegation have on several occasions made our position
clear. As was shown by events in Algeria itself, and as has
been shown in the last few days by events in Viet-Nam, a
cease-fire must be conditional on a political settlement.
When the right of self-determination is at issue a political
settlement can never be conditional on a cease-fire, whatever its nature.

apartheid.

130. I do not know who have placed themselves outside
the international community: those who, like Algeria, see
their action encouraged by their Arab brothers, see their
action encouraged by all the African peoples, which only
recently deemed it appropriate to pay a tribute to my
country by holding their meetings in Algiers, or those who
for the past twenty years have trampled that principle of
self-determination
underfoot, those who for the past
twenty years have been engaged in territorial expansion,
those who for the past twenty years have refused to submit
to international law,

123. The fact that Algerians had the honour of fighting at
the side of their brothers of the United Arab Republic was
primarily due to the natural solidarity which unites them
with all who fight for their national liberation, all who fight
for the recovery of their national territories. That is true in
the Arab context. It is equally true, as everyone knows, in
the African context.
124. The PRESIDENT: I recognize the representative of
Israel in exercise of the right of reply.
125. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): As has already become clear
there is really no need for me to reply to statements by the
representative of Algeria. It is quite sufficient to leave it to
his superiors to do that. On 25 October 1967 President
Boumbdienne of Algeria stated: “Nasser’s main error was
his acceptance of the cease-fire agreement”. On 25 October
1968 the Foreign Minister of Algeiia said the following
before the General Assembly of the United Nations: “The
fundamental problem, however, lies in the creation of
Israel”.~

13 1. As for discrimination,
become its symbol.

132. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Saudi
Arabia has just informed me that he would like to address
the Council again this afternoon, If I hear no objection, I
shall invite him to take a place at the Council table and
address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took a place at the Council table,

126. That attitude makes it clear that Algeria has placed
itself outside the family of nations and that Algeria’s
participation in the United Nations organ entrusted with
peace and international security is an affront to members of
this Council and of the United Nations as a whole. The
representative of Algeria masquerades here as a defender of
all peoples’ rights, while denying such rights to the people
of Israel. It is time that he and his Government recognized
2 Set Official
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of the General
1707th

Assembly,

meeting,para.90.

Zionism, like apartheid, has

133. The PRESIDENT:
Saudi Arabia.

I now call on the representative of

134. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I must
thank you and the other members of the Council for
granting me permission to speak again. Every time the
representative of Israel calls the Arabs aggressors, I feel
duty bound to rebut his allegations and to show who the
real aggressor was in Palestine.

Twenty-third

I

135. I am duty bound to offer a few clarifications to the
Council. This question started in 1920. I do not know
where Mr. Tekoah was in 1920. Mr, Tekoah tells us that the
Remans chased the Zionists. If we examine history books,
we find that there were no Zionists in the times of the
Remans. There were Jews; there were Jews of the area and
they were real Semites. Mr. Tekoah is a Jew by religion but
he looks to me, as do many of those who usurped the Holy
Land, like a European.

Christ and before Christ, but now are Arabs, because as I
said, there is a resiliency in Arabism.
138. Then he speaks about the Algerians; I do not know
who inhabited Algeria, but they were Arabites and they are
perhaps better Arabs than many people of Arab origin. We
a0 not discriminate.
139. When he talks about Arab aggression and throws
aspersions at the Arabs he is also speaking against the
Sudanese, who were Arabites-as I said in my last intervention-not by coercion or compulsion but by example.

136. Their reIigion is Judaism. We always profess that this
religion is one of the three noble monotheistic religions.
Ethnologically, he and those who came from, Eastern
Europe do not belong to the area. The mere fact that they
are Jews does not give them any more right than Christian
Europeans to embark on another invasion of Western Asia.
Mr, Tekoah had some curious figures and he drew certain
parallels, He mentioned that fifteen were killed some days
ago-fifteen Israelis-and thirty or so wounded, and he said
it as if 1,500 Americans were killed and 3,000 wounded. I
am sure he was talking to the Jews of New York, but he
forgot that there is another side of the coin, At least one
million or so Palestinians have so far lost their homelands
on account of Zionist incursions into our midst. People
would laugh if I said it was as if 100 million Americans
were chased out of the United States of America. But, since
we are drawing up comparisons, it is as if 100 million
Americans had been chased out of their country. Such
parallels are misleading. They dramatize the issue. No doubt
Mr. Tekoah is eloquent, and his diction is quite good for a
Semite from Eastern Europe, but he cannot dramatize
tragedy, the tragedy which-as my colleague from AIgeria
mentioned-has befallen the Palestinian people, the whole
people of Palestine but for 6 per cent who were Jews in
1919 at the time the United Kingdom was granted the
Mandate over Palestine.

140. I think Mr. Tekoah should be careful to go back to
history, to the genesis of this movement, before he throws
journalistic terms around here. There is nothing wrong with
journalism, it is very instructive, but let me say that he
cited various newspapers today. Of course, he mentioned
Drew Middleton of The New York Times. What is The New
York Times but a Zionist newspaper? There are no more
newspapers except big Zionist newspapers here in New
York City. When I fast came to America, to New York
City, there was The Sun and The World Telegram and The
Herald Dibune. They played politics with the Zionists in
those days to get the advertisements from the department
stores and the Zionist concerns. They folded up, and now
there are two newspapers.
141. No matter how they pretend they are fair in treating
news, when it comes to Israel I think their minds have
become befogged. That is quite natural. They have been
brainwashed by the Zionists. The Jews have been brainwashed by the Zionists here, but thank God for those who
still opt for Americanism-Jews
who are loyal American
citizens and who have their loyalty to the United States,
not this split loyalty, one to Israel and one to the United
States.

137. As I said during previous interventions, the majority
of those 6 per cent were Arab Jews. I call them Arab Jews
whether he likes it or not. They spoke Arabic. They had an
Arab background and culture. Their religion was only
Judaism inasmuch as the religion of some Jews was
Christianity, but they were Arabs. The religion of some
people in the area was Judaism, but they spoke Arabic,
they thought in Arabic. Let them consult the words of
history when the Arab Jews thrived and were respected by
the Arabs when they were at the zenith of their glory. I say
“glory” judiciously-not
an empty glory; I am talking of
the Arabs of the Middle Ages when darkness had spread its
wing over Europe and when Plato and Aristotle and others
were made familiar to Europe through the Arabs, I do not
have to recall how they flocked from Oxford-which
was
no more perhaps than a high school of today-they flocked
to Spain to learn Arab philosophy, and ancient Greek
philosophy and culture. And many of those Arabs that
were in Spain were Jews, but they did not come from
Eastern Europe. There was no Herzl then who, frustrated as
he must have been because of the persecution of Jews in
Europe, thought he could perhaps think of creating an
enclave for the Jews where they could live at peace, But the
Arabs never persecuted the Jews. They were never aggressors against the Jews. And here comes a Jew from Eastern
Europe, a Zionist who has repeatedly called us aggressors.
He talks of Egyptians-who
were Hamites at the time of

142. I do not know who bought The Times of London. It
has changed hands since I was in London in 1929. The
Times of London has to survive; it is not The Times it used
to be when I was in London in 1929. Maybe it needs a little
more advertising. I am talking frankly: it has to cater to the
Zionists and slant its news in favour of these advertisers. 1
know who controls the exports and the distribution of
goods in Great Britain, the department stores. I lived there;
I know. I lived for a decade in London.
143. Mr. Tekoah mentioned La Suisse; he mentioned La
Monde of Paris. I do not know who owns those papers; I
know that here in this country the Zionists have seen to it
that they control many newspapers-the
mass media of
information. And we call what they write great journalism
reflecting the freedom of the press. How can there be
freedom of the press when there are advertisers and when
you have to court them? And we know who those
advertisers are.
144. How can there be freedom of the press when a
certain family which owns a newspaper tries to indoctrinate
its readers with one candidate or the other in an election,
wielding influence out of proportion to its numbers, using
methods that affect the subliminal mind of man through
repetition?
12

145. Advertising is an art; it has even invaded the minds of
men to such a degree that sometimes I wonder to what
extent they have been conditioned by news that is subtly
repeated and presented in such a manner as to make the
readers believe what those newspaperswant them to
believe.

1.52. I think my colleaguefrom Brazil did not recite a
homily this afternoon, aswe sometimes
hearin the United
Nations. He was frank and outspoken,and gave us some
food for thought. SOdid our colleaguefrom Ethiopiawhen
he referred to what I had said: that we shouldgo to the
root of the matter, and not satisfy ourselveswith palliatives.

146, But has it occurred to Mr. Tekoah that he sadly
neglectedmentioning any other newspapers-forexample
from Moscow? Why did he not quote Moscow, for that
matter? Why did he not quote certain Hungariannewspapersor African newspapers,
or Asian newspapers,
for that
matter? Why? Becausehe chooseswhat suitshim to build
up a case-a case which is built on sand and which will
totter, ashistory will show,
147. He said that all the Arabs are gangingup on Israel
and that Israel has the right to live. It fell to me yearsago
to draw the attention of the GeneralAssemblyand that of
the Security Council to the fact that Palestinedid not
belongto Egypt, or to Jordan, or to Lebanon, or to Syria,
but to a people in whom sovereignty resided:none other
than the Palestinianpeople,regardless-of
whether they were
Arabs, regardless
of whether they wereChristians,Moslems,
or adherentsof any other religion. They had a personality,
and lived for centurieson the land. Conquerorshad come
and conquerorshad gone;but they stuck to the land. Their
ancestorsare buried in the soil of Palestine.You cannot do
away with the Palestinianpeople.
148. Mr. Eban spoke of a five-year plan-1 listened to
him-thinking that the refugeescould be scatteredaround:
perhaps someof them might come to the United States,
even. The United States,with the pressurethat the Zionists
can exert on this country, could, in his estimation,
probably absorbsomeof th&e refugees.And others could
go to Australia: the Westerncountriesare sympathetic.He
did not mention it: I do not know whether he wanted to
send some of them to Russia.The Zionists are always
askingthat the gatesof the Soviet Union shouldbe opened
so that goodJewishSovietsmay flock into Palestine.
149. Sometimes one thinks that if even the Soviet
Union-one of the super-Powersof today-is maligned
becauseof alleged anti-Semitism,what can we Arabs do
when we have no massmediaof information to rebut the
falseallegationsmadetime and againby the Zionists.
150. Is it any wonder that I askto intervenehere? This is
the only place where we can make our voice heard, even
though the newspaperssay, “Ah Baroody is a negligible
quantity, and Arabia is engulfed in the sandsof the
Peninsula”. But Baroody and every Saudiis an Arab; and
every Arab is a Palestinian.
151. As I said on Friday, we may bicker and quarrel,but
when it comes to Palestine,every Arab, whether he is a
Moroccan, a Tunisian, an Algerian, a Sudanese,
a Lebanese,
a Syrian, a Jordanian, an Egyptian, a Saudi Arab, or
someonebelonging to the principalities and sheikhdoms
which are federating now in the Gulf, every one of US is an
Arab, and every Arab is a Palestinianwhen it comesto
Palestine.
13

153. To most of you here Palestineis more or less
academic.And who briefs you? Experts, many of themnot all-oriented experts,orientedby the policiesthat serve
national interests.But whenthe expertsarehonestthey are
not listenedto-like Sir RonaldStorrsat onetime, whenhe
spoketo Mr. Balfour. Hewasnot heededby Mr. Balfour; or
Mr. Henderson,for that matter, or Paul Allen-may God
rest his soulin peace-who spoke.to me in 1948;he wasa
memberof the State Departmentandhe spoketo Mr. Truman. Mr. Truman, in his memoirs,said: “Who are these
striped-pantsboys? ” The expertsare called“striped-pants
boys”, Luckily for us diplomatsnowadays,we do not wear
stripedpantsany more.
154. Mr. Tekoah saidthat the Israelishave the right to
live. Nobody is denying them the right to live asJews,as
peoplewho would haveliked to live in Palestine.Duringthe
Ottoman Empire, in the best tradition of Islam,the Jews
not only were not discriminatedagainst, but were a
privileged people in Istanbul. Many of them were advisers
to the Ministers at the Porte, Wein WesternAsia did not
discriminate against the Jews, It was in Europe that
discriminationstarted. Again I mustsay that, asif from a
guilty conscience,someEuropeanswantedto seekredress
for the Jews, and thought that they could entertain the
whims of a dream-the dreamof Herzl-for which therewas
no longer a raison d’btre. For, as I mentioned-and I
mention again-after the Dreyfus affair, legislation was
initiated all over Europe to seethat the Jew would not be
looked down upon.
155. The Jewshave privilegesnow-not equalrights,but
privileges.Well, it is humanfor any person-not only the
Jew or the Zionist-to get privileges.As I have saidin a
Committee of the GeneralAssemblytime and again,most
people nowadaysfight not for FqualiFybut for privileges
and human rights: wealth, power and glory. Somepeople
want more wealth than they can use; othersmorepower
than is good for them br the communityor the nation or
the world in which they live; and otherswant glory-vain
glory, All theseare in the natureof seekingprivileges.Why
shouldnot the Jew seekprivileges?But whenit is at the
expenseof a whole people-the Palestinian
people-then we
must heedthe fact that if we do not stop Israelthere will
be a world conflagration,because
the United Stateswill not
leave us alone and the Soviet Union is not goingto leave
someof the Arabs alone-the balanceof power,mentioned
time andagain.
156. We have not changedsincethe daysof the Leagueof
Nations. I observedthe Leagueof Nations:the balanceof
power. But at whoseexpensein the long run? At the
expense of the Palestinianpeople. Well, the Palestinian
people have been rousedand I think it is high time that
they fended for themselves,whether the Arabs can or
cannot help them effectively.

157. What shall we do? Dump two million Palestinians
into the Mediterranean, or dispersethem? Suppose they do
not want to be dispersed, they do not want to emigrate. At
one time the Zionists thought, “Well, in twenty years those
Arab refugees who left their country will have died.” But
who are the Palestinian freedom fighters now? Are they
the old folks? No, the freedom fighters range between the
ages of seventeen and twenty-five. Many of them were born
in the camps. What shall the Arabs do-Egypt, Saudi
Arabia, Lebanon, Syria?

Soviet Union because there the State controls industry, but
if they could perhaps the skyscrapers in the Soviet Union,
because it is a bigger country, would be higher than the
Empire State Building.
161. I was a little amused when Mr. Tekoah mentioned, or
rather adduced, for one of his arguments an Arab proverb.
Our repertory of Arab proverbs is quite large and I single
out one proverb which the Arabs here will understand: in
English the meaning is “He hit me and he cried and wept,
and you are the first one to complain”. These people came
in 1919, they flocked into Palestine; they even hanged the
British Tommies-Lord Caradon will tell you-calling them
enemies. Finally, the British gave up and dumped the
Mandate in the lap of the United Nations. They even went
to the partner of Mr. Truman, Jacobson I believe or some
name like that, when he wasin the haberdashery business in
Missouri. There is nothing wrong with rising from a
haberdasher to become the President of the United States
of America; this is to the honour of this country. But they
went to Mr. Jacobson until, according to the memoirs of
Mr. Truman, he found no more rest. Read those memoirs
tonight, Mr. Wiggins, if you can because we are going, as
someone has said, to have many sessionshere. Because it is
not Egypt, or Syria, or Jordan that is going to find the
solution with Mr. Jarring, or after Mr. Jarring leaves. It is
the Palestinian peoples who refuse-people who have their
sovereignty, who have their identity; they are called
Palestinians like the Lebanese, the Syrians, the Iraqis, the
Sudanese, the Egyptians, or for that matter like any people
whether they be from Western Asia, from the heart of Asia
or from any continent. Read Mr. Truman’s memoirs,
Ambassador Wiggins, and you will find that you repeated
the error of the United Kingdom in abetting, or rather in
wielding your influence for the creation of Israel in a place
which is now tantamount, figuratively speaking, to a
hornet’s nest.

158. Syria exercises a great deal of wisdom. It is not
talking about peace becauseit knows that there can be no
peace. I do not say that it is wrong for the Egyptians or for
the Jordanians, for that matter, to seek an honourable
solution, But I wasinvolved in the Syrian national uprisings
in 1925-and when it comes to national acumen, you
cannot change a Syrian, He will die fighting. They know it
is futile to talk when, if they do give in, the Palestinian
people in Syria and all over the Arab world will see to it
that they are liquidated. It takes only a bullet to kill a
person.
159. Out of thirteen leaders who were shot, when it was
rumoured that they were going to find a solution with the
Zionists before the partition of Palestine, I knew nine. I
assure the Council that they were all innocent. But there
are activists in the Arab world as there are in every other
country, including the United States, no doubt Russia, the
Balkan countries and elsewhere in Europe. There was a
rumour that they were going to find an accommodation
with the Zionists and they were shot like birds. One of
them, a king, was shot in the mosque-none other than the
grandfather of His Majesty King Hussein, whom I knew
personally. I used to meet him in London when he came
there in the 1930s in order to deal with this question with
the Mandatory Power. The Palestinians or those of the same
persuasion shot them. Here again I refer to the wise words
of my colleague from Brazil, who said something about an
exercise in semantics when resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November 1967 wasreferred to. Although I must not judge
Mr. Goldberg by rumours, I heard that he had a good hand
in drawing up that resolution

162. Mr. Tekoah says, “We have the right to survival”. I
answer him: “What about the Palestinian people? Have
they the right to survival? ” Should we always look at our
own interests? What did Moses say? ‘Xove thy neigh
bour.” I wish I had brought the Bible with me because it is
full of gems on which Israel is trampling in a secular
manner. I am not talking of the orthodox Jews; they are
devout and pious like people of other religious denominations. I am talking about the secular leaders, or the leaders
who profess a certain religion, and I must say in fairness to
the Jews that religion has been used sometimes to motivate
a political movement. The Israelis are no exception.
Mr. Tekoah cites the Charter of the United Nations. The
Charter was brought out in 1945. What about the right of
self-determination enshrined in the Charter? Did the
United Nations in 1947 consider that the Palestinian people
had the right to self-determination? No. They did not
consider that because there were political arrangements and
modalities. As I said, our friends from the United Kingdom
committed a great error at the time of empire, and then it
was repeated by our friends of the United States of
America. I am not saying “friends” derisively; they are our
friends. Sometimes your friends hurt you more than your
enemies. They have hurt us tremendously.

160. But the Zionists who helped in writing that resolution somewhere in one of the capitals suceeded in putting
the knot of the wood in the saw of the carpenter. The
Zionists will withdraw if you live with them, if you make
peace with them, I think Mr. Eban finally realizes that no
Arab Government can talk about treaties with Israel, and
this is why they are talking of parallelism. Poor Mr. Jarring-one day the Arabs talk to him and another day the
Zionists, and he tries to synthesize something out of
nothing. I commiserate with him becausehe is a gentleman,
a man with a great conscience, No wonder he wanted to
leave. The Israelis do not want peace. They could have
peace if, instead of hoisting the banner of Israel they
brought it down and became components of a Middle East
community, living in peace either by way of cantonizatibn
or some other political device, like the Swissfor example,
and forget about the m-gathering of the Jewsfrom all over
the world. The majority of the Jews do not want to go to
Israel; they are happy where they are. They are building
skyscrapers in Manhattan, they control lots of businessin
Western Europe; of course they could not do that in the

163. The Palestinian people cannot be denied the right to
regain their homeland, not necessarily by war or bloodshed.
14

If those who created Israel would prevail upon it to see
wisdom and not go back to those days of its creation by
pressure, there would be peace. There will be peace if it is
based on justice, and justice means the non-denial to the
Palestinian people of their homeland. Again I must say that
this need not necessarily involve bloodshed.

produce it in their own countries. With Arab hospitality we
open our arms wide to them. We have never hurt the
Western Powers, but the whole of Asia and the continent of
Africa have been hurt persistently by the Western Powers.
Not all the Western Powers: I must pay tribute to France.
France has recognized the errors of the nineteenth century
and, because that great statesman, General ‘de Gaulle, is
perspicacious in handling international affairs, he is decried
as a nationalist by none other than those who wooed
France in the past. It shows that the Western peoples are
capable of producing men of wisdom and sanity, but if they
want to continue to be indoctrinated by the Zionists they
are, I submit, misguided, because they do not know their
own interest. It may be in their short-term interest, but
they cannot stay in the Middle East: if we examine the
situation objectively, it is clear that they cannot stay for
long, Perhaps in a decade or two, perhaps tomorrow, they
will disappear. If the world goes up in flames, as it may very
well do, because of the arsenals that are filled with lethal
modern weapons, it will not matter then who remains
there; it will become a question of squabbles.

164. In twenty years the world has changed tremendously,
in the twenty years since the creation of Israel. Jews then
lived peacefully there without the flag of Israel, without the
exclusivity of Zionists in a land which they claim as their
own. Nowadays the courts in Israel are having a hard time
determining who is a Jew. Incidentally, I read this in The
New York Times. I need not go into the details, but if the
mother is Jewish then the child is a Jew; the father does not
count, it seems. Those are fundamentalistic ideas. We have
some fundamentalism in our part of the world. But the
world has changed tremendously. If the Jews want to live in
Palestine as Jews and not as political Zionists, a solution
will readily be found, but not under the banner of Israel. I
am not talking about the destruction of Israel; Israel is a
symbol and there are some symbols that are wrong from
the beginning. I am dealing with human beings. Far be it
from me to suggest that there should be a day of reckoning,
but I am afraid it may come one of these days.

169. This is my message to the Council inresponse to the
aspersions which are repeatedly cast by Mr. Tekoah and his
ilk at the Arab people. We have our dignity. We respect the
dignity of all other human beings. But do not be mistaken;
nobody can solve this question except the Western Powers.
And do not blame the Soviet Union and its friends if they
want to come to the rescue of certain States. What would
have happened if there had been no Soviet Union? God
help us, what would have happened? You and the Zionists
would have had a holiday there, subjugating us as you
subjugated Africa and Asia in the nineteenth century. God
is great, and invisible. I am not talking of the traditional
God, the designer of the universe. The moral forces of the
universe, the law of retribution, the law of compensationall have their play. One does not have to believe in a certain
religion to discern that nothing which has been done and
which has injured a people can last for long.

165. Again, somebody here mentioned, and rightly, that
Palestine is becoming the arena of power politics for the
two super-Powers. But even if the super Powers were to
reach an understanding and to see to it that arms were
withheld from both sides, what about the future? For the
time being that might be a solution, but who could
guarantee that there would not be an irruption in the not
too distant future? Again we should be treating this
question in a way which would be like, as we say in Arabic,
treating a fever with poultices of watermelon rind. If you
put the rind of watermelon on the skin of a feverish man,
he may think he is relieved but the fever will come back
with a vengeance.

170. There is the law of retribution; and I am one who
would not like to see retribution, because this is not the
spirit that will bring about brotherhood amongst human
beings, amongst the human family. But this is how it goes.

166. This question should be treated radically and, from
my humble experience after having lived for forty-three
years with this question, may I suggest that those who
created Israel, in particular, re-examine the whole question.
States, like individuals, make mistakes. They cannot just
patch up such a mistake because, to quote the Biblical
proverb, it has become a tattered piece of cloth and YOU
cannot patch a tattered piece of cloth.

171. There can be no pursuit of peace, I repeat, in the
Middle East, whether through this Organization or by any
other avenues, unless the West realizes once and for aI1that
the exercise of tremendous power does not intimidate a
people. In Damascus in 1925, when I was a young man and
when the Mandatory Power was being fought, I remember
how a hundred men would draw lots in order to take a
battery; they had nothing but small ,arms. Then the
hundred would d.raw lots to see who would be in the centre
of those who were trying to capture that battery. The
battery was surrounded by a nest of machine guns; there
were two wings. That was before the Blitzkrieg of Hitler;
nobody then had heard of the house painter in Austria.
And then, valiantly, with heads high, knowing that they
were going to pay with their lives, they assaulted; those in
the middle were decimated but from the flanks a few were
saved and they took the battery from behind. Who was
fighting against those nationalists, who were called terrorists? Who, but our brothers from Senegal, soldiers from

167. To those who are wary because the Soviet Union has
come into the area-it is mentioned every day in the
newspapers here-1 would say that by your actions YOU
invited the Soviet Union to come to the area. Since the
days of the Czars Russia had been unable to go through the
Bosphorus. What if they come? They are an industrial
Power and one day they will probably start trading. They
are already trading with you and with Egypt, Syria, Iraq.
There is nothing wrong with that. The Western Powers have
far more economic interests in the area, but it shows the
visible and invisible Powers the Zionists wield that these
interests are being cast by the wayside.
168. What have we done to certain Western Powers? We
sell them oil at a fraction per barrel of what it costs them to
15

Senegal, That was in the colonial days when revolvers were
brandished and whips lashed them if they refused to shoot.
172. The spirit of the nationalists cannot be broken. Do
not for a moment entertain the thought that you can break
the spirit of the Palestinian people; they have awakened. I
was afraid about two or three years ago that it was a lost
cause. Algeria taught the whole world a great lesson.
Incidentally, it fell to me to write the complaint about
Algeria. One of their nationalists came to this city-none
other than Mr. M’hammed Yazid, who later became Minister of Information-and
I asked him how many troops the
Algerian fighters had at their disposal. He mentioned the
number of about 15,000 to 18,000. I said: “Then you are
losing; you are fighting a lost battle.” He said: “We hit and
run; we strike when we want. A million Algerians have been
wounded.”
Four hundred and fifty thousand trained
troops, valiant troops, were being fought by 15,000
Algerians, until that wise man came, General de Gaulle, and
placed his life in jeopardy-btcause in every country there
are people who do not want to relinquish what they
have-and finally assisted in the liberation of that country
which Mr, Tekoah tries to malign today. Thank God he has
no power; otherwise he would expel us all; anyone who did
not heed the Zionists would be expelled from the Organization. This gentleman, U Thant, our beloved SecretaryGeneral-his tongue is tied. He was the gentleman who
headed the committee for the liberation of Algeria in the
Afro-Asian group. He remembers that, when I was chairman
of the group, I would ask him and he would kindly come
with me to see the late Mr. Hammarskjold.
173. Where is the colonial Power now? And do you
consider Israel anything but a colonial movement, to
exploit not only the Arab countries, but the whole Middle
East? We say in Arabic: “The error of the clever is
compounded a thousandfold”. If the Jews had come freely
to Palestine because of religious sentiments, nobody would
have molested them. They would have lived there, traded,
brought their technology. And by Jove, by this time, they
would probably be dominating the Middle East. But they
wanted the banner of Israel to rally all the Jews in the
world. And the Jews in the world are happy where they
are . . . .
174. The PRESIDENT: Mr. Ambassador, I apologizP:with
great respect for interrupting you, In view of the lateness of
the hour, however, and in order to enable me to carry on
the business of the presidency in the best possible manner,
to plan for the work of the Council, I should appreciate it
very much if you, Mr. Ambassador, would find it possible
to indicate to me, just in a general way, the approximate
length of the remainder of your statement.
17.5. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I apologize if I have
perhaps taken more time than I should have. In fact, I was
0,~ the point of winding up my statement. The clock seems
to be staring at me and I noted that it was getting late.
However, I must mention to you, Sir, that Saudi Arabia has
never, during the twenty-three years of its membership,
sought a seat on the Council. We have kept aloof from
participating in the deliberations of this Council concerning
problems on which we have not arrogated to ourselves a
special knowledge. So if I have spoken today or on other

days at perhaps greater length than others unfamiliar with
the problem may have done, it is because I believe it my
duty to enlighten the members of the Council, many of
whom could be my sons for that matter or my brothers
who come from a different area.
176. But there will be other times when I shall continue
this debate. I realize that you have to have consultations
now. With your permission I shall resume my intervention
at some future date if I feel it necessary. Having said this, I
should say that I was winding up what I wanted to say. I
am sure you will grant me a minute or two and then you
can pursue your consultations, which I hope will be
fruitful. I was in fact winding up my statement. My train of
thought has been broken-n&
intentionally of course. I
must gather my thoughts and say that there shall be no
peace in the Middle East as long as the Palestinian people
are ignored; and, conversely, there shall be peace in the
Middle East if, as I mentioned during our last meeting, a
new approach is resorted to on the lines I suggested then
and which I shall elaborate during our next meeting, I hope,
with God’s will.
177. Allow me to thank you, Sir, and the members of the
Council for the generosity you have manifested towards the
representative of a small State who has tried to be objective
in this matter as much as it was humanly possible.
178. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Saudi Arabia very much for the accommodating attitude he
took to my question which was-1 wish to stress-only
a
question.
179. Lord CAR4DON
(United Kingdom): I had two
purposes in asking to be heard. One was to speak very
shortly on a theme which has been already dealt with in a
series of remarkable speeches this evening. I have in mind
particularly the outstanding speeches of the Ambassadors
of France, Ethiopia, Canada and Brazil. That theme is the
theme that in our effort to advance to a settlement we have
now reached-I think we all recognize this-a crisis of the
utmost consequence and urgency, and in the light of that
theme I wish to speak very shortly but presently to make a
suggestion as to our work.
180. I have a feeling-and I think that it is shared by many
members of the Council-an uneasy feeling that as far as the
advance to a peaceful settlement is concerned, it may well
be November or never. November last year was the month
of our unanimous agreement. We might look back on this
November as the month when the opportunity for a
peaceful settlement slipped beyond our reach. And at this
critical stage the most dangerous attitude of all, I would
respectfully suggest, is the attitude of mutual recrimination,
of accusation and counter-accusation, of an increase of
ill-feeling. I think it is necessary at this critical time that we
should all ask ourselves what we are here for. We are here
not merely to state opposing positions; we are here, we
trust, to make some contribution to a peaceful settlement;
we are here to try again to find agreement among ourselves.
Certainly it is true, as the Ambassador of Canada told us,
that it is the parties who carry the chief responsibility. But
all of us I believe would wish to make if we could some
contribution to restoring the peace and to making it

permanent. If the opportunities of this month escape us, we
shall look back at 1967 as the year when we agreed on an
honourable settlement and on 1968, as the year of failure,
as the year when we failed or were prevented from giving
effect to our own decisions. If we fail in 1968, then surely
1969 will be the year of retribution, the year when hate,
fear and hopelessness take full command, and when the
horror of another war becomes a terrible certainty.

co-operate with him in the matter. That being the case,
therefore, the proposal was rather surprising.
185. I am inclined to think that it would be preferable to
agree on a date which, according to my information, is
acceptable to the majority, that is, to hold the next meeting
on Thursday or Friday.
186. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): I did not wish
to put forward a formal proposal under the rules and
naturally would conform with the wishes of the Council as
a whole. If it could be understood-as
I think is the
suggestion now made to us by the Ambassador of the
Soviet Union-that
a date should be fixed but that we
would be free, of course in consultation with you, Sir, to
vary that date, then I should be perfectly content.

181. We know that there are discussions now proceeding,
which we trust will urgently continue, which may be
decisive; they are of overriding importance and we trust
that the Foreign Ministers who are engaged in those
discussions will give us in this Council the assistance that we
need to escape from the deadlock in which we find
ourselves. Surely, we should do nothing to impede or
interrupt those vital discussions. I therefore suggest to the
Council that we should today adjourn and meet again
whenever, after consultations under your direction, we
decide that the best time has come. I am not sure that it
would be well to attempt to continue immediately the
debate on which we are engaged; 1 believe that time might
well be provided for the discussions which we know are
proceeding at this time. It is surely the future that matters.
My suggestion, therefore, Sir, is that we should have the
opportunity of consulting amongst ourselves under your
leadership before we decide to continue the present debate.

187. The PRESIDENT: I may perhaps now inform the
Council in toto about my understanding of the consultations that we have carried on. I must admit that the picture
of those consultations was not exceedingly clear but it did
appear that there was a preference among members-and I
should say a strong preference-for
the fixing of a definite
date for the next meeting.
188. However, when it came to the problem of fixing that
date I found it somewhat difficult to ascertain a common
denominator. Some wanted Thursday, some Friday, some
in the morning, some in the afternoon. I wonder if, in those
circumstances, I might suggest that we fix our next meeting
for Thursday at 11 a.m., on the understanding that the
President will keep in touch with members with a view to
the eventual reconsideration,
with the consent of the
members, of the time fixed for the next meeting should
circumstances in the meantime so warrant.

182. That is the suggestion which I put forward as being
perhaps best suited to the needs of the present critical
situation.
183. The PRESIDENT: Members will have heard the point
of view just expressed by the representative of the United
Kingdom as to the timing of our next meeting on the
question on our agenda today. I have in my capacity as
President, as you will all know, consulted members on how
to pursue our consultations. I am somewhat in doubt
whether I should go straight ahead in telling about those
consultations I have carried on, or whether, in the light of
the points of view expressed by the representative of the
United Kingdom, there might be members of the Council
who might want to intervene at this stage.

189. Since I hear no objection,
members agree with that proposal.

I shall take it that

190. Before adjourning, I should like to draw the attention of the members to a letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral by the President of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea and circulated as document S/8883, submitting an
application for admission to membership in the United
Nations. I have contacted members of the Security Council
informally in that connexion and, as a result of those
consultations, I would suggest that a meeting be scheduled
for 11 a.m. on Wednesday, 6 November, in order to
consider the application.

184. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): The proposal by the United
Kingdom representative is somewhat unexpected, since I
had gathered that, following the President’s consultations,
the majority of members were inclined-or
so I was
informed-to fl the next meeting for Thursday or Friday.
That is quite a long delay, today being only Monday. If
consultations are possible on the substance of the question,
then the President would have an opportunity for holding
them, and the members of the Security Council would

191. As I hear no objection I shall take it that members
agree with that proposal also.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

17

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

mey
bookstore

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

SE PROCURER

be obtained
or write

ler publications
des Notions
Unies
sont
d&posit&es
du monde
entier.
Informer.vous
Nations
Unies, Section
des ventea, New York
HAH

IlOAY’IMTb

MBAAHMFl

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Soles
Section,

DES NATIONS

throughout
New York

UNIES

en vente
dons
les libroiries
et les agencer
aupr&r
de votre librairie
ou adrcrrez-vous
6:
ou Genitve.

OPTAHM3Al!WH

06bEAHHEHHblX

IiAlWfi

~h~~lllllll
O~W2W:lFtl~llll
&h,C~llllCllllLlX
Ih(llil
~,O;lillO IiylIllTL
R 1<llll;lillLlX
~I~~fl31lll~X
iII'CIITI'TIIPS
110 l3i'CS ~~t~fiOll~S ~111~~~. &.llO~llTC
Nlpanlill
06 lI:l,!(~llllll.S
II IlElIlI~~f lillllilillOY
HUtl:lll?IC
11.711 IlllIllllTC
II0 ll@N'l':
Opannaar~n~
06~e,uimiirdx
IIar~~ril. Cetiun~
UjJOJ%liC
lIC#lllllii,
IILNJ-rIOl)Ii
lI.lll JIfA3llCIlLL
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Los publicaciones
de 1-x Naciones
Unides
est6n
en todor
porter
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventor,
Nuevo
York o Ginebro.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price: $U.S. OSOior

NACIONES

uo

UNIDAS

en vento en librerias
y cosos dirtribuidorar
o dirijase
o: Nocioner
Unidat.
Sect&

equivalent

II

in other

currencies)

de

35003-October

1972-2,050
