RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
FROM 20 FEBRUARY TO 13 MARCH 1959 1

1349 (XIII). The future of the Trust Territory
of the Cameroons under French administration

that there will be general elections after independence
since such elections will then be necessary and useful
in order to settle various constitutional and other
questions,
Na ting the resolution adopted by the Legislative Assembly of the Cameroons on 24 October 1958, the conclusions of the Visiting Mission and the declarations
of the Administering Authority and the representatives
of the Cameroons Government concerning the desire and
readiness of the people of the Cameroons for independence,
Taking into account the declarations of the Administering Authority and the Government of the Cameroons
under French administration that the Territory will
become completely independent on 1 January 1960, and
the assurances given by the representative of France
that his Government will sponsor the application that
will thereupon be made by the Government of the
Cameroons to be admitted to membership of the United
Nations,
Having heard the views of the petitioners,
l. Resolves, in agreement with the Administering
Authority, that, on 1 January 1960, when the Cameroans under French administration becomes independent,
the Trusteeship Agreement approved by the General
Assembly on 13 December 1946 shall cease to be in
force in accordance ½;th Article 76 b of the Charter of
the United Nations;
. 2. Expresses its confidence that, at the earliest possible date after the attainment of independence on
1 January 1960, elections will be held for the formation
of a new assembly which should take decisions regarding
the establishment, in their final form, of the institutions
of the free and independent Cameroons;
3. Recommends that, upon the attainment of independence on I January 1960, the Cameroons under
French administration shall be admitted to membership
of the United :-J ations according to Article 4 of the
Charter.

The General Assembly,
Reca/.ling its resolution 1282 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 requesting the Trusteeship Council to examine, as
early as possible during the twenty-third session, the
reports of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Trust Territories in West Africa, 1958, on the Cameroons under French administration and the Cameroons
under united Kingdom administration, and to transmit
them, with its observations and recommendations, to the
General Assembly not later than 20 February 1959, to
enable the Assembly, in consultation with the Administering Authorities, to take the necessary measures in connexion with the full attainment of the objectives of the
Trusteeship System,
Having examined the special report of the Trusteeship
Council,2 as well as the report of the Visiting Mission
on the Cameroons under French administration 3 and
the observations of the Administering Authority on it,•
Taking into account the statements made in the Fourth
Committee by the representatives of the Administering
Authority and by the Prime Minister of the Cameroons
under French administration,11
Noting with satisfaction the adoption by the Legislative
Assembly of the Cameroons under French administration of the amnesty law of 14 February 1959 and the
assurances given by the Prime Minister of the Cameroons that this law is being put into effect on the
widest possible basis and with the least possible delay,
Noting the statements of the representatives of the
Cameroons Government that it welcomes the return of
all Cameroonians who in recent years have left the
country and invites them to re-enter normal life without
fear of reprisal,
Having been assured by the representatives of the
Administering Authority and the Government of the
Cameroons that there exist in the Territory freedom
of the Press, of assembly and of political association,
and othe.r fundamental freedoms,
Having been informed by the Prime Minister of the
Cameroons under French administration that his Government has issued a decree fixing 12 April 1959 as
the date for elections to be held to fill the four seats in
the Legislative Assembly allocated to the SanagaMaritime area, as well as two vacant seats in the Mbouda
subdivision,
Noting wi,th satisfaction the statement of the Prime
Minister of the Cameroons under French administration

794th plenary meeting,

13 March 1959.
1350 (XIII). The future of the Trust Territory
of the Cameroons under United Kingdom
administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1282 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 requesting the Trusteeship Council to examine, as
3 C!fficial Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twenty-third
Se.man, Supplement No. 3 (T/1441) documents T/1427 and
T /1434.
'
. 4 Official Records of _the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/4094, annex III.
5 See Official Records of the General Assembly Thirteenth
Session, Fourth Committee, 845th, 846th 849th' 860th and
871st meetings.
'
'

1 Resolutions adopted on the report of the Fourth Committee.
For the text of the report, see Official Records of the General
Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/4095.
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Sessio,i, Annexes, agenda item 13, document A/4094.

1

z

General Asaembly-Thirt-nth Sea.I-

early as possible during the twenty-third session, the
reports of the United Nations Visiting Mission to
Trust Territories in West Africa, 1958, on the Cameroons under French administration and the Cameroons
under United Kingdom administration, and to transmit
them, with its observations and recommendations, to the
General Assembly not later than 20 February 1959,
to enable the Assembly, in consultation with the Administering Authorities, to take the necessary measures in
connexion with the full attainment of the objectives of
the Trusteeship System,
Havi,,.g examined, in consultation with the Administering Authority, the special report of the Trusteeship
Council,2 as well as the report of the Visiting Mission
•on the Cameroons under United Kingdom administration, 6
Noting the statements made in the Fourth Committee
by the representatives of the Administering Authority,
by the Premier of the Southern Cameroons, by the
Leader of the Opposition in the Southern Cameroons
House of Assembly, and by the Minister for Northern
Cameroons Affairs in the Government of the Northern
Region of Nigeria,7

1. Recommends that the Administering Authority,
in pursuance of Article 76 b of the Charter of the
United Nations, take steps, in consultation with a
United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner, to organize,
under the supervision of the United Nations, separate
plebiscites in the northern and southern parts of the
Cameroons under United Kingdom administration, in
order to ascertain the wishes of the inhabitants of the
Territory concerning their future ;
2. Recommends further that in the northern part of
the Territory the plebiscite should take place about the
middle of November 1959, that the people of the
northern part of the Territory should be asked :
" (a) Do you wish the Northern Cameroons to
be part of the Northern Region of Nigeria when the
Federation of Nigeria becomes independent?
or
" ( b) Are you in favour of deciding the future of
the Northern Cameroons at a later date?"
41 Official Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twrnt:y-third
Session, Supplement No. 2 (T /1440), documents T /1426 and

Add.I.

and that the plebiscite should be conducted on the basis
of the electoral register at present being compiled for
the elections to the Federal House of Representatives;
3. Recommends further that the plebiscite in the
southern part of the Territory should be conducted during
the next dry season between the beginning of December
1959 and the end of April 1960;
4. Decides that the two alternatives to be put to
the people of the southern part of the Territory and
the qualifications "for voting in the plebiscite there should
be considered by the General Assembly at its fourteenth
session;
5. Expresses the hope that all concerned in the Territory will endeavour to reach agreement before the
opening of the fourteenth session of the General Assembly on the alternatives to be put in the plebiscite
in the Southern Cameroons and the qualifications for
voting in it ;
6. Decides to appoint a United Nations Plebiscite
Commissioner who shall exercise, on behalf of the General Assembly, all the necessary powers and functions
of supervision, and who shall be assisted by observers
and staff to be appointed by the Secretary-General in
consultation with him ;
7. Requests the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner to submit to the Trusteeship Council a report in
two parts on the organization, conduct and results of the
plebiscites, the first part of the report, which shall deal
with the northern part of the Territory, to be submitted
in time for transmission to the General Assembly for
consideration before the end of its fourteenth session;
8. Requests the Trusteeship Council to transmit to
it the reports of the United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner, together with any recommendations and observations it considers necessary.

794th plenary meeting,
13 March 1959.

*

* *
At its 794th ple11arv meeting, on 13 March 1959, the General
Assembly, voting by secret ballot, elected Jfr. Djalal Abdoh
( Iran) United Nations Plebiscite Commissioner.
7 See Official Records of the (;eneral Assembly, Thirteenth
Session, Fourth Ccnnmitter, 846th, 847th, 849th and 850th
meetings.
