THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR
rd

MEETING:

NEW

13 APRIL

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2003)

Adoption

of the agenda

. . .. . . . , , , .. ,. . . . .. . . , . . . , . , . .

. , . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the People’s Republic of
Benin established under resolution 404 (1977) (S/ 12294 and Add. 1) . . . . . .

S/PV.2003

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2003RD

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,

13 April 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
2. The PRESIDENi (interpretation from Spanish): In
addition, I wish to inform membersof the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Mozambique in which he requeststo be allowed to participate in
the debate on the question on the agenda.ConsequentlyI
propose, in accordance with past practice and with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the debate, without the right to vote, under
the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisionalrulesof procedure.

President: Mr. Simon Albert0 CONSALVI (Venezuela).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2003)
1. Adoption of the agenda

3. In view of the limited number of placesavailableat the
Council table, I invite the above-mentionedrepresentative
to take the placereservedfor him at the sideof the Council
chamberon the usual understandingthat he will be invited
to take a place at the Council table whenever he wishesto
addressthe Council.

2. Complaint by Benin:
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add. 1)
The meeting was called to order at 1I. 05 a. m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. J, C Lobo
(Mozambi@te) took the place reservedfor him at the side
of the Council chamber.

Adoption of the agenda

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
first speakeris the representative of Mauritania, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Benin
Report of the Security Council Special Mission to the
People’s Republic of Benin established under resolution
404 (1977) (S/12294 and Add.l)*

5. Mr. KANE (Mauritania) (interpretation j?om French):
Mr. President,first of all I shouldlike to perform a pleasant
duty and extend to you my warm congratulationson your
assumptionof the presidency of the Security Council for
April. Those important responsibilities have fortunately
been entrusted to you at a time when the world, and Africa
in particular, is facing many distressingproblemsof which
we are aware, and needsaman of your wisdom,experience
and talent to guide the proceedingsofthe Council towards
success,The high sense of responsibility we know YOU
possess
guaranteessuccessfor the Council.

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decisions previously taken by the
Council, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Botswana,
Cuba, Egypt, Gabon, Guinea, the Ivory Coast, the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Madagascar, Mauritania,
Morocco, Niger, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia and Togo
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. F: K. BouayadAgha (Algeria), Mr. M. Modisi (Botswana), Mr. L. Gomez
Anzardo (Cuba), Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr- L.
WDong (Gabon), Mr. M. S. chmara (Guinea), Mr. S. Ake
(Ivory Coast), Mr. K Sourinho (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic), Mr. 0. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. M Kune
(Mauritania), Mr. A. Bengelloun (Morocco), Mr. J. Poisson
(Niger), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr, M. Fall
(Senegal), Mr. A. H Hussen (Somalia) and Mr. A. A.
Kodjovi (Togo) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
-.

6. Without doubt, this year Africa has been one of the
continents of greatest concern to the international community. That concern has of course loomed large in the
activities of the United Nations and the Security Council.
7. The question being consideredtoday by the Council,
and t.he many problems it has had to deal with sincethe
beginning of the year, are so many signsunfortunately
revealing the profound and difficult crisis through which
Africa is passing.However, for more than 17 years, the
African continent has set an example, not only in termsof
stability and homogeneity but also, and above all, because
of the wisdomthat has marked the political options of its

* Subsequently issued as Official Records of the Security Council,
Thirty-Second Year, Special Supplement No. 3 (S/12294/Rev.l).

1

States. The unitary vision of the continent and the common
destiny of the African peoples have made it possible to
protect Africa from the contradictions that are rending our
world and to thwart the numerous attempts at colonial
reconquest of Africa.

The policy of colonial reconquest through the use of
mercenaries each day threatens the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of young States and in the
long term is liable, because of its ill effects, to create a
climate prejudicial to international peace and security.

8. It was that unfailing solidarity that made it possible in
1963, in the ex-Belgian Congo, now the Republic of Zaire,
to thwart the forces of colonial reconquest led by the
notorious Schramm. That active solidarity also enabled the
Federal Republic of Nigeria to preserve its unity by
thwarting the Biafran secession. The unity of the African
continent has made it possible also for the Republic of
Egypt and the Arab countries to put an end to the
expansionist ambitions of international Zionism. Those
indissoluble links were demonstrated when the Republic of
Guinea, the Republic of Uganda and the Republic of
Zambia were the victims of invasions financed and conducted by Powers from outside Africa. These are so many
examples which prove, if proof were necessary, that Africa
has always been able to restore its unity and solidarity
when any of its States has been the victim of aggression.

12. If such a dangerous and tragic situation has hitherto
prevailed in Africa, and if the forces of colonial reconquest
have not been disarmed, it is because they still succeed in
recruiting throughout the world hired killers greedy for
spectacular action and sometimes for power. The events at
Cotonou eloquently demonstrated the monstrous nature of
the invasion, the objective of which was to re-enslave the
people of Benin.
13. As a result of the aggression against Benin, the
Security Council, we are sure, will be able, together with
the international community, to undertake effective action
against mercenaries, whose activity in Africa and elsewhere
constitutes a genuine threat to international peace and
security.
14. A moment ago I said that what was now happening in
Africa was of concern for more than one reason. Many of
the statements we have heard in this Council, particularly
those of African delegations, unfortunately faithfully
reflect the conflicts which are undermining the African
continent. We are among those who continue to believe
that the internal problems of Africa, however urgent and
serious they may be, should in no way be allowed to go
beyond the African framework,
Effective institutions
already exist to find for each problem of our continent a
solution that would preserve friendship and the higher
interests of the African peoples.

9. If that unity has made it possible to safeguard some of
the fundamental interests of the African peoples, it has
none the less not discouraged those who, in subtle and
varied ways, have continued to attempt to reconquer the
immense wealth of the African continent. The events of 16
January 1977 at Cotonou, capital of the People’s Republic
of Benin, were a demonstration
that enabled us to
understand both the grave threat to small countries and the
infinitely dangerous international consequences which acts
of that kind may involve. The date of 16 January 1977
could have been a fatal one for the people of Benin and a
tragedy for all African peoples if the courage, determination and high level of mobilization of the people of
Cotonou had not succeeded in overcoming the cleverly
conceived aggression the objective of which was, without
any doubt, that of overthrowing the present Benin regime.
Such a flagrant intervention in the internal affairs of Benin,
an independent and sovereign State, is reprehensible in
every respect because of the ill effects it causes and the
suffering and misfortune it imposed upon the people of
Benin.

15. Although this meeting of the Security Council has
been called-as it had to be in view of the origins of the
aggression-certain
aspects of the question before the
Council should be dealt with exclusively among Africans. A
consensus to that effect was, incidentally, arrived at by the
African Group at the United Nations. It ,is regrettable that,
after so much effort, discordant notes should have been
sounded, calling into question the spirit of unity and
solidarity demonstrated by the African Group.

10. The people of Mauritania, its party and Government
did not fail to manifest their militant solidarity with the
Benin people and Government from the very outset of the
aggression. This solidarity of the Mauritanian people was
reiterated by Comrade Hamdi Ould Mouknass, Minister for
Foreign Affairs, at the meeting of the OAU Council of
Ministers held at Lome last February. The active support of
the Mauritanian people for the people of Benin originates in
the profound links of friendship and fraternity which have
so long united Mauritania and Benin. The losses of Benin
were very deeply felt in Mauritania, and the tragedy which
affected the people of Benin was shared by the whole
Mauritanian people.

16. In this respect we regret that, in spite of the
information contained in the report of the Security Council
Mission, Benin deemed fit to communicate to the Council a
report that has had the effect of checking the momentum
of solidarity we had been patiently building with regard to
the aggression at Cotonou. The grave charges
. _.made.--by the
Benin Government against certain African heads of State
and the particularly virulent character of those accusations
constitute a distressing precedent the consequences of
which will affect relations among African States for a long
time to come.
17. However that may be, we do not understand why our
brothers in Benin chose to adopt this attitude, which, in
every respect, is prejudicial to the cause we defend,
damaging to the relations of brotherhood which have so
long united the people of Benin with its neighbours, and
fatal to the sacred unity of the African continent, Indeed,
neither the report of the Security Council Mission, nor’the

Il. The acts of vandalism and the odious crimes committed in Benin by the forces of invasion and the
mercenaries in their pay constitute a sufficiently eloquent
warning for the international community to contemplate,
here and now, effective measures to put an end to this evil.
.
2

documents identified by the Mission, still less the state.
ments of a mercenary, appear to be sufficient to constitute
irrefutable proof of the charges against the incriminated
African States.

21. Africa should therefore reflect on the events in Benin
in order to overcome its weaknesses. The health of the
peoples of Africa depends on their unity and solidarity.
22. If we have too often accused imperialism, we should
recognize, for the good of our continent, that there is
another form of intervention in the internal affairs of
Africa which is as dangerous and as fraught with consequences as the threat posed to Africa by imperialism. We
too often forget that, while we have driven out the hyena
by the front door, we have unfortunately allowed the tiger
to slip in by the back door.

18. Certain members of the Mission at least had the
candour to recognize this. AS proof, I need cite only the
following statement made by our brother Mansur ~~a
after the visit by the Mission to Cotonou:
“Our terms of reference and the time available to us did
not enable 11s to verify the authenticity of the
documents.”

23. The various political somersaults that we have been
witnessing in southern Africa and the tragic situation now
prevailing in the Republic of Zaire are eloquent testimony
to the new threat hanging over Africa. We fear that
tomorrow the defence of the higher interests of Africa may
give way to the benefits of belonging to a given bloc.

He said also:
“Our mandate was not to determine responsibility or to
make recommendations, but to examine the facts, It was
a fact-finding mission,,”
Those statements are clear and sufficient; they spare me the
necessity of making a detailed analysis of the report of the
Mission.

24. Despite the particularly alarming situation in Africa,
we remain optimistic. As was said so well by Comrade
Moktar Ould Daddah, President of the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania:

19. The representative of one African delegation said
yesterday here that the statements of the mercenary Bti
Alpha Oumarou were valid because they had been made in
complete freedom. If such a procedure is to be adopted by
the Council and if any statement made by any so-called
mercenary is to be considered as a piece of basic evidence in
a case, then we have to say here and now that a gloomy
future faces international relations. Mercenaries are nothing
more or less than stateless agents attracted by greed; their
essential role is to destroy the countries in which they
operate, from the point of view both of internal equilibrium and of relations between those countries and the
neighbouring States. The simplistic accusations made by the
mercenary BL Alpha against certain African States are
instructive in that respect.

“What is happening in various parts of Africa should
incline us towards deep pessimism, but we continue to
have confidence in man’s better nature.”
25. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
26. Mr. GOMEZ ANZARDO (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, and all the members
of the Council for allowing my delegation to participate in
this important debate on the wanton, indescribable aggression perpetrated against the fraternal people of the People’s
Republic of Benin on 16 January last in the capital of
Benin, Cotonou.
27. As we take a place at the Council table, we are filled
with joy at seeing the representative of a fraternal Latin
American country, Venezuela-which gave America and
mankind Simon Bolivar, the Liberator-occupying the
Chair of the Council for this month.

20. It would appear as if, for sonic people, the events in
Benin were a long-awaited opportunity, which made it
possible for them to conjure up old demons. The disconcerting rapidity with which Gabon, Senegal, the 1~0~’
Coast, Togo and Morocco have been placed in the dock is
sufficient proof that some people are doing everything in
their power to discredit others by means of the events in
Benin. We regret that such attempts should have succeeded
to such a point as to give the debates in the Security
Council the acrimonious nature we have witnessed in recent
days. We do not believe,’ for our part-and the facts furnish
eloquent proof of this-that
the countries I have just
mentioned could have organized, financed or even facilitated, closely or remotely, an active aggression against the
people
of Benin. The ties of brotherhood and blood that
unite the people of Benin and the peoples of those
countries do not permit of such a hostile attitude, an
attitude with such serious consequences for Benin. We
continue to think that the confessions of the mercenary Ba
Alpha are part of a huge plan whose purpose is to worsen
relations between Benin and its neighbours and to Pit
- African States against other African States.

28. In 1889, in the magazineLa Edud de Ore, dedicated to
children and youth in America and the rest of the world,
Jose Marti, the great man of the Cuban revolution during
the war of independence against Spanish colonialism, the
intellectual author and guide of the second revolutionary
process that gave our people its total and complete
sovereignty and liberation from imperialism and reaction
under the leadership of my President, Comrade Fidel
Castro, wrote the following for future generations, in
reference to the example of Bolivar:
“While there are many men without dignity, there are
others who have within them the dignity of many men.
They are the ones who fight with tremendous force
against those who have robbed the peoples of their
freedom, who have robbed men of their dignity. Those
3

and reaction, attacked the capital, Cotonou, violating the
sovereigntyand territorial integrity of Benin and causing
deathsand considerablematerial damage.

men are sacred: Bolivar of Venezuela: San Martin of Rio
de la Plata; Hidalgo of Mexico.
“He liberated Venezuela and New Granada. He liberated Ecuador. He liberated Peru. He founded a new
nation: Bolivia. He won great battles with barefoot and
half naked soldiers, The generals fought at his side with
supernatural courage. They were an army of young men.
No one has ever fought more or better for freedom in the
world. Bolivar waged a great struggle for the right of man
to self-government, but even more for America’s right to
freedom. He died poor, but left a family of nations. It is
said that a traveller reached Caracas one day at dusk and,
without even shaking the dust off his clothes, without
finding out where he could eat or sleep, he asked where
the statue of Bolivar was. And it is said that the traveller,
alone, with only the tall, sweet-smelling trees to keep him
company, stood and cried before the statue, which
seemed to be moving, like a father who has just seen his
son. That was only natural, because all Americans should
love Bolivar as they would love their father. They should
love Bolivar and all those who fought as he did to make
America the continent of Americans. All of them, from
the most famous hero to the common foot-soldier, the
unknown hero.”

33. The People’sRepublic of Benin is bounded in the
north by Niger, in the north-west by Upper Volta, in the
west by Togo, in the south by the Gulf of Guineaandin
the eastby Nigeria. It has3 million inhabitants; there are
46 ethnic groups in the country, the main onesbeingthe
Fons, Yorubas, Ajas, Baribas, Sombasand Peulhs; the
official languageis French, but a number of dialectsare
spoken.Benin is fundamentally a rural country; about 85
per cent of the people live in the countryside. Palmoil is
the most important product in the economy, although
someeffort is beingmadeby the Government of President
Kdrekou to promote industrial activity. Transnationaloil
companies,suchasShell, British Petroleum,Texaco, Mobil,
Agip, Depp and others, have been nationalized. The
country coversan areaof 112,622 squarekilometres,The
capitalis Cotonou.
34. On 26 October 1972, the army, under Lheleadership
of Mr. KbrCkou, put an end to the shamefulsituation of
exploitation, poverty and discrimination suffered by the
former colony of the Kingdom of Dahomey, whose
republicanstatus wasdeclaredin 1958, and which became
independantof France on 1 August 1960. I passover the
longstrugglethat waswagedagainstthe colonial system.

29. Our countries, Cuba and Venezuela, have indissoluble
links with the fraternal countries of Latin America and the
Caribbean, to which we are bound by geography, history
and the struggle against the common enemy. We share
yearnings for progress and social change in the struggle for
economic development and greater culture. We are bound
by ties of international solidarity with the countries of the
third world, against any form of exploitation and discrimination on the part of peoples and countries.

35. Under the leadershipof the National Council of the
Revolution Benin adopted a new course.The Councilwas
madeup of representativesof the army, union leadersand
youth and women’s organizations. In a short time the
internal and external policies of the country were completely transformed.The Government, presidedover by the
young official Kerekou, broke off ties with the reactionary
regimes,including thoseof Rhodesiaand South Africa, and
decidedto promote co-operationwith progressiveGovernments of the area-Guinea, Algeria and others-and to
expandrelationswith the socialistcountries.

30. Mr. President, my delegation appreciates the noble
gesture of solidarity by your President, Carlos Andres
Perez, and his Government and people in connexion with
the brutal act of terrorism perpetrated against a civilian
aircraft, in flight, with 73 persons on board, including 57
Cubans, who were the victims of mercenaries and imperialism. The perpetrators are now being tried by the
Venezuelanauthoritiesundertheir judicial processes.

36. After nearly a century of colonial dominationand11
years of a republican regime under the influence of
foreigners,the presentPeople’sRepublic of Benin found
ways and meansof recovering its dignity. The courseof
socialistdevelopmentwhich waschosenfor the reconstruction and rehabilitationof the country hasnot beenimmune
to acts of aggressionand danger from colonialistsand
otherswho opposethe nation’sbest interests.

31. We wanted to makethosegeneralreferencesto a few
of our great heroesin America becausetheir idealsand
principles are still valid in the,strugglebeingwagedtoday
by mankind, and their causesareappropriatelyreflectedin
the Charter of the United Nations. Also, this providesus
with an opportunity to tell you, Mr. President,a distinguishedson of the land of Bolivar, of our conviction that,
with your experience,reputation and talents, your record
as a fighter and your well-knownideals,the work of the
Council under your presidencyduring the month of April
will be successfullycompleted.

37. On 30 November 1974, before the peoplegatheredin
Yabro Square,at Abomey-an ancient site evocative Of a
magnificentculture and resistanceto foreign dominationPresidentKerekou proclaimedthe building of a new society
basedon the principles of scientific socialism.On that
occasion,the secondanniversary of the triumph of the
movementwhich brought PresidentKBrBkou to the leader32. My delegationsupportsthe complaintput forward by
ship of the country, he denounced infiltration of the
the representative of the People’sRepublic of Benin, NationalCouncil of the Revolution by reactionary elements
Comrade Boya, on behalf of the peopleand the Revolu- whosemissionwasto curb the country’s political develop
tionary Military Governmentof Benin,headedby President ment. He also announcedthe need to changethe Council
KCrekou, about the act of aggression
of which his country
into a revolutionary political party. The next year, in a
was a victim on 16 January, an act committed by
campaigndesignedto recover the nation’s resources,to
mercenarieswho, supportedby international imperialism nationalize the former monopolies and to make certain
4

administrative reforms in accordance with the new objet.
tives, the Party of the People’s Revolution of Benin was
created; its objective was to promote an understanding of
its ideology and to mobilize the masses so that they might
fulfi their historic destiny.

“The continued provocations against Angola, Mozambique, Zambia and other African countries, the resump
tion of unbridled repression by the racist regimes against
peoples whom they subrugate and the recruitment and
deployment of mercenaries by the agencies of imperialism
are a threat to the whole of independent Africa, a threat
which must be countered by energetic and effective
action.” [1999th meeting, pam. 25.1

38. 1 have given a brief review of the politico-social
background of the People’s Republic of Benin, because,
together with the historic victories of the heroic peoples of
Viet-Nti,
‘Cambodia and Laos in their just’ wars for
national and social liberation, the achievement of independence by the fighting peoples of Guinea-Bissau, Cape
Verde, Mozambique and Angola, and the irrevocable
existence of socialism in Cuba-the first socialist country in
America-it
confirms that the main characteristic of our
time is the revolutionary movement from capitalism to
socialism, in which the general crisis of capitalism and
imperialism is being exacerbated, the colonial system is*
collapsing and neocolonialism is doomed to perish.

43. In the light of the facts which have been analysed
during the debate and the documents made available to the
Council, my delegation would like to emphasize that the
aggression committed against the People’s Republic of
Benin, as well as similar acts of aggression committed earlier
against other African peoples which, after their struggle for
liberation and sovereignty, had made fundamental social,
political and economic changes, in furtherance of the
interests of their respective peoples and to combat foreign
exploitation, clearly show the complicity of the reactionary
regimes which, as part of a strategy for carrying out an
imperialist offensive in that part of Africa, are committing
acts of aggression of various kinds against brother countries
struggling for independence.

39. In the face of this irreversible historical movement, the
desperate reaction of international imperialism and reactionary forces takes the form of violation of the peace and
sovereignty of peoples, as it did in Benin, and of undermining the provisions of international law and of the
conventions and the Charter of the United Nations, so as to
put a brake on the revolution in Africa which is sweeping
through its jungles and forests seeking the redemption of
that continent that has suffered slavery, discrimination and
exploitation, and so as to bring Africa once more under the
yoke of colonialism and to transform it once more into a
source of raw materials and wealth.

44. The case of Benin is the latest link of that strategy of
international imperialism, and the repeated tactic of the use
of mercenaries is an alarming matter which obliges the
international community, and the organs of the United
Nations in particular, to take appropriate action against the
ugly weapon of mercenary activity, which is conspiring
against the peace, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States and flagrantly violating the principles of the Charter.
45. Because of the continuous acts of aggression by
mercenary commandos against the peoples which have
thrown off the bonds of imperialism and colonialism, many
countries now feel that the time has come to reveal the
scope and the importance on the world scene, of aggression
by mercenaries and to eradjcate it once and for all by
means of an international convention which should shortly
be prepared to combat the use of mercenaries.

40. My delegation has considered very carefully the report
of the Security Council Special Mission, established under
resolution 404 (1977), which went to the Republic of
Benin and carried out an exhaustive investigation into the
events which took place in the capital of Cotonou, on 16
January last. We shall not go into the voluminous and
well-documented report in detail because other representatives have already done so, but we should like to say that
the statement made, the evidence provided and proof
submitted are in harmony with the conclusions of the
Special Mission. They provide valuable information in
helping to define the aggression, to identify those directly
responsible and to describe the strategy of international
imperialism and reaction and their use of mercenaries to
commit acts of aggression against those who are fighting for
a better life by freeing themselves from colonialism,
neocolonialism, exploitation, dependence, discrimination
and underdevelopment.

46. Neither cunning nor hypocrisy, neither the way in
which mercenaries are used nor the campaign of the
imperialist press to mask its misdeeds can hide the hand of
imperialist and reactionary aggression in the case before US.
47, The people of the People’s Republic of Benin and all
the peoples of Africa and the world which have liberated
themselves and taken the path of sovereignty and well-being
for their masses have and will always have the wide and
firm support of the socialist and non-aligned countries and
the international progressive movement.

41. My delegation wishes to praise and congratulate the
members of the Special Mission for the work they have
done: its Chairman, Ambassador Illueca, from the fraternal
people of Panama, Ambassador Mansur Kikhia from Libya
and Mr. Ramesh Mulye of India. We feel that they have
produced an honest, valid and valuable report of great
usefulness which will help the Council in adopting a wise
and just resolution.

48. My delegation congratulates the people of Benin, the
Party of the People’s Revolution, the National Council of
the Revolution and the Revolutionary Military GOwnment
headed by President KtSrekou because, in the face of
aggression by imperialist and reactionary mercenaries, they
fought valiantly and routed the enemy, thus contributing to
the defence of the reign of justice, peace and the
sovereignty of peoples.

42. The head of my delegation, Comrade Ambassador
Alar&n, in his statement to the Council on 31 March last
during the debate on sanctions against South Africa, said:

49. ln view of the abundant proof provided by the report
of the Special Mission and the facts contained in the report
5

of the Government of the People’s Kepublic of Benin, and
in view of the undoubted aim of the armed aggression
carried out by mercenaries guided and armed outside the
territory of Benin with the obvious participation of
international imperialism and reactionary forces to overthrow a legally constituted Government, I wish, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation, to call upon the Security
Council, over which you are presiding, to adopt, without
any further delay, an appropriate resolution condemning all
those responsible for armed aggression, in order once and
for all to put an end to punitive incursions by mercenaries
against the peoples of Africa and of the world which have
chosen to build their own future. Also, appropriate
measures must be adopted in order that compensation may
be paid consonant with the material damages caused, as
requested by the Government and the people of Benin.

ingsf, dealt ably and in depth with its important aspects.
We should merely like, at this point, to reiterate what the
Chairman of the Mission said while introducing the report,
namely, that the conclusions contained in paragraphs
141.145 of the report represent unanimous agreement on
the part of the members of the Mission. We believe that in
establishing the facts concerning the events that occurred at
Cotonou on 16 January, the Mission carried’ out its task
objectively and in a businesslike manner. Its findings are
now before us and it is for the Council, the highest organ of
the United Nations, to address itself to the points arising
out of the Mission’s report and to arrive at an appropriate
decision.
55. We share with the representative of France [2001st
meeting] the expectation and the hope that the Council
will examine the report in a calm and objective manner, for,
if it were to adopt any other method in doing SO,it would
merely serve to distract us from our common goal. We are
happy to note that, so far, all the participants in the debate
have been unanimous in condemning the events of 16
January and in avoiding acrimony and polemics, occasional
bursts of passionate defence of respective points of view
notwithstanding.

50. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
thank the representative of Cuba for his references to the
Liberator Simcin Bolivar, the ideologist and precursor of
the struggle of our peoples, and JosC Marti, Hidalgo and
San Martin. 1 thank him also for what he said about
President PCrez and the cordial relations between Cuba and
Venezuela, and, of course, for the kind words he addressed
to me personally.

56. As we have noted, the report raises a number of
important issues. One of them concerns the personnel
constituting the attacking force which landed at Cotonou
on 16 January, We are heartened to note the assurance of
the representative of France that an investigation, in
accordance with the internal laws of France, is already in
progress concerning the points arising out of the documentation mentioned in the report. We were equally
gratified to note from the statement of the representative
of Senegal (ibid] that his Government had also undertaken
to investigate the case of Bb Alpha Oumarou, the prisoner
captured by the Benin forces from among the fleeing
attacking force on 16 January. Other States in a position to
throw any light on any of the events or personnel
mentioned in the report would do well to supply the
Council with such information as would help us fully to
unravel the mystery of that unfortunate event. Cries of
outrage and injured innocence might prove tempting but
they are no substitute for a responsible and constructive
approach dictated by objective considerations.

51. Mr. HASHMI (India): Mr. President, first of all we
should like to extend our warmest felicitations to you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April, We are confident that, in carrying
out your tasks, you will display the wisdom, far.sightedness
and dignity which all of us have come to associate with
your person and which, indeed, you have been displaying. I
need hardly add that this high honour conferred on you,
the representative of Venezuela, a country with which we
have the friendliest relations, gives us added joy.
52. We should also like to express our appreciation for the
manner in which Ambassador Young of the United States
presided over our deliberations in the month of March. In
the short time he has been here, he has already given
irrefutable proof of his courage, competence and clarity of
vision. We wish him ail success in his term as Permanent
Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations.
53. My country had the privilege of being selected as a
member of the fact-finding Mission which the Security
Council sent to the People’s Republic of Benin in pursuance
of its resolution 404 (1977). We should like to place on
record our appreciation for the leadership and sagacity of
the Chairman of the Special Mission, Ambassador Illueca of
Panama, and the spirit of team work displayed by him and
Ambassador Kikhia of Libya. We are happy to have had
that opportunity of making our modest contribution in the
furtherance of a cause which is vitally important for a
number of small developing countries. I should also like to
take this opportunity to thank all those who were good
enough to say generous words about my colleague, Mr. Ramesh Mulye, a member of the Mission.

57. In our opinion, any decision the Council arrives at
should have the following elements.
58. First, it should unequivocally condemn the act of
aggression to which the People’s Republic of Benin was
subjected on 16 January.
59. Secondly, it should reaffirm the Council’s abhorrence
of mercenaries who attack small, defenceless countries
which want to be allowed to pursue their development in
conditions of peace and harmony. In the past, the Council
has adopted resolutions condemning the use of mercenaries.
However, that has deterred neither their use nor their
activities in conflicts, particularly in Africa. Perhaps the
time has now come for us to contemplate prohibiting,
under our individual domestic laws, the recruitment and use
of mercenaries, as well as assistance to them in any form.
We are convinced that only concerted action on the part of

54. In so far as the report of the Special Mission is
concerned, the representatives of Panama and Libya have,
in their respective statements [ZOOOth and 2002nd meet6

the comity of nations can be of any value and effect if we
are sincerely to try and curb that menace.

66. While pointing out in its report’that
“the terms of its mandate, as well as the time available at
its disposal for its implementation, did not permit it to
investigate further and verify the testimony of the
prisoner pertaining to these matters”
[SfI2294,
para. 1451,

60. Thirdly, Benin has suffered extensive damage as a
result of that unprovoked armed aggression which so
blatantly violated its sovereignty and territorial integrity on
16 January. While all of US sympathize with it for the losses
it has suffered in terms of material damage and personnel,
both civilian and military, we believe that it is incumbent
on the world community to give more concrete shape to
that sympathy. In document S/12318/Add. 1 of 5 April, the
Government of Benin has given a rough idea of the extent
of the damage which it suffered as a consequence of the
events of 16 January at Cotonou. It would only be fair for
all Member States of the Organization to contribute
generously to the mitigation of Benin’s suffering, That
would, in our opinion, be an ideal way of articulating our
moral indignation and sympathy in concrete terms,

the Mission was able to arrive at certain significant
conclusions with the help of the available evidence, First,
“the People’s Republic of Benin was, . . subjected to an
armed attack” [ibid., para. 1411 the primary objective of
which seems to have been “the overthrow of the present
Government of Benin” (ibid]. Secondly,
“Inasmuch as the territorial integrity, independence and
sovereignty of the State of Benin was violated by [the/
invading force . . ., the State of Benin was subjected to
aggression,” [Ibid., para. 142. f

61. We believe that a decision along these lines would be a
wise one and would add to the stature of the Council.
Indeed, the Council cannot be expected to do anything less;
what is being sought is the very minimum. We hope the
Council will act in a manner befitting its role and
responsibility.

Thirdly,
“a majority of the attacking force, not nationals of Benin,
were participating in this action for pecuniary motives
and were, therefore, mercenaries” [ibid., para. 1431.

62. Mr. AKHUND (Pakistan): Sir, it gives me great
pleasure to felicitate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April.
We have no doubt that, under your wise and able guidance,
the Council will deal effectively with the complex and
difficult items on its agenda. Pakistan and Venezuela, both
countries of the third world and sharing a common
approach and similar, views, have co-operated with each
other in many different forums, and you can be assured of
our full co-operation here and our support in the discharge
of your responsibilities.

Fourthly, that similar operations “could be conducted
elsewhere against smali defenceless countries for similar
purposes” [ibid., para. 1441.

63. I take this opportunity also to place on record our
warm appreciation to Ambassador Andrew Young, who SO
ably conducted the Council’s deliberations last month and
gave a striking demonstration of the qualities of energy and
candour, a reputation for which had preceded him in 1~s
appointment as his country’s Permanent Representative to
the United Nations.

68, The United Nations in general, and the Security
Council in particular, has to perform its primary task,
stipulated in Article 1 of the Charter, which is:

67. The conclusions of the Special Mission require careful
examination and appropriate action by the Council. As I
said when the Council was discussing this question in
February, small and medium-sized countries, especially
those of the third world, “must rely for their security on
the maintenance of orderly relations among States and on
respect for international law” [1987th meeting, para. 471.

“To maintain international peace and security, and to
that end: to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace. . .”

64. The Council is now engaged in considering the report
of the Special Mission it sent to Benin last February in
pursuance of resolution 404 (]977), to investigate the
complaint made by that country. My delegation would like
to place on record its deep appreciation to the members of
the Special Mission-Ambassador
Illueca of Panama,
Ambassador Kikhia of Libya and Mr. Mulye of India-for
the meticulous care with which they discharged the tasks
assigned to them under the able chairmanship of Ambassador Illueca. The Mission was entrusted with a difficult
assignment and its report fully justifies the confidence
placed in it by the Council.

69. The Special Mission has concluded in its report that,
by virtue of the attack on Cotonou on 16 January, “the
State of Benin was subjected to aggression”. We have thus
before us a case of aggression against a Member State,
which must be strongly condemned by the Security
Council. Further, as “a majority of the attacking force, not
nationals of Benin,” were mercenaries, the Council is once
again called upon to deal with this persisting evil. It is the
view of the delegation of Pakistan that the Council, while
reaffirming its resolution 239 (1967), should call upon ail
States to ensure that their territories and resources, both
human and material, are not used for the recruitment,
support or sustenance of mercenaries, ~110 appear to find a
fertile field for their lawless activities, especially in Africa.
We support the suggestions put during this debate by a
number of colleagues, that international action against

65. We note that the Special Mission visited the sites of
the events which took place on 16 January 1977, heard the
testimony of a number of witnesses, including that of the
one prisoner who was taken, and examined and recorded
carefully all available evidence.
7

mercenaries shuuld
pL?tTlX~WJl~

hSiS.

It

be initiated
is time

cOIlVCIlti~~~ 011 this
application.

Subject

and institutionalized

on a

democratic and popular revolution and to all peoples that
love peace and justice throughout the world.

we feel to formulate a
‘and to seek its universal

75. Imperialism and its servile lackeys have just sustained a
stinging defeat in the eyes of the world. But they do not
want to accept that defeat. That is why they are now
striving vainly to demonstrate, through hollow and empty
arguments devoid of any logic, that the military operation
of colonial reconquest of Sunday, 16 January 1977 was
either the work of the Holy Ghost or a staged operation
sometimes described as ridiculous, sometimes as more
infantile than ridiculous,

70. Benin has also suffered
considerable loss of life and
material damage
Inoterlal
clamage as ;1 direct result of the attack of 16
January. There
Therf is,
‘- therefore,
‘*
^
urgent need to enable Benin to
the ma
make good
good
material
damage and to provide compensation for I’the regrettable loss of life. It is the view of the
delegation of i’akistan
Pakistan that the international
community as
a whole
to the succour of Benin and help to
whole should cO~%le
co
repair the damage caused
to its economy and its people,
c

76. Imperialism and its lackeys have also tried to divert
the Council’s attention by noisily and hysterically engaging
in facile polemics and by digressing to subjects that have
nothing to do with the item on our agenda. Why have they
resorted to these tactics? What is behind this obvious
strategy? Now that it has been established that there was
an act of aggression against Benin, where mercenaries were
only the instruments, we must also establish that there were
actual aggressors,

the friendship
and VmPatlly which my country has always felt for the
young and striving nations
of Africa, We share the problems
of economic and social development
that they face and we
understand their desire to be left alone to pursue those
goah
in the light of their particular
circumstances and
following the SoCid
system that they consider best suited to
their conditions. We should consider it a matter for dismay
if dil’ferences over these questions caused disunity and
dissension ~IIIOII~ them..
The unity of Africa is essential in
the difficult struggle for political
emancipation and racial
equality, of which southern
Africa is the battleground. It is
7 1. 1 shOuld like to conclude

by reiterating

77. My delegation has listened most attentively to the
statements of certain delegations, We have paid particular
attention to that of France [2001st meeting/ and, especially, to those of Togo (2002nd meeting/ and of Gabon
[2OOOth meeting/. My delegation believes it to be its
national and sacred duty to reply calmly to certain parts of
those statements.

also a most important
factor for the peace and security of
the world. It is the hope of my delegation that the events
that are the subject of our present debate will not weaken

the fabric of African unity, but, on the contrary, provide
occasion for renewed efforts to strengthen it.
7’.

Mr.

DOYA

(Benin)

(interpretation

Mr. President, my delegation
tit the
conducting this debate.
its

satisfaction

73. “I’hc direction

way

in which

from

78. My delegation believes it entirely natural that people
should defend themselves when they are accused, but we
categorically reject the hysterical polemics that we heard
-as sterile as they were childish-the perilous acrobatics
and the verbal juggling, an exercise of hollow rhetoric that
has made no positive contribution to this debate on a
question so important that repercussions of all kinds are
liable to be felt by all, because no one is really safe from
the use of mercenaries by the forces of evil against the
independence of small, defencelessStates.

French):

would like to express to you
in

certain

which

you have been

delegations have been

trying to lead our discussion

reveals the ridiculous strategy
that has been so actively worked
out by imperialism and its
lackeys to camuUfluge
the truth
and cover up their
ahominnblc crime against the peace-loving people of Benin,
We denounce these delaying tactics, which do no credit to
their authors. Hut my delegation would also like to express
its pleasure at the positive
support of the Council in its
effort to determine
the truth
and all the whys and
wherefores of that aggression. From the statements that we
have heard so f’ar, it has become clear that the Council did
something particularly
useful
by dispatching a special
mission of inquiry
to Benin to verify the facts as I
presented then1 OII 7 February
before this very Council
/1986th t?le&~~/.
Thanks
to the evidence and to the
tcs~imany examined, it is now established that the People’s
Republic of [3enjn was the victim
of an act of armed
aggression committed
by a horde of mercenaries, that its
sovereignty a,ld territorial
integrity
were violated and that

what occurred was a flagrant

79. Before proceeding further, my delegation would like
to remind everybody that my country came to the Council
not as a defendant but most definitely as a plaintiff,
absolutely convinced of the validity of its case. So, if we
made charges against anyone here, it was not without
proper thought or consideration, or without taking the
necessary time or considering the numerous inquiries

undertaken by many commissions and missions which came
to Cotonou, the scene of the aggression, This procedure is
in conformity

with the revolutionary axiom to the effect

that “Whoever has not made an inquiry has no right to
speak”, So we are not making gratuitous assertions; our
assertions are well founded and can be objectively verified
or checked.

instance of intervention in the
80. Having made that point, my delegation would like to
exercise its right of reply, in a general way, on a certain
number of points that were made in common by a number
of delegations whose countries were implicated in one way
or another in the aggression of 16 January 1977 against the
People’s Republic of Benin.

intcrnnl affairs of Nenin.

74. All the representatives
that we have so far heard have
recognised and vigarously
condemned
that act of aggression, and there is now no longer any doubt that it occurred.
This unanimity is encouraging
to the people of Benin, to its
8

81. People have made much use of, and I would say
abused, such expressions as “scenario”, “forged documerits”, “the single black so-called mercenary who is,
moreover, Guinean” and upon whom pressure was supposedly exerted; mention has been made of “altered
evidence of foreign residents and Benlnese nationals”,
because “the said witnesses”, it has been alleged, “were also
subject to similar pressure not to depart from the official
line”-a statement which presupposes that those gentlemen
are very well informed about the aggression against Benin
but refuse to give their information to the Council. It has
also been said that this was just an operation undertaken by
certain hotheads thirsty for adventure or that it was just a
spree on the part of a group of marauders. Mention has
been made of pseudo-mercenaries, strange documents,
imbroglio and multifaceted mysteries. All this has been said
in an attempt to prove that this was an operation that mere
individuals initiated for their own personal reasons and
carried out on their own account without anyone else being
behind them. Whom are they trying to deceive? Who
would have benefited from the crime of these so-called
adventurers if the operation had succeeded? Obviously,
imperialism and its lackeys, caught up in their own
contradictions, are at their wits’ end to know how to hide
their crime against the people of Benin, a people which has
already exposed them.

our country, Benin, our people are deeply attached to the
truth.
84. Now, with regard to the documents whose authenticity has been questioned in such a light way, I should like
to quote a passage from my statement of 6 April which
unequivocally replies to any questions about the authenticity of those documents:
“Now that the actual facts of the aggression have been
100 per cent established-the material damage, the loss of
life on both sides, the arms and munitions abandoned by
the mercenaries, the mercenary taken prisoner, and the
abundant evidence from so many sources-, one would
have to be of congenital bad faith to believe that the
people of Benin had recourse to falsehood in order to
find where to lay the blame.
“One would have to be naive or really ill-intentioned to
believe that the People’s Republic of Benin had forged
the national identity card of Lieutenant-Colonel Gilbert
Bourgeaud or that of Sy Sawane. One would have to be
intellectually dishonest to believe that the People’s
Republic of Benin had invented the bank account
numbers, the airline tickets, the names and addresses of
those hired killers who are the mercenaries that invaded
Cotonou on Sunday, 16 January 1977.

82. This clumsy and odious strategy of camouflage undertaken by those responsible and by their accomplices cannot
succeed. The intentions behind it constitute a grave insult
to the people of Benin, which has serious reasons for
making accusations against all those who have vainly
attempted to distract the Council from the question
before it.

“What the reactionaries and colonialists are afraid of
and what is causing disarray in the camp of imperialism
and its African lackeys is the fact that Benin is in
possession of such valuable documents which completely
unmask the whole diabolical imperialist plan for the
colonial reconquest of Africa. It is vain, after the
scrupulous inquiries conducted by various commissions
and missions, to try to sow doubt in the minds of the
people of the world by questioning the authenticity of
the documents.” [Ibid., paya. 59-61. /

83. Indeed, neither the argument that the operation was
undertaken by isolated individual adventure-seekers nor the
fabrications that the sponsors of the aggression and their
accomplices have been trying to make people believe stand
up to any reasonable logical analysis. By what exercise of
Intellectual acrobatics can it be proved that the people of
Benin recruited white and black adventurers from Paris and
from African capitals to commit aggression against it? Did
the Beninese people hatch a plot against itself? Why? Did
the Beninese people cause damage of such wide scope
against itself simply for the malignant pleasure of being able
to attack countries with which it has always maintained
very good and mutually advantageous relations? Did the
people of Benin invent the prisoner, the mercenary of
Guinean origin called BB Alpha Oumarou? In the eyes of
our impenitent detractors the people of Benin supposedly
organized our whole plot, an armed conflict, to kill in cold
blood its bravest sons and then to hold national funerals in
their memory, That is really the height of cynicism! The
people of Benin supposedly hatched this plot to harm its
own economy, to paralyse its administration. That is really
the height of folly, If BL Alpha Oumarou was invented,
what prevented us, according to that same logic of our
detractors, from inventing 10 or 20 more? Permit me to
say to our detractors who are so short of arguments that, if
BL Alpha Oumarou was a fiction thought up by the People
of Benin, the various missions and commissions to which he
has been presented would have been able to uncover that
hoax. Such a hoax is perhaps being played elsewhere; but in

85. However, one may wonder why recourse has been had
to such ignominious means in the effort to escape blame,
Why these insincere attitudes, this denial of the truth, this
Pontius-Pilate-like behaviour? It is a case of a thief who is
being chased and who cries “thief’. The representatives of
the countries that have been charged would do well to
resort to more subtle manoeuvres.
86. The facts exist and are obvious, and it is difficult to
eliminate them by a wave of a magic wand, It is difficult to
disregard them. They are so obvious that they cannot but
be observed, so revealing are they of a grave political
scandal in which certain States are disgracefully implicated.
87, The public denials with which some delegations that
have come here have contented themselves are nothing but
gratuitous assertions devoid of any meaning, They have
been accompanied by threats or gestures of intimidation,
but these have been made in a very clumsy and grotesque
way. They make no positive contribution to this debate, to
which, we repeat, Benin attaches vital importance.
88. My delegation considers it necessary, at this stage, to
make some precise points for the benefit of certain
countries, to avoid any misunderstanding and to permit the
9

Council. to continue its discussions in an atmosphere of
calm, objectivity and responsibility, the natural characteristics of so important an organ.

the pseudo-African press of Paris. Why reproduce servilely,
like a schoolchild, the silly stories of Jeune Afriquc and ~~
Monde? Let us be dignified at least.

89. My delegation has noted the statement of the representative of France [2001st meeting] with regard to Gilbert
Bourgeaud, the French mercenary who led the operation of
aggression of 16 January 1977 against Benin. If the French
mercenary Bourgeaud, about whom we have evidence of all
kinds identifying him, is not in the French Army, he could
perhaps be in the police force or in some other French
organization. What is true, undoubtedly, is that the
representative of France does not deny the existence of
that mercenary as the individual who led the armed attack
of 16 January 1977 against Cotonou. So who is Gilbert
Bourgeaud? This question, which Benin asks very clearly,
retains all its validity in the light of what has been said SO
far.

94. Ever since 16 January 1977, we have been hearing the
same old song, the same old refrain, to camouflage the
truth and to spread lies of all kinds about our country. My
country has since then rebutted all the arguments one by
one, and today, caught in their own trap, the’reactionaries
of all kinds and the press which serves them have been
obliged to acknowledge the facts contained in the many
reports now available, which can be consulted by anyone,
All these confused and infantile assertions can but make us
smile. They show how much haste was involved and how
little time was taken to examine documents and to weigh
arguments properly in the effort to shift the blame,

90. Similarly, the French representative referred to investigations already undertaken by France concerning the
mercenaries who left France to attack Cotonou and he
expressed regret that the Government of Benin had not so
far contacted the French Government through bilateral
channels in order to make complaints on this score, I
sincerely regret to have to say to the French representative
that, in view of the nature of the relations between our two
countries, it is difficult to understand why the French
authorities should wait to be informed before co-operating
with Benin in solving the mystery surrounding this serious
affair that has plunged a peace-loving and friendly country
into mourning. And I must say here that all friendly
countries throughout the world manifested their support
for Benin immediately after the aggression of 16 January
1977.
91. The valuable information that each one has should be
included in the dossier in order to make it possible to
establish with objectivity the whole truth about this
scandalous affair, which is nothing more or less than an
operation of colonial reconquest. The Government of Benin
wished to put its cards on the table because it has nothing
to hide, and it was in order to enable the international
community to consider this matter along with us that we
brought it to the Security Council. Without acrimony, we
want to say to the French delegation that the special
relations between us give the people of Benin hope that the
French authorities will co-operate honestly in the Council
to shed the greatest possible light on this act of aggression.
92. As I said earlier, I should like particularly to go back to
certain parts of the statements of the representatives of
Gabon and Togo.
93. The representative of Gabon, with unexpected haste,
made his diplomatic debut in the Council on 6 April
(2000th meeting/. Our brother from Gabon could have
taken his time and read my statement before launching
such a hysterical attack on my country. I want to make it
clear that the arguments put forward by the representative
of Gabon, who spoke of a stage-managed operation, a
manufactured plot, an allegedly manipulated mercenary,
Beninese and foreign witnesses being subjected to pressure,
and so on, are worn-out cliches of the pro-imperialist and

95. Finally, the representative of Gabon referred also to
some multifaceted assistance and fraternal co-operation,
which he said was disinterested. I should like to say here for
his benefit, that our country is open to all forms of
mutually advantageous co-operation, but that Benin relies
above all on its own resources for its development,
However, the co-operation and assistance referred to by the
representative of Gabon are not unilateral, and the Govern.
ment of Gabon, which he represents, is in a position to
know that. It is rather dangerous to proclaim all this from
the rooftops, For us, co-operation must be sincere and
without ulterior motives, and Benin has never begged alms
from any country. Benin wants co-operation, whether
bilateral or regional, to be devoid of, all political pressure
and it wants the advantages to be mutual.
96. I should now like to ask the representative of Gabon
to tell the Council whether Recruitment Contract
No. 02327/MFP/R.A.
of 3 August 1976 of the French
mercenary Gilbert Bourgeaud is a forgery. What were the
personal papers of Bourgeaud doing at Cotonou Airport on
16 January 1977? Perhaps he came to Cotonou as a tourist
on that day and just lost his papers. In that case, why did
he not make the proper declaration-as he did, in fact, at
Abidjan, when he lost his driving licence, which had been
issued in Morocco? Similarly, would the representative of
Gabon dare say that account No. 35025.020 T of the Bank
of Gabon and Luxembourg, opened at Libreville in the
name of the French mercenary Bourgeaud, is also a
forgery? I should like particularly to draw to the attention
of the representative of Gabon the fact that all the papers
of the French mercenary Bourgeaud are to be found
reproduced in annex VI to the report under discussion.
97. I should now like to say a few words to the
representative of Togo. As he concluded his statement
yesterday [2002nd meeting/, the representative of Togo
was obviously satisfied by the tremendous feat he had just
performed. He was obviously pleased, because, after an
introduction containing contradictory and gratuitous assertions, he said, as the Council will remember, that he had
received explicit instructions from his Government to speak
in a debate “shrouded in mystery”. I say he was obviously
happy, after having devoted severalpagesof his statement
to the geographicaland historical factors uniting Togo and
Benin,to have alsodevoted long passages
to the exceptional

qualities of the Togolese President, Eyadema, who travels a
lot, according to him.

tion of our revolutionary experiment; thus, they have
becomethe designated
accomplices
of our principalenemy.

98. Permit me to say that that statement was completely
beside the point. But why did the representative of Togo so
deliberately avoid the problem before us? Why was this
strange brother of ours so delighted to insult the people of
Benin so much, instead of helping it to clear up the mystery
surrounding the events of 16 January 1977, which he
himself condemned? Why does this strange brother of ours
give us the impression of someone who has not even read
the valuable document the Special Mission has made
available to him? Would it be natural for anyone who had
closely followed the operations of 16 January 1977 at
Cotonou to cast malicious doubt on the bravery of our
forces by asking how the mercenaries were able to leave in
an aircraft? Why does this strange brother of ours try to
blacken the reputation of the people of Benin and its
revolution by insinuating that we begged 6 billion from the
international community? Why all this indignation against
the people of Benin and its revolution? Simply because our
so-called brother completely failed in his attempt to lull the
vigilance of our people.

103. Benin knowsnow, after the aggression
of 16January
1977, where it stands.But, we repeat,the facts are there,
and it is on thesefacts that we want the discussions
to be
focused-andon nothing else.No one needsto resort-to
rid himself of guilt-to sucha clumsy, and even comical,
manoeuvre.

99. My delegation is very tempted to reply point by point
to the insults of the representative of Togo, but we shall
not do so because we quickly discovered in him a subversive
agent provocateur, and we do not want to tax the patience
of the members of the Council or to waste their time, and
also because a matter of such great political importance
should not be allowed to be drowned in a flood of insults.

104. Having made that point to the representativesof
Gabon and Togo, we should like to make someother
points.
105. My delegationrespectsall the headsof African States
and vigorously protestsagainstthe insultsto the Guinean
leader.No African representative-whetheran ambassador
or a permanentrepresentativeto the United Nations-has
the right to describeany African head of State in such
opprobriousterms.Thosewho indulgein thisfacileexercise
detract from African unity. It is they who cultivate hatred
and who, consequently,areready to lend a stronghelping
hand to subversion.A solidanti-imperialistfront hasbeen
establishedbetweenGuineaand Benin, All the efforts of
the enemiesof Africa to deala low blow to that front are
doomedto failure.Let that beclearlyunderstood.
106. My delegationwouldventure to hopethat, after this
point I have made concerningthe maliciousdigressions
introducedinto this discussion
to sowconfusion,everyone
will know wherethingsreally stand,My delegationdesiresa
frank discussion
on the questionof the aggression
against
my country. All the Statesin favour of peaceandsecurity
mustwork for the truth, andnothingbut the truth,

100. But we should like to say this. If the representative
of Togo received categorical instructions to describe our
people so outrageously, in such disgraceful terms, in the
Council, we lay on the leaders of Togo full responsibility
for the effects of their thoughtless verbal onslaught. Those
who play into the hands of imperialism and the odious
policy of political colonial reconquest in Africa, will alone
bear, in the face of history, the inevitable responsibility for
their treachery. Insults are an act of weakness and a
confession of guilt. The People’s Republic of Benin reserves
its right to reply later, at an appropriate point, to all these
insults.

107. Beforeconcluding,my delegationwould like to make
it clear that it has scrupulouslyrespectedthe consensus
reached by the African Group, which duly received a
mandate from the OAU Council of Ministers at its
twenty-eighth ordinary session,to act in solidarity with
Benin during the debate of the caseby the Security
Council.

108. In my statementof 6 April, I did not nameany of
the African countriesthat wereaccomplices
in the aggressionof Sunday,16 January1977.Why,then, havewe made
101. Furthermore, the representative of Togo stated:
our nationalreport availableto the Council? It is obvious
“We regret that those who are responsible for the
that the circulationof this report asan official documentof
decadence”-he said “decadence’‘-“of
Benin thought it a the Council is only normal, andthat it isin keepingwith
the promisemadeby the Beninauthoritiesto the members
good idea to use this ramshackle operation at Cotonou in
of the SpecialMissionwhenthey wereat Cotonou.In other
order to publicize the lowness of their methods and the
words,this document,had it beenavailableearlier,could
flagrant incompetence of their regime.” [Ibid., para. 88./
have been annexedto the report under discussionand
publishedat the sametime. The highestauthoritiesin Benin
102. As it is well understood that the representative of
approvedthis documentonly on 12 March 1977. It was
Togo is speaking on behalf of the Togolese authorities,
read andreread over the air by the Voice of the Revolution.
Benin is pleased to see for the first time, behind the thick
lt was publishedin full in our national organ, &UZU.
veil of hypocrisy, what those authorities really think of the
Hence, it has become a public document, circulated
revolutionary process that has been going on in our country
throughout Africa. So what kind of crime of hk+rnaiest~
since 26 October 1972. We understand now the significance
have we committed, and what do people want us to
of many unfriendly and unbrotherly acts and the hatred
fanned and maintained by the ruling circles in Togo against believe?
the people’santi-imperialistregimeat Cotonou. Our suspi109. Contrary to what somewould like membersof the
cions and our accusationsare very well founded. The
Togoleseruling circlesare fiercely opposedto the continua- Councilto believe,Benin isvery devotedto African unity;
11

\

117. My delegation would like to join the other members
of the international community in condemning with the
utmost vigour that scandalous act of aggression which
endangers international peace and harmony. In the clr.
cumstances, my country, which for many years was a
victim of the most barbaric form of aggression at the hands
of American imperialism, cannot help but feel solidarity
with the people of Benin and we unreservedly support their
action in the Security Council or any other international
body to promote their just cause.

the militant, active, combatant, anti-imperialist unity; the
unity that closes the door to all threats, domination and
aggression against Africa’s independence.
110. Benin is absolutely convinced of the facts and the
documents under discussion. We challenge any delegation
to prove the contrary. Gratuitous statements and denials
prove nothing and convince no one.
111. The PRESIDENT (interpretation fi’om Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

118. Our active solidarity and unreserved support go also
to the other peoples of Africa which, through Benin, have
once again been subjected to the worst form of neo.
colonialism and imperialism.

112, Mr. SOURINHO (Lao People’s Democratic Republic)
(interpretation from French): The Security Council is at
present considering the report of the Security Council
Special Mission established under resolution 404 (1977),
following the complaint by the People’s Republic of Benin
concerning the armed attack to which it had been subjected
on 16 January 1977.

119. Never can enough stress be placed on the fact that, if
the world is to live in peace and harmony, it is imperative
that every people and every nation should have the right to
choose in complete freedom and in full tranquillity the
course of development and the economic and social regime
which best suits it, free from any outside interference. It
goes without saying that international peace and stability
will always be jeopardized SO long as that principle is not
applied everywhere throughout the entire world and especially so long as certain imperialist, neocolonialist and
reactionary circles continue to interfere in the affairs of
others. In this regard, the event that occurred in Benin has
once again brought to light the hypocrisy and cunning of
international imperialism, which loudly claims to support
the principles of sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States but cynically continues to interfere in
the internal affairs of other countries.

113. But before I take up that subject, I should like to
express to you, Mr. President, and to all the members of the
Security Council, my delegation’s gratitude for being
allowed to take part in this debate. I should also like to
offer you my delegation’s warmest congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Council for the month of
April. You are a distinguished representative of your great
country, Venezuela, whose deep devotion to the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations, as well
as to universal peace and security, need no further proof.
My delegation is convinced, in view of your country’s
excellent tradition and your wide experience, that you will
assume with the greatest success the heavy responsibilities
that will be yours until 30 April.

120. We should like to repeat once again that the armed
attack of which Benin is the most recent victim is not an
accident or isolated fact; it is one phase in a long series of
sordid plots which international neo-colonialism and imperialism have laid to commit acts of aggression against the
peoples of developing countries, in particular those which
make political options that do not suit them. It is only too
true that, for their security and stability, all the peoples of
the third world-of Africa, Latin America and Asia-and the
rest of the international community must seriously stand
together to fight against all acts of aggression by international imperialism, especially those perpetrated by
mercenaries in the employ of others.

114. My delegation’ would like also to associate itself-not
“as ‘a mere formality, but sincerely-with the tributes that
preceding speakers have paid to your predecessor, Ambassador Young of the United States, for the very skilful way
in which he led the Council’s work in March.
115. The conclusions of the report of the Security Council
Special Mission have, in my delegation’s opinion, completely removed the veil from the deadly event in Benin on
16 January last. This report. allows for no confusion
whatever about the nature of that event. My delegation
wishes to thank all the members of the Special Mission, and
particularly its Chairman, Ambassador Illueca of Panama,
for their very conscientious and objective work,

121. Furthermore, the report of the Special Mission,
which clearly states in paragraph 144 that “a similar
operation could be conducted elsewhere against small
defenceless countries for similar purposes”, only further
underlines the serious threat which hangs over the other
developing countries without exception. It is a matter of
urgency that the international community and, in particular, the Security Council should not only verbally
condemn this disgraceful system of the use of mercenaries
but also take action to remove this scourge.

116. As the report clearly states in paragraphs 141 and
142, this was an act of armed aggression carried out from
outside the country and designed to overthrow the Government at Cotonou. That cynical and senseless attack was of
unprecedented brazenness, in view of the fact that the
People’s Republic of Benin is at present one of the
non-permanent members of the Security Council. It was
moreover an act of inadmissible and intolerable interference
in the internal affairs of Benin that grossly flouted the
principles and norms of international law and the objectives
of the Charter.

122. Similarly, it is also desirable, with regard to the
question now before the Council, that all countries, and in
particular those mentioned in the report of the Special
Mission, give their active and forthright assistance to the
12

Security Council in its efforts to shed light on this sorry
affair.
123. Since its popular revolution of 1972 and notwithstanding the constraints on its national development, Benin
has never slackened its efforts in the international arena to
work for the triumph of the principles and purposes of the
Charter and to build a better world for one and all. Its
presence in the Security Council as a non-permanent
member makes it unnecessary to comment any further.
124. Furthermore, in its bilateral relations with other
countries, Benin has recently affirmed through its representative in the Council, Ambassador Boya, that it has been
pursuing a policy of peace, good-neighbourliness _and
sincere co-operation with complete respect for the principle
of independence and sovereignty. Thus, the people of Benin
must be considered a valiant and peaceful people.
125. The dastardly attack committed against it on 16
January 1977 has had a very grave impact on the country’s
economy. In this connexion, we firmly support Benin’s
request that the international community give the people of
Benin, which unjustly fell victim to aggression, just compensation for the damage incurred.
126. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of Equatorial
Guinea, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the question on the agenda. Consequently
I propose, in accordance with past practice and with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote,
under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
127. In view of the limited number of places available at
the Council table, I invite the aforementioned representative to take the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber, on the understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table whenever he
wishes to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ecua Mike
(Equatorial Guinea) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.
128. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The
next speaker is the representative of Egypt, whom I invite
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
129. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Mr. president, I
should like first oi all to associate myself with preceding
speakers in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and in
expressing happiness at seeing you presiding over the
Council’s deliberations on an issue that is vital for Africa
and the third world, I should also like to express mY
delegation’s gratitude to you and to the members of the
Council for having given us the opportunity to Participate
in the debate on this important matter.

130. The Security Council meets today to study an
extremely serious situation which has dangerous consequences for the maintenance of international peace and
security because it involves an attempt against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a State Member of the
Organization.
131. The fact that the armed forces and the courageous
people of Benin were able to repulse the invaders does not
alter the fact that a peaceful, small African State has been
subjected to an attack in violation of the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international law, and
that the threat of aggression against small independent
States exists and will continue to exist unless a conscious
effort is undertaken by the international community.
132. The primary objective of the attack was to undermine the achievements of the people of Benin. The invading
force came from outside the territory of Benin and,
therefore, there could be no doubt that the State of Benin
was subjected to aggression in clear violation of its
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is
known that the attacking force was made up of mercenaries
and that a similar operation could be conducted elsewhere
against small defenceless countries for similar purposes.
133. What happened in Benin is not an isolated act. It is
unfortunately not the first time that the Council has been
seized of a case of clear violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a small African State, nor is it indeed
the first time that Africa has been subjected to the
abhorrent practice of the use of mercenaries. Mercenaries
have operated in most parts of Africa-in Zaire, in Guinea,
in Nigeria, in Angola and elsewhere. The use of mercenaries
has grown to be a most disturbing phenomenon and quite a
dangerous aspect of international life, which deserves the
full attention and collective action of the international
community as a whole.
134. The heads of State or Government of Africa and the
non-aligned countries have for many years been attempting
to draw attention to the danger of the use of mercenaries
and appealing to the international community to take the
necessary action to check that danger. They have called
upon all States to cease tolerating the recruitment Of
mercenaries and not to allow their nationals to serve in
their ranks.
135. The Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity held in Mauritius in July
1976 and the Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries held at Colombo in August the
same year once again drew the attention of the international community to the importance and the urgency of
creating the necessary machinery to dismantle the existing
mercenary organizations and to punish the crime of
employing mercenaries in the future. The Afro-Arab
Summit Conference held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March 1977
in turn reiterated the position of Africa and the Arab world
on that matter. The Political Declaration adopted by the
Conference stated:
“The. . . Conference strongly condemns the practice of
mercenaries and undertakes to eliminate this phenom-

\ .

enon in Africa and the Arab world.”
13ara. 11. I

[S/12298,

annex,

also stress a more important aspect, namely, the imperative
necessitv for collective action to ensure that the territorial
integrity and political independence of States are respected.

3

136. The General Assembly and the Security Council have
already condemned the use of mercenaries, and we should
like to join other delegations in expressing the hope that
the present debate of the Council on the complaint by
Benin will not result in just another condemnation of the
use of mercenaries but will lead to the initiation of concrete
steps towards the enaction of international legislation
providing for the establishment of an international convention against the hiring of such international criminals.

138. We wish to seize this opportunity to make a solemn
appeal to the international community, in the name of
African unity and solidarity, to act in harmony and unison
so that the lessons of the recent events at Cotonou will be
learned and the tragedy not repeated. We fully realize that
this is a great challenge, but we are thoroughly convinced
that it is our duty to meet it in order to overcome it.

137. While we have attempted to underline the serious
implications of the mercenary phenomenon, we cannot but

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

14
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-March

1978-2,200
