S/PV.8183

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8183

rd meeting
Tuesday, 20 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tileuberdi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04549 (E)
*1804549*

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Ambassador Necton Darlington Mhura, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Malawi to the
United Nations
The President (spoke in Arabic): At the outset of
this meeting, I should like, on behalf of the members
of the Security Council, to express profound grief and
sorrow at the passing of His Excellency Mr. Nector
Darlington Mhura, Permanent Representative of
Malawi to the United Nations. The members of the
Council convey their deepest sympathy to the family
of Ambassador Mhura and to the Government and the
people of Malawi.
Today also marks the one-year anniversary of
the passing of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin of the
Russian Federation.
I now invite the members of the Council to stand
and observe a minute of silence in tribute to the
memory of Ambassador Mhura and in memory of the
late Ambassador Churkin.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the President of
the Observer State of Palestine to participate in this
meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules of
procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Observer State
of Palestine, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort
him to a seat at the Council table.
2/30

20/02/2018

Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the Observer
State of Palestine, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to warmly welcome His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I have just returned from
a visit to Kuwait, which generously hosted a conference
on the reconstruction of Iraq and helped mobilize
critical resources. The international community showed
its gratitude to the Iraqi people for their courageous
victory over Da’esh. The support is a vote of confidence
in the Government and the people of Iraq. Kuwait,
Mr. President, played a very important leadership role
in that very successful meeting.
Unfortunately, positive developments in Iraq are an
exception in the region. That context underscores the
need for a political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, which has lasted for far too long. I am here
to reiterate my full personal commitment, and the
commitment of the United Nations to supporting
the parties in their efforts to achieve a two-State
solution — a solution of two democratic States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace within secure
and recognized borders; and a solution that addresses
all final-status issues on the basis of relevant United
Nations resolutions, international law and mutual
agreements. There is no plan B.
Yet we must face today’s sad reality. After decades
of support, the global consensus for a two-State solution
could be eroding. Obstacles on the ground have the
potential to create an irreversible one-State reality. It
is simply impossible to square the circle of a one-State
reality with the legitimate national, historic and
democratic aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.
At the same time, conditions for Palestinians in
Gaza, which has been under the control of Hamas for
a decade, are dire. Shortfalls in the funding of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are a matter of
international concern. The human security, rights and
dignity of 5 million Palestine refugees are at stake.
So, too, is the stability of the region. I appeal to the
international community to step up its generous support.
This is a time for dialogue, for reconciliation, for
reason. At this moment of grave consequence, I appeal
for effective concerted action by all parties. It is more
important than ever.
Allow me now, Mr. President, to ask you to give
the floor to the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, to deliver
his monthly briefing to the Security Council on the
situation in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: We meet this month as regional
tensions are taking an increasingly perilous turn.
Fighting in Syria is increasing, endangering
de-escalation arrangements and regional stability, as
well as undermining efforts for a political solution.
Despite the positive news from Iraq and the defeat
of Da’esh, much of the Middle East continues to
be in the grips of an ongoing human tragedy of
immense proportions.
Against that backdrop, and after over a century of
hostilities, including 50 years of continued military
occupation, Israelis and Palestinians are still no closer
to peace. Many have lost hope that they will see it in
their lifetimes. The enemies of peace are growing more
confident by the day. They see every failure of the forces
of moderation as a win for the forces of radicalization.
They believe the political odds are turning in their
favour. Day after day they are emboldened. Hindering
peace are also those who push facts on the ground and
who promote unilateral moves blocking the pathway
back to the negotiating table.
None of that will bring us closer to resolving the
conflict. None of it will respond to the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to statehood or the Israeli
longing for security. It will only drive us farther down
the road of confrontation, suffering and a one-State
reality of perpetual occupation.
Last month the international community discussed
key priorities to advance the goal of peace at the

S/PV. 8183

extraordinary ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians. At that meeting, I was
encouraged by widespread, unequivocal messages
reaffirming support for the two-State solution, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions, and
the need to resume meaningful negotiations over all
final-status issues, including the status of Jerusalem.
Participants also made a critical commitment to
undertaking efforts to address the humanitarian crisis
in Gaza, including support for projects focused on
water, electricity and economic recovery.
My message to all was clear. First, we must
clearly reaffirm that sustainable peace requires a twoState solution, which can be achieved only through
a negotiated process. Israelis and Palestinians have
defined the final-status issues and only they, together,
can determine their resolution. Secondly, efforts
must continue to seek implementation of concrete
and transformative steps on the ground — including
ending Israeli settlement expansion and advancing
policy shifts, particularly in Area C — consistent with
a transition to greater Palestinian civil authority, as
called for in the 2016 report of the Middle East Quartet.
Thirdly, the Palestinian Authority must continue to
advance institution-building and service delivery to
the Palestinian people and work towards bringing Gaza
back under its control. Lastly, it is critical that any
future peace proposal focus on the two-State solution
and all final-status issues, as per prior agreements and
relevant United Nations resolutions. Failure to do so
could have dangerous repercussions.
Maintaining support for Palestine refugees is
fundamental to the pursuit of peace and stability in
the region. I reiterate my ongoing concern over the
sizeable funding shortfall of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), despite the welcome flexibility of
some Member States in accelerating the disbursement
of their funding commitments. In addition, the
emergency appeals launched on 30 January seek to raise
$800 million for the West Bank and Gaza, as well as for
the Syria regional crisis, to meet the essential needs of
some 1.5 million highly vulnerable people. I encourage
Member States to consider urgently providing new
funding for UNRWA’s critical requirements.
As the peace process falters and the gulf between
the two sides widens, Palestinians and Israelis continue
to suffer the violent consequences on the ground. Seven

18-045493/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians were killed by Israeli security forces
in various incidents across the occupied Palestinian
territory, and one Israeli civilian was stabbed and
killed by a Palestinian in the West Bank. Three of the
Palestinians killed died during violent clashes with
Israeli security forces; one of them was a 16-year-old,
shot near Ramallah. He was the fourth child killed in
such circumstances since the beginning of the year.
I once again emphasize that the use of force must
be calibrated and that lethal force should be used only
as a last resort, with any resulting fatalities properly
investigated by the authorities. I urge Israeli security
forces to exercise maximum restraint in order to avoid
casualties in such circumstances. I call upon all sides to
reject violence, condemn terror, ensure accountability
and work to reduce tensions.
In recent days we have also witnessed dangerous
security incidents in and around Gaza. On 17 February,
four Israeli soldiers were wounded by an improvised
explosive device placed at the Gaza fence. This was
followed by Israeli airstrikes on some 18 Hamas targets,
while Palestinian militants fired two rockets into
Israel — one causing damage to a house in the Sha’ar
HaNegev Regional Council. Two Palestinian teens
were killed by Israeli security forces while reportedly
attempting to approach the fence. Prior to this latest
flare-up, during the course of the past month three
more rockets were fired towards Israel, with two Israeli
retaliatory airstrikes, all without injuries.
I encourage the international community to join
the United Nations in calling on militants in Gaza to
refrain from such provocations and end the building of
tunnels and the firing of rockets towards Israel. Such
actions and the response they elicit only risk the lives of
Palestinians and Israelis, undermine peace efforts and
increase the likelihood of another devastating conflict.
I also take this opportunity to note the need to resolve
the matter of the missing Israeli soldiers and civilians
who are being held in Gaza.
Two additional incidents highlight the risk of
escalation and the need for continued Israeli-Palestinian
security coordination. These were the discovery of 12
roadside bombs in the West Bank on 26 January and
the foiled attempt on 4 February to smuggle, within a
shipment of medical equipment, a dual-use component
used to make explosives into Gaza. I also note that
the trial of 17-year-old Palestinian girl Ahed Tamimi
started on 13 February behind closed doors. She has
4/30

20/02/2018

been detained on remand for two months to date. As
stated in my last briefing (see S/PV.8167), the detention
of a child must be used only as a measure of last resort
and for the shortest possible time.
Throughout the reporting period, Israel’s illegal
settlement-related activities continued unabated. In
response to last month’s killing of a resident of the
illegal Havat Gilad outpost, on 4 February, Israel
approved the establishment of a new settlement to
absorb its residents. I strongly denounce the expansion
of the settlement enterprise as compensation for
Israeli deaths. Settlement construction is not a morally
appropriate way to respond to murder. On 12 February,
Israel also advanced two settlement plans for some
85 housing units near Bethlehem. I reiterate the longstanding United Nations position that all settlementrelated activities are illegal under international law and
a substantial obstacle to peace, and I call on Israel to
seize and reverse such policies.
The demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued, with 31 structures affected,
resulting in 33 Palestinians being displaced. Particularly
concerning was the demolition of two donor-funded
classrooms serving Palestinian children in the Bedouin
community of Abu Nuwar. This is the sixth demolition
or confiscation in the school since February 2016.
Overall, according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 44 schools in the occupied West
Bank are currently at risk of demolition. I urge Israel to
cease this practice.
I briefed the Council last week on the situation in
Gaza. Month after month, we have raised the alarm
about the humanitarian, economic and ecological
calamity underway. It bears repeating that the situation
is unsustainable. Continuing power cuts of up to
20 hours per day severely undermine the provision
of basic services. Without additional immediate
fuel deliveries, the situation could deteriorate, with
dramatic consequences. I reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s appreciation to the United Arab Emirates and
the State of Qatar for their support in dealing with the
emergency. Their immediate response to our appeal has
helped stave off a further deterioration.
I am encouraged by the trilateral meeting I had
last week with Palestinian Prime Minister Hamdallah
and Israel’s Coordinator of Government Activities in
the Territories, Major General Mordechai, in which we
focused on the humanitarian problems in Gaza. Both
18-04549

20/02/2018

S/PV. 8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sides reaffirmed their commitment to the temporary
Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism and agreed that there
is a need for a joint review to improve its functionality,
transparency and predictability.
As the humanitarian crisis in Gaza escalates,
the implementation of the Egyptian-brokered
intra-Palestinian agreement has stalled. Absent
immediate steps to address the humanitarian crisis and
to revive the economy, we will face a total institutional
and economic collapse in Gaza. This is not an alarmist
prediction; it is a fact. I welcome the proposal of the
Palestinian Government to incorporate into its 2018
budget some 20,000 civil service employees in Gaza.
A positive outcome, however, is contingent, inter alia,
upon the collection of taxes, the payment of salaries, the
return of Government administration and, ultimately,
security control of Gaza. I urge all sides to intensify
their engagement and to move forward in this process.
For a decade, 2 million people have lived under the
full control of Hamas, with crippling Israeli closures
and movement and access restrictions. Throughout this
period, the international community has provided aid
and humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering
and to rebuild what was destroyed in three devastating
conflicts. It is time to break this cycle. It is time to
return Gaza to the control of the legitimate Palestinian
Authority, for there can be no Palestinian State without
Palestinian unity. Those who stand in the way of
reconciliation hurt the Palestinian national cause, and
the price will be paid by generations of ordinary people.
The security situation in the Golan is also a
growing concern. A worrying escalation occurred on
10 February, when the Israel Defense Forces destroyed
what they identified as an Iranian unmanned aerial
vehicle, which had reportedly entered its airspace from
Syria. Shortly thereafter, Israeli aircraft targeted a
Syrian airbase. During the attack, one Israeli jet was
hit, injuring two pilots, which further prompted Israel
to attack what it described as “12 military objectives”
inside Syria. I urge all sides to work towards easing
tensions in that highly volatile area.
I now turn briefly to Lebanon. Heightened
rhetoric was exchanged between Israel and Lebanon
over disputed maritime areas. The United Nations
continues to call on the sides to act responsibly, avoid
security risks and explore with the support of the
United Nations ways to resolve the issue. Preparations
continue for May parliamentary elections in Lebanon

and for the upcoming second Rome conference and
the Cedre conference to support the security sector
and economy, respectively on 15 March and 5 April.
While the situation was generally quiet in the area
of operations of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, and despite heightened rhetoric concerning
proposed construction by the Israeli Defense Forces
in so-called reservation areas in Lebanon south of the
Blue Line, construction began in non-reservation areas
on 7 February with no incidents reported.
In conclusion, and to return to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, I would like to reiterate that
we in the international community must continue
advocating for substantial changes to Israeli policy
on the situation in the West Bank, including a halt to
settlement construction, the demolition of structures
and the prevention of Palestinian development in Area
C. On Gaza, we must work collectively to alleviate
the humanitarian disaster and provide full support to
Egypt’s reconciliation efforts. Our support to UNRWA
also remains vital. I also hope that we will be able
to look beyond the closed, dark negotiation rooms,
currently empty of diplomats and politicians, to see that
there are Israeli and Palestinian advocates for peace
working tirelessly to promote change — civil-society
organizations, youth and women’s groups and religious
and community leaders, which all have a critical role
to play and must be supported and allowed to express
their views freely. We rarely discuss their role and we
do not speak often enough of the challenges they face,
but their efforts must be recognized and supported.
In this Chamber we have often spoken of the
need for leadership on both sides if we are to reach a
deal — a compromise, through negotiations — that
will enable the Israelis and Palestinians to separate
and be masters of their own fates. But they would not
be negotiations between equals, for one side is under
military occupation. Its leadership has committed to
working for a peaceful solution to the conflict through
negotiations. I urge the international community not
to give up on support for the moderate Palestinian
leadership or for building up the institutions that
will increase the chances of success. Our window of
opportunity is closing, and if we do not seize it quickly,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will be engulfed in the
whirlwind of religious radicalization that continues to
roil the region.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

18-045495/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I now give the floor to President Abbas.
President Abbas (spoke in Arabic): Seventy
years have passed since Palestine’s Nakba took place
and resulted in 6 million Palestinian refugees who
continue to suffer from the cruelty of their exile and
loss of human security and to wander the world after
losing their peaceful, stable lives in their towns and
villages. They are part of the 13 million Palestinians
whose country has not yet been recognized as a full
State Member of the United Nations, despite numerous
international resolutions affirming their right to selfdetermination and to statehood in their national lands.
We are the heirs of the Canaanites who lived
in Palestine more than 5,000 years ago and whose
descendants have remained there to this day. Our great
people remain rooted in their land. The Palestinian
people have built their own cities and homeland and
made contributions to humankind and civilization that
the whole world has witnessed. They have established
institutions, schools, hospitals, cultural institutions,
theatres, libraries, publishing houses, newspapers,
economic institutions, businesses and banks with wide
regional and international influence. All of that existed
before and after the Balfour Declaration, issued by the
British Government in 1917, according to which people
who had no ownership in Palestine gave it away to people
who had no right to it. The British Government bears
responsibility for the disastrous consequences inflicted
on our Palestinian people as a result of the Declaration.
Since then, and despite the fact that our people
have remained under occupation, they have continued
their journey, building and developing their country
after the establishment of the Palestinian Authority
in 1994. Their national institutions are recognized by
international bodies for their merit and their work,
which is founded on the principles of the rule of law,
transparency and accountability, and the empowerment
of women and young people in an environment of
tolerance, cultural coexistence and non-discrimination.
We have continued to strive to unite our people and
our land, and to ensure that we are ruled by a single
authority with a single body of law and united armed
forces, and we are determined to ensure that we convene
parliamentary and presidential elections.
Our belief is deeply rooted and our position on the
use of arms of any kind is clear. Not only do we call
for all nuclear weapons to be dismantled, we are also
opposed to conventional weapons, which have caused
6/30

20/02/2018

such terrible destruction in many States in our region
and all over the world. That is why we are committed
to fostering a culture of peace, rejecting violence,
pursuing sustainable development and building schools,
hospitals, industrial zones, farms and technological
production rather than establishing arms factories and
buying tanks and fighter jets. We want our people to
be able to live in freedom and dignity, far from wars
and destruction. For the price of one tank we can build
a school and provide protection for a generation. For
the price of one fighter jet we can build a hospital and
provide health protection for a generation much better
than all weapons, conventional or otherwise.
What we really want for our people is a life of
freedom and dignity, far from wars and destruction and
from terrorism and extremism, which we are working
relentlessly to combat all over the globe. Because of
this, we signed 83 security agreements with 83 States
around the world, including the United States, Russia
and other countries of Europe and elsewhere. We have
only one goal in signing these agreements, and that is
fighting terrorism regardless of its grounds or origin.
Why are we here today? After a long journey and
tremendous efforts to establish a political path based
on negotiations that could lead to a comprehensive
and just peace, we participated, as everyone knows,
in the Madrid Conference in 1991 and signed the Oslo
Accords in 1993. We were alone there with the Israelis
and the Norwegians. The Oslo Accords affirmed the
importance of arriving at a settlement of final-status
issues before 1999. Unfortunately, that has not yet come
to pass. We must therefore ask why it has still not been
achieved although it is stipulated in the Accords.
Despite this, we have persisted in our efforts to
achieve peace. We engaged in dialogue at Wye River
and Camp David. We participated in the Annapolis
Conference. We held talks with the former Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert for eight months. We met
with Prime Minister Netanyahu in the presence of the
former United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
and George Mitchell. We also accepted President
Putin’s invitation to meet with Mr. Netanyahu in
Moscow, but he has regrettably evaded participating in
such a meeting. We further engaged in all earnest with
former Secretary of State John Kerry, but the Israeli
Government’s intransigence resulted in the failure of
all of those efforts. After that, how can it be said that
it is we who reject negotiations? We have never refused
any invitation to participate in negotiations. We believe
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that negotiations are the only path towards peace. How
then could we reject them? Believe me, that it is untrue.
Confronted with deadlock, we have neither given
up nor lost hope. We have come to the United Nations
believing in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which affirm, inter alia, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force, as well as a people’s right to self-determination.
Article 40 and 41 reaffirm that. Nobody has held
Israel accountable for occupying our territories in
1948. The Charter affirms the right of people to selfdetermination, which is among the issues the Council
will address tomorrow. We continue to engage with all
of its bodies in our quest to end the occupation of our
land and people. Yet, in spite of all of that, the United
Nations has failed to implement its relevant resolutions
to date. Is that possible? Is it logical that despite the
adoption of 705 General Assembly resolutions since
1948 and 86 Security Council resolutions in our
favour, none of them have been implemented? Where
are those resolutions that the Council has adopted?
There are 86 Security Council resolutions, with no
result whatsoever.
Is it logical for Israel to neglect its obligation to
implement General Assembly resolutions 181 (II) and
194 (III)? As members of the Council may recall,
those two resolutions were sine qua non for Israel to be
accepted to the United Nations. Moshe Sharett wrote a
letter indicating that he was ready to implement them.
Owing to that commitment, Israel was accepted at the
United Nations. However, up to this very day, those two
resolutions have yet to be implemented.
Israel is acting as a State above the law. It has
transformed the occupation from a temporary situation,
as per international law, into a situation of a permanent
colonization of territories that it has occupied since
1967. It was supposed to be temporary; however, it
has become permanent. It colonized all the areas that
it wanted, including Jerusalem, which the Council
considers an occupied territory. How can that happen?
Israel has shut all doors on the two-State solution on
the basis of the 1967 borders. Here, we reaffirm, as we
have done in the past, that our problem is not with the
followers of Judaism. Judaism is a monotheistic religion,
as are Christianity and Islam. Our problem is only
with the occupiers of our land and those denying our
independence and freedom, regardless of their religion.

S/PV. 8183

We met with the President of the United States,
Mr. Donald Trump, four times in 2017. We expressed
our absolute readiness to reach a historic peace
agreement. We repeatedly reaffirmed our position,
in accordance with international law, relevant United
Nations resolutions and the two-State solution on the
basis of the 1967 borders. Yet that Administration has
not clarified its position. Is it for the two-State solution
or the one-State solution?
Subsequently, in a dangerous and unprecedented
manner, the United States Administration made
an unlawful decision, which was rejected by the
international community, that resulted in taking the
issue of Jerusalem off the table, without reason. It
decided to recognize the city of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel and transfer its Embassy there. It did
so ignoring that East Jerusalem is part of Palestinian
territory. It has been occupied since 1967, and it is our
capital, which we wish to be a city that is open to all
the faithful of the monotheistic religions, especially
Christianity, Judaism and Islam.
It is also strange that the United States still includes
the Palestine Liberation Organization on its terrorist
list and imposes restrictions on the work of our Mission
in Washington, D.C., under the pretext of congressional
decisions since 1987. Despite our bilateral relations
with the United States, including assistance, visits and
broad relations, we come to discover that the United
States Congress believes we are terrorists. If the
Congress believes we are terrorists, how is it that the
Administration has relations with us? How is it visiting
us? How is it providing assistance to us? How can it
help terrorists?
Most recently, the United States has decided to
punish Palestinian refugees by reducing its contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in spite of the facts
that it supported the Agency’s establishment and that
it endorsed the Arab Peace Initiative, which calls for a
just and agreed solution for the plight of the refugees, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
The United States has contradicted itself. It
has contradicted its own commitments and violated
international law and relevant resolutions with its
decision regarding Jerusalem. No country alone can
resolve a regional or international conflict without
the participation of other international partners.
Therefore, it is our view and position that in order to

18-045497/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

solve the Palestinian question it is essential to establish
a multilateral international mechanism that emanates
from an international conference and is in line with
international law and relevant resolutions.
Faced with Israel’s policies and practices in
violation of international law and its non-compliance
and non-implementation of agreements signed, the
Palestinian Central Council — the highest Palestinian
parliamentary body — decided several weeks ago to
re-evaluate the relationship with Israel. Indeed, we will
review the relationship, given that we have become
an Authority without authority and the occupation
has come at a great cost. We are even working for the
occupation as its employees. We say that Israel must
uphold its obligations as an occupying Power.
We do not oppose Israel shouldering its
responsibility in the West Bank and Gaza because the
situation is unbearable and unacceptable. In spite of
that, before the Council I reaffirm our commitment to
maintaining our institutions and achievements, which
we have carried out on the ground in Palestine and
in the international arena, thanks to the assistance of
those present. We are determined to remain committed
to the political, diplomatic and legal path, rejecting
all violence and through political negotiations which
we have never rejected. We will continue to extend
our hands to make peace and work to end the Israeli
occupation, based on the two-State solution along 1967
borders — two States recognized by the international
community — pursuant to the relevant resolutions.
We want to realize our national aspirations, but at
the same time we will continue to oppose any attempt
from any side to impose solutions undermining that
legitimacy. We will reject with all our capabilities
any solution that violates that legitimacy. We have
been granted the status of non-member observer State
by the General Assembly, based upon which we have
become State party to 105 international institutions,
organizations and treaties. We have been recognized
by 138 States. All of that has further strengthened the
status of the State of Palestine, which continues to seek
other recognition by the remaining States in the world,
including States Members on the Council that have
yet to recognize the State of Palestine despite the fact
that the recognition of the State of Palestine does not
negate negotiations. Recognition does not run contrary
to negotiations, but rather promotes them. I therefore
call on members that have yet to recognize the State
of Palestine to do so. In the future, we will intensify
8/30

20/02/2018

our work to achieve admission as a full Member to
the United Nations. We came to the Council once with
that proposition and were rejected. We will come again
and ensure international protection for our people. We
will come to the Council and appeal for international
protection for our people.
The situation is no longer tolerable. Members
have listened to the Special Coordinator’s briefing and
we hope that they will support our efforts to secure
the rights of 13 million Palestinians yearning for an
independent homeland, just like every people in the
world, and for their State to assume its rightful place
within the international community. I say 13 million
Palestinians, and others say that that is not true. But
we are 13 million Palestinians whether we live within
Palestine or in other countries.
I have come here before the Council in the middle
of the deadlock in the peace process caused by the
decision of the United States regarding Jerusalem,
Israel’s ongoing illegal settlement activities, its failure
to respect signed agreements and its violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, the latest of which
is resolution 2334 (2016). We are here because of the
Palestinians’ desire to continue working constructively
and courageously. We have the full courage to say yes
and the full courage to say no, based on international
law and our interests. We are here to build a culture of
peace, reject violence, save the principle of two-States,
obtain security and stability for all, restore hope to
our people and the peoples of the region, and find a
way out of the impasse which we face. We believe in
comprehensive, lasting and just peace that is a strategic
choice for the sake of future generations in our region,
Palestinians and Israelis. I will therefore inform the
Council about our plan.
First, we call for the convening of an international
peace conference by mid-2018, predicated upon
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, with broad international participation,
including the two parties concerned and regional and
international stakeholders, foremost among them the
permanent members of the Security Council and the
Quartet in the same framework as the Paris conference
for peace in the Middle East and the conference to be
held in Moscow in line with resolution 1850 (2009).
We have accordingly called for the convening of an
international peace conference. The conference in
Paris was attended by representatives of 74 States.
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8183

The outcome of the proposed conference should be
as follows.

unfortunately the United States Administration did not
fulfil its commitment.

First, during its initial phase, it should result in the
admission of the State of Palestine as a full Member to
the United Nations, and that is what we deserve. Does
not everyone here believe that we deserve to become
a full Member? Why not? We call on the Security
Council to realize that goal. We will come to the
Council in line with General Assembly resolution 67/19
of 29 November 2012, adopted by 138 votes in favour
to 9 votes against, which supported our non-member
observer status and guaranteed international protection
for our people based on the 1967 borders and the
exchange of recognition between the State of Palestine
and the State of Israel along the 1967 borders.

Thirdly, the Arab Peace Initiative must be
implemented, as adopted from A to Z, and not from
Z to A. According to the Initiative, the Palestinian
question must be resolved first, before regional issues.
That was affirmed by the Initiative and all Arabs and
Muslims who have adopted it. When the Initiative is
implemented and the State of Palestine is recognized
within the 1967 borders and the problem is resolved,
all Arabs and Muslims will be ready to recognize the
State of Israel — all Arabs and Muslims. All 57 Arab
and Muslim countries will recognize the State of Israel
and normalize relations with it, as stipulated in several
Arab summit agreements. In that regard, we reiterate
the terms of reference for any upcoming negotiations,
including, first, respect for international law.

During its second phase, it should result in
the establishment of an international multilateral
mechanism that will facilitate negotiations between
the two parties to resolve all permanent status issues
as defined by the Oslo Accords, including the issues
of Jerusalem, borders, security, settlements, refugees,
water and prisoners, which are to be resolved through
an agreement by both parties. Negotiations leading up
to that mechanism must be based on international law
and the relevant United Nations resolutions, and their
outcome must be implemented within a corresponding
time frame with assurances for that implementation.
Negotiations are to be defined by a timeline at the end
of which the agreement must be implemented. That is
the only way to resolve this long-standing conflict in
the Middle East.
Secondly, during negotiations all parties must
refrain from unilateral actions, in particular any
that would prejudice the outcome of final-status
negotiations, as set forth in the Oslo Accords of
1993. The Oslo Accords stipulate that all parties must
refrain from unilateral actions, and, above all, any
solution must be based on the cessation of settlement
activities in territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, and the suspension of the decision
concerning Jerusalem and the transfer of the United
States embassy there, as that hinders negotiations. The
relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), must be respected.
At the same time, the State of Palestine would refrain
from joining other organizations, as we have already
committed ourselves to 22 international organizations
out of 500 organizations and treaties. We have
committed and we continue to be committed, although

We are a State, but that has not yet been recognized.
Nevertheless, we affirm respect for international law
and relevant resolutions. First, all resolutions must be
respected, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
through to resolution 2334 (2016), and the Arab Peace
Initiative, along with signed agreements. Secondly,
we affirm the preservation of the principle of the twoState solution, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
State of Palestine, living side by side with the State of
Israel in peace and security on the basis of 4 June 1967
borders. We reject partial solutions and a State that has
provisional borders. Thirdly, we call for the acceptance
of minimal land swaps that are equal in value and size
in accordance with an agreement between the two
parties. Fourthly, East Jerusalem is the capital of the
State of Palestine, open to the members of the three
religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Fifthly,
we must ensure the security of the two States, without
undermining their independence and sovereignty, by
the presence on the borders of a third party to protect
Israel and Palestine. Sovereignty is key and cannot
be preserved by hegemony and control. Sixthly, there
must be a just and agreed upon solution for Palestine
refugees on the basis of resolution 194 (III) and in
accordance with the Arab Peace Initiative. Pending
a just solution for the refugees’ issue, there must be
ongoing international commitment and support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Who will take
care of the 6 million educated refugees if assistance
for them is halted? If assistance is stopped, they will
become terrorists or refugees in Europe. That is the

18-045499/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

alternative unless the Council continues to support
UNWRA until the crisis ends.
We stand ready to embark on the longest journey
to the farthest places in the world in order to enjoy our
rights but we will not move one inch if we are asked
to forsake those rights. We will present any agreement
reached with Israel to a general referendum among
our people so as to respect democracy and strengthen
legitimacy. We believe we are a democratic and civilized
people. Therefore we will call a general referendum.
We knocked on your door today, Mr. President,
as you preside over the highest international body
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace
and security. We have presented our vision for peace.
It is hoped that it will be received with wisdom and
justice. We are ready to begin negotiations immediately
in order to achieve the freedom and independence of
our people — just like all other nations — as well as
peace and security for everyone in our region and the
world, so that future generations can enjoy the benefits
of that peace, following the enormous sacrifices made
by our people. We recognize our martyrs, the wounded
and the prisoners.
The Security Council is the highest world body.
After the Council, we leave our issue in the hands of the
Almighty, until Judgment Day. If justice for all people
cannot be attained here, where should we go? Please
help us. We call upon the Council to help us so that we
do not commit acts that are at variance with our beliefs,
those of the Council and the world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank President
Abbas for his statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of Israel.

20/02/2018

United Nations. Today, once again, rather than driving
just 12 minutes between Ramallah and Jerusalem, he
has chosen to fly 12 hours to New York to avoid the
possibility of peace. Mr. Abbas has made it clear with
his words and actions that he is no longer part of the
solution; he is the problem.
What has he done to improve the life of a single
person in Ramallah or Gaza? The Palestinians need
leadership that will invest in education, not glorify
violence. They need leadership that will build
hospitals, not pay terrorists. They need leadership that
will negotiate with Israel, speak to us and not run away
from dialogue.
Mr. Abbas just addressed the members of the
Security Council and spoke about his commitment to
peace. That is what he often does when speaking in
international forums. But when he addresses his people
in Arabic, he conveys a very different message. A few
weeks ago when Mr. Abbas spoke to the Palestine
Liberation Organization Central Council, he called the
national movement of the Jewish people “a colonialist
project that has no connection to Judaism”. In that same
shameful speech, he had the audacity to accuse Jews of
supporting anti-Semitism in order to promote Zionism.
It was not the first time he used such hateful language. In
September 2015, as part of his attempts to delegitimize
the connection between the Jewish people and the land
of Israel, he stated that “the Jews have no right to the
Temple Mount and other holy sites. The Jews desecrate
them with their filthy feet”. He then went on to incite
his people to violence, saying, “we welcome every drop
of blood spilled in Jerusalem”.

Mr. Danon (Israel): I expected Mr. Abbas to stay
with us and have a dialogue. Regrettably, once again he
has run away. Look what just happened in this room.
Mr. Abbas entered, put his demands on the table and
left. He expects the Security Council to deliver the
result. It will not work that way. The only way to move
forward is through direct negotiations between Israel
and Palestine.

Mr. Abbas inspires a culture of hate within
Palestinian society. He names schools and public
squares in honour of terrorists. He encourages
Palestinian children to hate by teaching them in school
that Jews are descendants of apes. Just this month, his
Fatah faction praised the terrorists who killed Rabbi
Raziel Shevach, and he remained silent and refused to
condemn the terrorists who killed a father of six as he
was driving home to see his children.

It is unfortunate that we are meeting here today.
For the past seven and a half years, the Chairman of the
Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, has refused
to meet even once with Prime Minister Netanyahu.
He has refused to negotiate peace. Yet, during that
same time, Mr. Abbas has made seven trips here to the

Mr. Abbas’s incitement does not end with rhetoric.
He has made it official Palestinian policy to sponsor
terrorism. In 2017, he spent $345 million to pay
terrorists for killing innocent Israelis. That is 50 per
cent of the total foreign aid donated to the Palestinian
Authority — 50 per cent of its money — which is money

10/30

18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

he could have spent building 40 hospitals. That is money
he could have used to build 172 schools — every year.
His travels around the world to seek international
intervention are an attempt to avoid the hard choices
necessary for peace. He looks to every possible
forum because he does not want to actually negotiate
with Israel.
It is unfortunate, but this reckless behaviour by
Chairman Abbas is nothing new. It is a pattern set
throughout over 70 years of missed opportunities by
Palestinian leadership whose spirit he continues to
embody. We recently celebrated 70 years since the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 181 (II). For the
Jewish people, it represented international recognition
of our historic rights to our homeland. We accepted the
resolution immediately. It was not perfect. It did not
provide us with all that we deserved. But it gave us hope
for a better future. Yet, this past November, as Israel
celebrated this milestone, the Palestinians marked the
anniversary with grief and mourning, just as they did
70 years ago when they chose to reject it. Since that
moment in 1947, Israelis valiantly fought in too many
wars against enemies intent on destroying our country.
Over time, brave leaders emerged in Egypt and
Jordan — leaders who were willing to negotiate,
compromise and ultimately sign peace agreements
with Israel. But the Palestinian leadership continued to
choose conflict over coexistence. At the Camp David
summit, in 2000, Prime Minister Ehud Barak presented
the Palestinians with an unprecedented offer. What
was Mahmoud Abbas’s reaction? He chose to side
with Yasser Arafat, claim it was a trap and reject the
proposal. That was back in 2000.
In 2005, Mahmoud Abbas was elected to chair the
Palestinian Authority. The world hoped he would follow
in the courageous footsteps of President Sadat and King
Hussein, seek peace with Israel and forge a better future
for Palestinians. But he let his people down. Since the
day he took office, peace plan after peace plan has been
accepted by Israel and rejected by Mr. Abbas. Time and
again, Israeli leaders have sat with Mr. Abbas — three
different Israeli Prime Ministers, three different
American Presidents — but every time an inch towards
progress is made, Mr. Abbas runs away.
In 2007, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert offered
the most generous deal since resolution 181 (II): an
almost complete withdrawal from Judea and Samaria
and a direct link to the Gaza Strip. The offer even

S/PV. 8183

included a plan to place the Old City of Jerusalem, the
gateway to our holiest sites, under international control.
Mr. Abbas’s response was simple: an unequivocal no.
Two years later, Prime Minister Netanyahu did
something unprecedented. In an attempt to restart
negotiations, he initiated a 10-month freeze on
Jewish construction in Judea and Samaria. That was
a precondition to which no Israeli Prime Minister, not
even Yitzhak Rabin or Shimon Peres, had ever agreed.
But soon enough, the 10 months passed, and Mahmoud
Abbas was nowhere to be found. He never came to
the table.
In 2013, Secretary of State John Kerry opened
another attempt at negotiations. Once again, Prime
Minister Netanyahu was ready to talk and negotiate.
Once again, Chairman Abbas responded by breaking
his commitment to Secretary Kerry. He chose the
unilateral action of joining international conventions.
Then he sought peace with Hamas, the internationally
recognized terrorist organization, without even
demanding that it renounce violence.
Today, as we speak, the current United States
Administration is once again working very hard to make
progress towards peace. Mr. Abbas, however, is once
again looking hard for an excuse. This time he claims
it was the American announcement about Jerusalem
that drove him to reject negotiations. By recognizing
Jerusalem as Israel’s capital, President Trump simply
stated what should be clear to everyone.
Let me be clear. For thousands of years Jerusalem
has been the heart and soul of our people. Jerusalem
has been our capital since the days of King David.
And Jerusalem will remain the undivided capital of
the State of Israel forever. We will always insist on
Israeli sovereignty over a united Jerusalem. But even
fair-minded observers would agree that, under any
possible agreement, Jerusalem will be recognized
internationally as our capital.
After all these years of Abbas’s rejectionism, one
thing is very clear: when we extend a hand, Abbas
extends a fist. Only when the terrorists of Hamas extend
a hand does Abbas embrace them with open arms and
without preconditions. Mr. Abbas has not even insisted
on the basic human gesture of demanding the return of
the Israeli civilians and the remains of Israel Defense
Forces soldiers Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul, savagely
being held by Hamas.

18-0454911/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israelis are an optimistic people. We weathered four
bloody wars with Egypt while waiting for a leader like
Anwar Sadat to courageously visit Jerusalem. It took
decades of talks with Jordan until the time was right
for King Hussein to enter into what he rightly called a
peace of the brave.
Three times a day Jews in Israel and all over the
world turn to Jerusalem and pray for peace. We ask the
following from God:
“Grant peace, goodness and blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy to us and unto all Israel and all
of the world.”
We have no doubt that the day will come when the
Palestinian people will also be blessed with leadership
that shares these noble aspirations. This will be a
leadership that condemns violence and ends the
shameful practice of paying salaries to terrorists.
It will be a leadership that educates its people on
tolerance instead of peddling anti-Semitism. It will be a
leadership that recognizes that Israel is and always will
be the national homeland of the Jewish people.
Israel eagerly awaits the day when such a
Palestinian leadership will emerge and bring hope for a
better future for its people and our region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to those Council members who wish to
make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for being with us today as
well as Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.
We are meeting today in a forum that is very
familiar to all of us. This meeting on the Middle East
has been taking place each month for many, many years;
its focus has been almost entirely on issues facing
Israelis and Palestinians, and we have heard many of
the same arguments and ideas over and over again. We
have already heard them again this morning.
It is as if saying the same things repeatedly without
actually doing the hard work and making the necessary
compromises will achieve anything. Beginning last year
we have tried to broaden the discussion, and we have
had some success in doing so. I thank my colleagues
who have participated in those broader discussions. One
reason we did that is our well-founded belief that the
United Nations spends an altogether disproportionate
amount of time on Israeli-Palestinian issues.
12/30

20/02/2018

It is not that those issues are unimportant. They
are certainly very important. The problem is that the
United Nations has proved itself time and again to be a
grossly biased Organization when it comes to Israel. As
such, the disproportionate focus of the United Nations
has actually made the problem more difficult to solve
by elevating the tensions and the grievances between
the two parties.
Another reason we have attempted to shift the
discussion is that the vast scope of the challenges
facing the region dwarf the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
As we meet here today, the Middle East is plagued
by many truly horrendous problems. In Yemen, there
is one of the worst humanitarian disasters on Earth,
with millions of people facing starvation. Meanwhile
militia groups fire Iranian rockets from Yemen into
neighbouring countries.
In Syria, the Al-Assad regime is using chemical
weapons to gas its own people. This war has taken the
lives of more than half a million Syrians. Millions more
have been pushed into neighbouring Jordan, Turkey and
Lebanon as refugees, causing major hardships in those
countries. In Lebanon, Hizbullah’s terrorists exert
ever more control, illegally building up a stockpile of
offensive weapons, inviting a dangerous escalation that
could devastate regional security.
The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham is engaged
in an inhumane level of cruelty in much of the region.
It has been dealt severe setbacks in Iraq and Syria,
but it is not yet completely destroyed and still poses
serious threats.
Egypt faces repeated terrorist attacks, and of course
there is the terrorist-sponsoring regime in Tehran that
initiates and encourages most of the troubles I have
just outlined.
These immense security and humanitarian
challenges throughout the region should occupy more
of our attention rather than having us sit here month
after month and use the most democratic country in the
Middle East as a scapegoat for the region’s problems.
But here we go again.
I do not mean to suggest that there is no suffering
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Both sides have
suffered greatly. So many innocent Israelis have been
killed or injured by suicide bombings, stabbings and
other sickening terrorist attacks. Israel has been forced
to live under constant security threats like virtually no
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

other country in the world. It should not have to live
that way. And yet Israel has overcome those burdens;
it is a thriving country with a vibrant economy that
contributes much to the world in the name of technology,
science and the arts.
It is the Palestinian people who are suffering more.
The Palestinians in Gaza live under Hamas terrorist
oppression. I cannot even call it a governing authority,
as Hamas provides so little in the way of what one
would normally think as Government services. The
people of Gaza live in truly awful conditions, while
their Hamas rulers put their resources into building
terror tunnels and rockets. The Palestinians in the West
Bank also suffer greatly. Too many have died, and too
much potential has been lost in this conflict. We are
joined here today by Palestinian Authority President
Abbas. I am sorry he declined to stay in the Chamber to
hear the remarks of others. Even though he has left the
room, I will address the balance of my remarks to him.
When the new American Administration came into
office last January, we did so against the fresh backdrop
of the passage of resolution 2334 (2016). In the waning
days of the previous American Administration, the
United States made a serious error in allowing that
resolution to be adopted. Resolution 2334 (2016) was
wrong on many levels. I am not going to get into the
substance now. But beyond the substance, perhaps its
biggest flaw was that it encouraged the false notion
that Israel can be pushed into a deal that undermines
its vital interests, damaging the prospects for peace
by increasing mistrust between the Israelis and
the Palestinians.
In the past year, the United States has worked
to repair that damage. At the United Nations I have
opposed the bias against Israel, as any ally should do.
But that does not mean that I or our Administration is
against the Palestinian people. Just the opposite is true;
we recognize the suffering of the Palestinian people, as
I have recognized it here today.
I sit here today offering the outstretched hand of
the United States to the Palestinian people in the cause
of peace. We are fully prepared to look to a future of
prosperity and coexistence. We welcome President
Abbas as the leader of the Palestinian people here today.
But I will decline the advice I was recently given by his
top negotiator, Saeb Erekat. I will not shut up; rather, I
will respectfully speak some hard truths.

S/PV. 8183

The Palestinian leadership has a choice to make
between two different paths. There is the path of
absolutist demands, hateful rhetoric and incitement to
violence. That path has led and will continue to lead
to nothing but hardship for the Palestinian people.
Or there is the path of negotiation and compromise.
History has shown that path to be successful for Egypt
and Jordan, including the transfer of territory. That
path remains open to the Palestinian leadership if only
it is courageous enough to take it.
The United States knows the Palestinian leadership
was very unhappy with the decision to move our
embassy to Jerusalem. It does not have to like that
decision. It does not have to praise it. It does not even
have to accept it. But know this: that decision will
not change.
So once again you must choose between two
paths. You can choose to denounce the United States,
reject the United States’ role in peace talks and pursue
punitive measures against Israel in international
forums such as the United Nations. I assure you that
path will get the Palestinian people exactly nowhere
towards the achievement of their aspirations. Or you
can choose to put aside your anger about the location
of our embassy and move forward with us towards a
negotiated compromise that holds great potential for
improving the lives of the Palestinian people.
Putting forward old talking points and entrenched
and undeveloped concepts achieves nothing. That
approach has been tried many times and has always
failed. After so many decades, we welcome new
thinking. As I mentioned in the meeting held last month
on this issue (see S/PV.8167), the United States stands
ready to work with the Palestinian leadership. Our
negotiators are sitting right behind me, ready to talk.
But we will not chase after you. The choice is yours.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to express our appreciation
to you, Sir, as President of the Security Council, to
my colleagues on the Council and to everyone in this
Chamber today for the tribute to the memory of Vitaly
Ivanovich Churkin, the late Permanent Representative
of Russia, exactly a year since he was unexpectedly and
untimely taken from us. I thank you.
I would also like to express our sorrow and
sympathy at the passing yesterday of our dear
friend and colleague Mr. Necton Mhura, Permanent
Representative of Malawi.

18-0454913/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We are pleased to welcome Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the State of Palestine, to the Council
Chamber. We believe that the participation of the
leader of Palestine in today’s meeting is important to
an understanding of the current situation in the Middle
East. We thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative
report on the situation regarding the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli situation.
The long-suffering region of the Middle East
is being ripped apart by violent conflicts, in Syria,
Yemen and Libya, all of them in themselves deeply
critical. But it would be deluded to think that the
Palestinian problem has now taken a back seat and an
even greater mistake to put it there on purpose. Even
today it is still the epicentre of the chronic instability in
the Middle East. The situation in the area has recently
deteriorated. In the absence of full-fledged political
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis, the
notorious recent decisions regarding Jerusalem have
not only inflamed emotions and pushed the situation
into another destabilizing cycle, they have intensified
people’s desperation. There have been demonstrations
in the West Bank and Gaza and angry statements from
the Palestinian leadership and the capitals of the ArabMuslim world, all of which only confirm the sensitive
significance of the problem of Jerusalem, the cradle of
three monotheistic religions.
We believe that increasing the pace of Israeli
settlement activity will undermine the prospects for
achieving a two-State solution and that the policy should
be ended. Ensuring the ability of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to do its work effectively is absolutely
critical. We must never let the Palestinians find
themselves in circumstances where they have nothing
to lose, practically speaking, a situation that would fuel
radicalism and has the potential to blow up the situation
in the Palestinian territories and the entire region.
Russia contributes regularly to the Agency’s budget as
well as giving the Palestinians bilateral assistance.
It bears repeating that the current status quo in this
protracted conflict is incapable of producing a reliable,
lasting and viable outcome. Only a settlement based
on a two-State formula, presupposing the peaceful and
secure coexistence of two States, Palestine and Israel,
will enable the crisis to be overcome and create the
conditions for sustainable development and a road to
peace. As the situation evolves, Russia will continue
its efforts to maintain the architecture of the Middle
14/30

20/02/2018

East settlement and to lead the political process
out of its current depressed state. The priority task
right now is achieving an immediate resumption of
direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations on a generally
recognized international legal basis, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
We firmly believe that the Middle East Quartet still
has the full potential to be a unique mediation format,
approved by the Council’s resolutions. There should
be no question that the group of four mediators, in
collaboration with the League of Arab States, is capable
of playing a role in unfreezing the political dialogue.
The work of the Quartet, particularly its report of
June 2016, has not lost its relevance. Implementing
the report’s recommendations will help to strengthen
confidence-building measures between the parties. It
discusses what to do about the settlement activity, the
persistent provocative rhetoric and violence from both
sides and other factors, as well as the imperative of
ensuring that the Palestinians achieve genuine national
unity based on the political platform of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. We support activating this
mechanism and its regular and thorough collaboration
with the League of Arab States and all the regional
and global stakeholders that are capable of helping to
overcome the dangerous impasse in the PalestinianIsraeli settlement. We particularly welcome Egypt and
Jordan’s efforts in that regard. Our Egyptian partners’
mission to unite the Palestinians’ ranks continues to
be vital.
Getting new developments with regard to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict requires considering how the
international community will support the process so as
to create the conditions for direct negotiations between
Palestine and Israel. A direct dialogue on settling all
final-status issues is a given in the Middle East peace
process equation. We must focus on developing a
formula acceptable to both sides. We are ready to discuss
its parameters with all global and regional stakeholders.
As we all know, the last two weeks in Russia have seen
numerous contacts conducted at the highest level,
including visits by King Abdullah II of Jordan, Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and President Abbas.
We reaffirm our willingness to provide a platform in
Russia for a meeting of Palestinian and Israeli leaders,
without preconditions. We expect the proposal will
receive a positive response from both sides.
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We would like to emphasize that achieving a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement, as with the resolution
of other regional problems, will require joint efforts
and collective and mutually respectful cooperation.
All efforts to lay blame, groundless accusations and
insulting rhetoric must be left behind, forever part of
the past. We must rather activate channels for dialogue
where we can discuss ways for resolving these difficult
problems. The measures for confidence-building and
security for the entire Middle East that we have long
proposed still remain on the agenda.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for their
important and informative briefings, and to welcome
the presence here of President Mahmoud Abbas of
Palestine and the courageous and constant commitment
to peace and negotiations that he has reaffirmed before
the Council today.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is not just one more
crisis among all the crises rocking the Middle East. It is
the oldest conflict in the region and one whose symbolic
dimension, historical depth and regional reverberations
transcend the borders of Israel and the Palestinian
territories. And lastly, it is a conflict whose centrality
and dynamics have always given terrorist groups active
in the region and beyond grounds for recruitment. Now,
almost a quarter of a century after the Oslo Accords,
the prospects for peace continue to diminish both on
the ground and in discussions and minds. During that
time, the new generation of Palestinians and Israelis
that has grown up has seen the hopes for a settlement
of the conflict recede. In that regard, there are some
who may be tempted to turn everything upside down,
particularly by transforming a political disagreement
that seeks compromise into a religious conflict where no
concessions are possible. We should be very conscious
of the risk of that happening.
We cannot ignore the fact that in reality the socalled status quo on the ground is deteriorating every
day, thanks in part to colonization and more generally
to Israel’s occupation. It is also marked by violence,
which continues to be used and encouraged by several
movements, including Hamas, in a situation that
may degenerate and lead to uncontrollable regional
consequences at any time. The risk of escalation is
particularly evident in Gaza, which is my first point
and which the news of the past few days compels me
to make. Recent incidents, against a background of

S/PV. 8183

humanitarian and economic crises in the Gaza Strip,
increase the risk of a new conflict like the three Gaza
experienced over the past decade. In order to avoid new
violence, whose primary victims would be the people of
Gaza, we call on everyone to exercise restraint. I want
to reiterate that we will never compromise on Israel’s
security and reiterate our strong condemnation of the
attacks perpetrated on Israel’s territory — be they
the use of explosives, the indiscriminate rocket fire
that has recently resumed, or the digging of offensive
tunnels such as that which has just been destroyed by
Israeli forces.
Beyond the urgently required de-escalation,
there can be no lasting solution for Gaza without the
return of the Palestinian Authority under the authority
of Mahmoud Abbas and within the framework of
the principles endorsed by the Palestine Liberation
Organization. In that regard, we reiterate our
commitment to the implementation of the agreement
signed in Cairo on 12 October 2017 by Fatah and Hamas,
which should enable the Palestinian Authority to fully
exercise its prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in
the area of security. That process must result in a rapid
improvement of the living conditions of the people in
Gaza and must also be accompanied by a lifting of the
blockade, as well as credible security guarantees for
Israel. France stands ready to support those efforts.
Finally, we must not separate the situation in Gaza
from the Palestinian question as a whole. Gaza is an
integral part of the Palestinian territories, and there
can be no Palestinian State or viable peace agreement
with Israel without Gaza. Palestinian unity is therefore
essential to peace in the Middle East.
My second point concerns the conflict as a whole.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the oldest of the
conflicts that are tearing apart the Middle East and
the only one whose solution is also widely known
and shared. This solution is based on the principle of
two States living in peace and security within secure
and recognized borders; borders drawn on the basis
of the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed exchanges of
territories; Jerusalem as the future capital of those two
States; and a concerted, realistic and fair solution for
Palestinian refugees. Any negotiations must be based
on internationally agreed parameters, which themselves
are based on international law and the resolutions of the
Council. These parameters are not optional, but rather
the very framework for negotiations. We know very
well that the fate of the Israelis and the Palestinians are

18-0454915/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

connected. Neither of the two peoples will sustainably
achieve their national aspirations at the expense of
the other. Today we are at a crossroads, at a critical
moment when each of the parameters I have just listed
has been weakened.
With regard to the 1967 lines, the settlement
of Palestinian territories and all the accompanying
legislative and administrative measures are trying to
impose another reality on the ground and to implement a
project that is incompatible with the two-State solution.
If we are not careful, that solution will disappear like a
mirage in the desert. After a record year for settlement
in 2017, there have already been announcements of
some 1,800 housing units this year. The position of
France is clear. We condemn settlement activity in all
its forms. It is illegal under international law, as recalled
in resolution 2334 (2016). It is also dangerous, since it
destroys on the ground the possibility of two States and
undermines trust between the parties.
With regard to the issue of Jerusalem, the status
of the city can be determined only by the parties
themselves within the framework of a peace agreement.
Under such a future agreement, the city is destined to
become the capital of two States, Israel and Palestine.
In the absence of agreement, we do not recognize
any sovereignty over Jerusalem. We therefore do not
agree with any announcement that deviates from the
international consensus and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 478 (1980).
Similarly, we regret the adoption early this year of
an Israeli law on Jerusalem that will make it much
more difficult to share Jerusalem as part of a future
peace agreement.
Finally, the situation of the Palestinian refugee
camps is a time bomb in Gaza — I will not dwell on
this — and throughout the region. As long as a realistic
and fair solution for refugees remains out of reach,
the provision of basic services by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) to more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees will be essential. This is a humanitarian
imperative, in particular in areas such as medical
assistance and food supplies. It is also a question of
human development, in particular when it comes to
UNRWA’s network of schools, and an imperative for
the security and stability of the region. The situation in
Lebanon is particularly worrying in this respect.
16/30

20/02/2018

Let us be clear. The weaker UNRWA becomes,
the more terrorist groups can use Palestinian refugee
camps as breeding grounds for recruitment. In the name
of humanitarian requirements, but also realism and our
security interests, we call on the United States not to
give up the historic and vital role it plays with regard
to UNRWA. At the same time, all current and potential
donors should renew their efforts to promote UNRWA
as a unique tool for regional stabilization.
I have recalled the main parameters for a solution
to the conflict, which are based on the Council’s
resolutions. My third and last point is: How can we
contribute on this basis to a resumption of negotiations?
We acknowledge the commitment of the United States,
whose role is essential, to fostering a resumption
of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations on a final-status
agreement. We hope the American proposals will be
within the framework agreed by the international
community, as recalled by President Emmanuel Macron
when he met with Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu
and President Mahmoud Abbas in December 2017. Our
authorities intend to remain in close contact with the
parties in order to contribute to the preservation of
the possibility of two States on the ground and the
resumption of negotiations.
With regard to methodology, we welcome the
proposals made today by President Abbas and are open
to exploring the development of the ways in which
the international community can support the peace
process. France has been reflecting on that for a long
time. That is what motivated our initiative leading
to the Paris conference on 15 January 2017, at which
more than 70 countries renewed their agreement on
the parameters for peace and the idea that Israelis
and Palestinians should themselves create a lasting
solution through negotiations. Such a development is
intended not to undermine the role of the United States,
whose commitment to supporting the peace process is
indispensable, but to make it possible for the actors who
can play a constructive role with the parties to more
easily join together, on the basis of the international
parameters I have described, in order to help the
parties to resume and successfully carry out the peace
negotiations. In that regard, regional actors would play
a crucial role by offering, on the basis of the Arab Peace
Initiative, the prospect of full regional normalization
for Israel in the wake of a peace agreement. Similarly,
Council members should provide their support.
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the difficult context I have just described, I want
to solemnly reiterate that there is no viable alternative
to the two-State solution. A single State would lead to
two parallel citizenship regimes in the same territory,
thereby creating an unequal situation that would
be unacceptable in principle and catastrophic in its
consequences. Such a situation would represent a
double impasse. For the Palestinians, it would mean
the abandonment of their aspirations for statehood; for
the Israelis, it would mean the demise of their national
democratic project.
If there is one urgent need today, it is to offer Israelis
and Palestinians a political future by actively working
to restore hope for two States and the possibility of
negotiations between the parties. France, because it is a
friend of both Israelis and Palestinians, intends to play
its full role nationally and with its international partners.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for their, as always, detailed but
sobering briefings to the Security Council. I want to
say too that we fully support the work on the ground of
Mr. Mladenov and his team and the work that they do
every day to search for peace in the Middle East.
We were also pleased to see President Abbas in the
Chamber today and to hear his message.
For many years, we have spoken about the Middle
East peace process as being at a crossroads. This
statement has never been more accurate than it is
today. And at every crossroads there is a choice to be
made. At this moment in time, there are a number of
worrying developments in terms of the choices we see
being made. Accelerated illegal settlement expansion,
harmful Israeli legislative measures, resurgent violence
including rocket attacks, the grave and deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Gaza — which we dealt with
in detail last week — and a threat to the specific status
of Jerusalem, as it is embodied in, inter alia, resolution
478 (1980), are among the many examples. At the same
time, our commonly agreed destination is as clear as
ever. It is two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security.
In order to contribute to the two-State solution, we
must acknowledge the fundamental root cause of the
conflict, which the occupation. If we are to be able
to reach a sustainable peace, humanitarian, economic
and political actions are all needed, but their full
engagement will not suffice if the illegal occupation of

S/PV. 8183

Palestine does not end. As we work on the steps ahead,
this perspective must be kept in mind. Sweden remains
fully committed to the two-State solution, based on
international law, known parametres and relevant
resolutions of the Council, including resolution 2334
(2016).
Respect for international law and United Nations
resolutions remains at the core of the peace process. It
is therefore more important than ever to be principled
and to base our decisions and actions on international
law. The Council is central to upholding the rulesbased system, and the debate tomorrow will also focus
on the significance of this system and respect for the
Charter of the United Nations. The aim remains two
States living side by side in peace and security, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both. That is also the policy
of the European Union. There is no alternative, and
that is why no action should be taken that prejudges
the final-status issues. Such issues can be taken off the
table only as part of negotiations between the parties.
That includes Jerusalem and refugees. In this regard,
the Council has a duty to uphold its resolutions on the
special status of Jerusalem.
We were pleased to see President Abbas in the
Security Council today, as I said earlier. Sweden
recognized Palestine in 2014 and fully supports
Palestinian state-building. For sustainable progress,
efforts towards the re-establishment of Palestinian
Authority control in Gaza and intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are crucial, as are continued efforts to
strengthen inclusive and democratic institutions and
processes in Palestine.
As Special Coordinator Mladenov said, the peace
process needs to be inclusive in order to advance and
achieve sustainable results. Women’s fair representation
and full and meaningful participation in the peace
process is a prerequisite for progress. The younger
generations must also be included and given hope of a
better future and an alternative to the current situation.
The private sector also has a role to play. In both
Palestine and Israel, civil society plays a crucial role in
advancing peace. That is why Sweden engages closely
and widely with civil society, in particular women’s
groups and youth, in both countries.
As previously stated, including in the Council last
week, a significant reduction of funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) is deeply worrisome and

18-0454917/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

must be urgently and sustainably resolved. Failure
to resolve the funding situation will have serious
humanitarian and security consequences in the region.
For that reason, Sweden has already made our payment
of $59 million for 2018 to UNRWA, and we urge
others to step up their funding, including by making
their payments as early as possible. Furthermore,
Sweden, Jordan and Egypt, together with UNRWA
and the Secretary-General, have decided to co-host a
ministerial conference in the spring on the Agency’s
pressing financial situation.
We are indeed at a crossroads. Our final
destination — the two-State solution — is getting
further away by the day. The political and even physical
space for a two-State solution is drastically shrinking.
The choices that we all make — Israelis, Palestinians
and as members of the Council — will determine where
we end up. The Council also has a responsibility to act,
including by supporting the parties in moving from
words to action. Difficult choices need to be made.
What is needed now is political leadership and courage
to make the bold choices and pick the right path to break
the long-term deadlock and restart a genuine peace
process. Only that way can we reach our commonly
agreed final destination.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation offers
its gratitude for and welcome to the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of the
State of Palestine, to whom I offer our deepest respect
and admiration.
I also welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process. We further commend the initiative
of the presidency of Kuwait for organizing this
important meeting.
Bolivia comes to this important meeting, the second
of 2018 on this issue, with great concern, as every day we
continue to see the suffocation of the people of Palestine
by Israel through expansionist and colonialist policies
that violate international law and the resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council. It is
necessary and critical to recall that, while there are two
parties to this conflict, they are not of equality status.
One of those parties, Israel, is the occupying Power;
the other, Palestine, is an occupied people. This is a
historical and glaring inequality. One of the parties has
used and uses force to occupy the territory of another.
18/30

20/02/2018

One of the parties has built a wall that, according to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
constitutes a violation of international law. One of the
parties builds illegal settlements in the territory of the
other. One of the parties displaces civilians by force,
confiscates land, demolishes housing and transfers
settlers to illegally built settlements. One of the
parties has imposed a blockade on Gaza, with terrible
humanitarian consequences, including limited access
to basic services. One of the parties is responsible for
the existence of 5 million Palestinian refugees. One of
the parties appropriates the water and agricultural land
resources of the other. One of the parties has unleashed
a brutal military campaign against the Palestinian
people. One of the parties commits serious violations
of human rights and may have committed crimes of
war. One of the parties forcibly displaces Palestinian
civilians. One of the parties shirks its international
obligations and systematically violates the resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
For example, Gaza is currently suffering electricity
blackouts of up to 16 hours a day, and there is a severe
shortage of drinking water, medicines and basic
supplies. Fuel reserves are running dry. These facts
have dreadful repercussions, such as the closure of
hospitals and the possible collapse of basic services, in
addition to the likelihood of a cholera outbreak. The
situation is alarming, and even more so now that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNWRA), which provides
humanitarian assistance to more than 1 million people
in Gaza, is facing a financial crisis that is undermining
its response capacity. In that regard, we express
our concern about the announced cuts in UNRWA
funding, a measure that is no more than a manifest
way to politicize the dignity and human security of
nearly 5 million Palestinian refugees. We welcome the
initiative of Sweden, among other States, to convene
a ministerial conference to address that important and
urgent matter.
For 50 years, Israeli policies of dispossession,
occupation and discrimination have heightened the
suffering of the Palestinian people. In January alone,
Israeli authorities demolished or seized 32 Palestinian
structures in the West Bank — approximately the
same number of structures as the monthly average
of 2017. Thirty-seven persons were displaced and
another 82 were affected as a result. In other words,
we must speak not of a status quo in the situation of
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the occupied Palestinian territories, but of an ongoing
and continuous augmentation of the occupation,
rendering the possibility of attaining a two-State
solution increasingly difficult. We believe that those
who suffer the most as a result of those policies are
the most vulnerable faction of the population, which is
comprised of women, older people and children. In that
regard, we express our concern about the more than 300
children who have been detained in recent months by
Israel’s security forces.
As Mr. Mladenov mentioned, we want to draw
attention the case of the young girl Ahed Tamimi, who
has become a symbol of the Palestinian resistance.
Ahed’s story is not just about a girl, but rather thousands
of youth over decades of occupation. Ahed has borne
witness to the violence and injustice that her people
endure on a daily basis. She has watched her mother be
arrested and her cousin fall into a coma after being shot
in the face — both of them victims of Israeli forces.
Ahed has felt the fear and hopelessness that other youth
cannot even imagine at that age. She has experienced
what no parent wants for their children. And despite
that, she has demonstrated extraordinary strength and
bravery. Israel, a State party to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, is the only country in the world
that tries children before military courts. We express
our solidarity with Ahed Tamimi’s family and we are
awaiting her prompt release.
Bolivia, as a pacifist country, believes in a unique
approach to ensuring fair and lasting peace in the
conflict between Israel and Palestine — one based
on dialogue and negotiations, with clear political will
demonstrated by both parties in order to achieve the
two-State solution. For that reason, we reaffirm our
full commitment to multilateralism and respect for
international law, and we reiterate our support for all
international efforts that lead to a peaceful solution to
the conflict, such as the Quartet road map, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative, among others
that are dedicated to entrenching fair and lasting
peace, allowing both peoples to live within secure and
recognized borders.
We are convinced that the only long-term
option to solve the conflict is the two-State solution,
where, ultimately, a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State would be established with the pre1967 internationally recognized borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions. In

S/PV. 8183

that regard, we reiterate our emphatic condemnation
of the decision made by the United States Government
to recognize Jerusalem as Israel’s capital, since it
constitutes a flagrant violation of various Security
Council resolutions, such as resolution 478 (1980), which
references the withdrawal of States’ diplomatic posts
from the city. That decision only subverts any possibility
of dialogue between the parties and disproportionately
moves away from any peaceful solution.
In concluion, we believe that now is the time for
multilateralism and for the Security Council to assume
its historic responsibility entrusted to it by Charter of
the United Nations. Once again, we refuse to believe
that this building and the Council have become an
occupied territory in a colonized land. Nelson Mandela,
who was included on the United States terrorist list
until 2008 said that “we know too well that our freedom
is incomplete without the freedom of the Palestinians”.
Mr. Tleuberdi (Kazakhstan): Our delegation
appreciates the presence of President Mahmoud Abbas
in the Chamber and His Excellency’s statement to
the members of the Security Council. We also thank
the Secretary-General for his remarks, and Special
Coordinator Mladenov for the latest update.
As a member State of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, Kazakhstan shares concerns regarding
the future of the two-State solution, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) funding deficit and the need for
the international community to lead the Middle East
peace process.
Kazakhstan’s position on the Middle East peace
process remains unchanged. My country urges
the parties to maintain the historical status quo of
Jerusalem, in accordance with previously reached
international agreements. My delegation therefore
endorses the statement of Secretary-General António
Guterres that the question of the final status of Jerusalem
must be resolved through direct negotiations between
the two parties. It should be achieved on the basis of
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. At the same time, the legitimate concerns
of both the Palestinian and Israeli sides should be taken
into account.
We support negotiations that result in the
two-State solution, and we stand for their early
resumption, especially in the bilateral format and
without preconditions. The ultimate goal should be

18-0454919/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the restoration and promotion of the peace process,
in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the principle of
land for peace, the Quartet road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Kazakhstan declares its support for the rights of
the Palestinian people to self- determination and the
establishment of a free, sovereign and independent State
within its international borders pre-1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, coexisting in peace with Israel.
At the same time, we emphasize the right of Israel to
security. We also propose restoring trust and utilizing
the confidence-building measures with a three-fold
approach, namely, the promotion of a securitydevelopment nexus, a revamped regional approach and
a more enhanced, coordinated and transparent modus
operandi of the United Nations in the wider region,
delivering as one United Nations.
We note that the difficult humanitarian situation
in Gaza, which further contributes to instability and
frustration, could lead to the resumption of conflict
and increase of terrorist activities. In that regard, we
urge the official authorities of Israel and Palestine
to help resolve the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza
Strip. That requires confidence-building measures
with an economic dimension, with support from the
international community.
Kazakhstan endorses the concern expressed by
the Special Coordinator over the funding of UNRWA
this year. A significant reduction of its regular budget
has already increased the anxieties of the 5.3 million
Palestinian refugees, who have already suffered at
the hands of the longest protracted refugee crisis.
Kazakhstan also expresses great concern over the
growth of Israeli settlements in Palestinian territories.
All United Nations resolutions in that regard have been
an important step to bring about a cessation of settlement
activities and prevent violence against civilians.
We also call upon the leaders of Israel and
Palestine to take concrete steps that will preserve the
possibility of peaceful coexistence between the two
States and strengthen the prospects for peace based on
the inalienable right of Palestinians to statehood and
Israel’s right to security, as we mentioned before, and
recognition. Kazakhstan welcomes the United States
diplomatic efforts in resuming the peace process and
talks with the leaders of both countries, which United
20/30

20/02/2018

States President Trump held in Washington, D.C., in
recent days.
We call on the Middle East Quartet to revive the
work on the Palestinian-Israeli track in the context of
United States efforts in that direction. We also welcome
the efforts of the Russian Federation and Egypt to
ensure intra-Palestinian unity and urge all Palestinian
political parties and movements to integrate into one
national political structure. Kazakhstan believes it is
necessary, in the very near future, to begin negotiations
on each existing problem, with a view to reaching an
agreement on pending issues and giving them a socalled final status. Only such an approach would lead
to the adoption of a basic treaty.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the President, the Secretary-General and Mr. Mladenov.
I would like to welcome President Abbas and thank him
for his address to the Security Council. I welcome his
stated commitment to non-violence and to engaging
constructively towards the two-State solution.
The United Kingdom remains committed to a twoState solution that ends the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and we will support all and any efforts to that end. Our
long-standing goal is a negotiated peace settlement
that leads to a safe and secure Israel, living alongside
a viable and sovereign Palestinian State, with secure
and recognized borders and with Jerusalem as a shared
capital of both States.
United States leadership on this issue is
indispensable to achieving a solution that meets the
aspirations of both parties, and we look forward to the
announcement of peace proposals when the United
States Administration judges them to be ready. United
States efforts offer a significant opportunity to deliver
peace, and they should be supported and encouraged
by all. We stand ready to provide political and practical
support to help achieve a viable agreement. We
encourage the parties to make a public commitment
to renewed peace negotiations based on a two-State
solution. In order to move forward, it is important
that they reaffirm their commitment to all previous
diplomatic agreements, which have taken us closer to
peace. Those agreements remain an important basis for
renewed talks. We welcome the Palestinian Authority’s
continued recognition of the State of Israel and the
parties continuing security cooperation.
If a peace process is to succeed, it needs to be
conducted in an atmosphere free from violence. We
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

regret that too many people continue to undermine
efforts to achieve peace. We condemn the detonation of
an improvised explosive device along the Gaza border
with Israel on Saturday, which wounded four Israeli
soldiers, including two seriously. We also condemn
the recent terrorist attack in the West Bank settlement
of Ariel. There is never an excuse for terror, and our
thoughts are with the family and friends of the victim,
as they are with all those who have been affected by
violence. Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right
to live in peace and security. There is also a right to
dignity, and we condemn kidnappings, as well as acts
that prevent families from being able to properly grieve
for their loved ones.
We will continue to press all sides to refrain from
engaging in or encouraging incitement to hateful action
or language. That only serves to stir up prejudice and
takes us further from the goal of achieving peace.
In that regard, it is unacceptable for anyone to deny
the legitimacy of the connection of either the Jewish
or Palestinian peoples to the land. Inflammatory
and unhelpful rhetoric on both sides weakens trust,
corrodes mutual respect and undermines prospects for
peace. We call on both parties to act with restraint and
to show bold leadership. Only when both parties reject
violence and work together to ensure calm and stability
can peace have a chance to flourish.
We are concerned by the Israeli Government’s
recent decision to establish a settlement deep in the
West Bank — the second in 12 months. Those plans
have also raised the possibility of the retroactive
legalization of the illegal outpost of Havat Gilad, and
there have been renewed threats from Israel to demolish
structures in Al-Susiya, in the occupied West Bank.
We call on Israel to immediately reverse its policies of
settlement expansion and demolitions. They undermine
the physical viability of the two-State solution and call
into question Israel’s own commitment to peace.
The lack of Palestinian unity continues to be an
impediment to achieving peace. We therefore support
reconciliation efforts that lead to the full return of the
Palestinian Authority to Gaza. As Special Coordinator
Mladinov informed us last week, current conditions
in the Gaza Strip are dire. Further deterioration of the
humanitarian situation will not only continue to put
lives at risk, but would represent a threat to stability in
the region. It is essential that all parties work urgently
to improve the situation, and we call for an easing of
access controls for people and goods into an out of

S/PV. 8183

Gaza. The United Kingdom remains a committed
supporter of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It must
be able to continue its vital work to improve the lives of
Palestinian refugees and help maintain stability across
the region. It needs appropriate funding to do so.
All United Nations States Members have a role to
play in nurturing peace and rejecting violence. We are
therefore concerned by incursions across Israel’s border
with Syria earlier this month. Our commitment to
Israel’s security is unwavering, and we support Israel’s
right to defend itself.
The United Kingdom’s position on an IsraeliPalestinian peace agreement has not changed. It should
be based on the lines as they stood on 4 June 1967, with
equal land swaps to reflect the national security and
religious interests of the Jewish and Palestinian peoples.
Jerusalem should be the shared capital of the Israeli and
Palestinian States, and its status must be determined
through a final-status agreement. A just, fair, agreed
and realistic settlement for refugees is needed that is
demographically compatible with the principle of two
States for two peoples.
In conclusion, like everyone in the Council, the
United Kingdom strongly supports peace. We want
to see renewed peace negotiations, supported by the
international community, that lead to a safe and secure
Israel — the homeland for the Jewish people — living
alongside a viable and sovereign Palestinian State — the
homeland for the Palestinian people. Let us all work
together to lay the groundwork for peace.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, allow me to thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting in order to hear the briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.
We commend Mr. Mladenov for the excellent work that
he is doing in the Middle East in the search for peace
in that region. We welcome the President of the State
of Palestine, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
and are grateful for his presence at this meeting. We
also appreciate the presence of Secretary-General
António Guterres.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is optimistically
following developments in Iraq, although it is very
concerned about the current situation in Yemen and

18-0454921/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Syria, and it expresses its deep concern about recent
developments in the Iraeli-Palestinian conflict.
Accordingly, we express the full support of Equatorial
Guinea for stabilizing and bringing peace to the
region in general, and the situation between Israel and
Palestine in particular.
Equatorial Guinea regrets the latest escalation of
violent incidents and tensions between Palestinians and
Israelis, as we just heard in Mr. Mladenov’s briefing,
and calls on all parties to act rationally and refrain
from actions that could aggravate an already complex
situation. The Government of Equatorial Guinea, led
by His Excellency President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
always advocates for negotiated solutions to all conflicts
and problems no matter how complex or intractable they
might seem, and, with regard to the case at hand, our
Government’s stance is no different. We therefore call
on all parties involved in the conflict to do their utmost
to normalize the situation and alleviate the suffering
of the people. The Government of Equatorial Guinea
advocates for the two-State solution directly negotiated
between Israelis and Palestinians, or within the
framework of a multilateral mechanism. It is possible
that such a solution might entail painful concessions for
both parties, as the very nature of dialogue implies the
ability and need to make concessions.
All negotiations must be conducted within
the framework of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. The final
status of Jerusalem must be the consequence of such
negotiations. Equatorial Guinea considers as just the
historic claims of the Palestinian people, which have
been validated by the various declarations by the
African Union and the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions. But Israel’s right to live
in peace and security must also be taken into account.
The parties should refrain from unilateral actions that
could stymie dialogue.
We are deeply concerned about the critical
humanitarian situation in Gaza, as highlighted by
Mr. Mladenov’s briefing. Equatorial Guinea believes
that the solution to the grave humanitarian crisis should
be a priority for the international community, with
the objective of improving the plight of the civilian
population. We therefore commend Qatar and the
United Arab Emirates on providing financial assistance
to ease the humanitarian crisis. Nonetheless, it is not
enough to resolve issues with health care, drinking
water and electricity. Without those services, it is very
22/30

20/02/2018

difficult to provide medical assistance and a semblance
of normalcy. We call for intra-Palestine dialogue to
overcome differences. We believe it will have a positive
impact on the quest for a just solution to the crisis.
In conclusion, we pay well-deserved tribute to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for its work, despite scarce
resources, and call for the continued provision of
international financial assistance to an agency whose
humanitarian efforts are very noble and laudable.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive
briefing. We are also pleased to welcome President
Mahmoud Abbas to today’s meeting.
Poland strongly supports all initiatives aimed at
stabilizing and strengthening peace and security in
the Middle East. Regrettably, since our last briefing
(see S/PV.8167), no significant positive moves towards
achieving peace have been made. On the contrary, we
cannot fail to notice that the situation has deteriorated.
We note with concern an increase in the number
of incidents along Israel’s border with the Gaza
Strip — mortar rockets fired from the Strip and Israel’s
retaliatory measures, as well as growing tensions over
Israel’s northern border. We recognize Israel’s right to
defend itself and ensure the security of its citizens. At
the same time, we urge all parties to exercise restraint
in order to avoid further hostilities that would put large
groups of the population at risk. Particularly worrying
is the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, where
we face a deep crisis with regard to life-saving health,
water and sanitation services. The current shortages of
fuel could soon aggravate the situation even further,
depriving the inhabitants of Gaza of hope and real
prospects and inciting inflammatory remarks that result
in violence, extremism and radicalization, in particular
among young people.
We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
financial situation of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). The effects of reducing support could lead
to serious security and humanitarian consequences, not
only in Palestinian territories but also in neighbouring
countries that host Palestinian refugees. The Agency
already faces great challenges in upholding its mandate
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to preserve key services, such as education and health
care. The international community, as a whole, cannot
shirk its responsibility and obligations to Palestinian
refugees. We must make every effort to ensure the
smooth continuation of the Agency’s work on a solid
financial basis. For its part, for years, Poland has
actively and regularly supported UNRWA and will
maintain its support for Palestinian refugees through
annual contributions to the Agency. In response to the
current needs, Poland will contribute to UNRWA’s
general budget in the first quarter of the year.
I would like to add that a stable humanitarian
situation in the entire Middle East region is a key
priority for Poland. For that reason, in recent years, we
have significantly increased our support for the most
affected people in Syria, its neighbouring countries
and the West Bank through bilateral and multilateral
assistance, including the Polish contribution under the
Economic Resilience Initiative last year.
In more general terms, let me underline that the
Security Council must maintain its commitment to
resolving one of the longest-standing conflicts on our
agenda. We should continue to seek an end to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict by reviving the peace process.
Only a return to meaningful bilateral negotiations,
based on the relevant United Nations resolutions and
international law, can provide positive input to the
process. That is the only path towards a two-State
solution and resolving all final-status issues. Poland
supports a two-State solution under which the national
aspirations of both parties to the conflict would be met,
including Palestine’s right to self-determination and
independence and Israel’s right to ensure its security
and normalization of relations with Arab States.
In line with the long-standing European Union
position, we would like to reiterate our position on
Jerusalem. We strongly believe that the aspirations of
both parties with regard to Jerusalem must be fulfilled,
and a way to resolve the status of Jerusalem must be
found through negotiations.
We appeal to Israel and Palestine to refrain from
unilateral steps that prejudge the outcome of final-status
negations, and expect them to demonstrate their
commitment to peace through their actions and policies.
We condemn all acts of terrorism and incitement to
violence. In our opinion, they constitute a significant
obstacle to the reactivation of the peace process.

S/PV. 8183

We continue to watch developments on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation closely, and we call
on all Council members to support that process in
accordance with the Quartet principles. We believe
that reaching an outcome accepted by the international
community could be an important step for the unity of a
future Palestinian State and may, in the long term, lead
to a sustainable peace agreement. An important element
of such a solution is the involvement of countries of the
region. We should build on the relevance of the Arab
Peace Initiative of 2002 as a comprehensive framework
for the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, thereby
contributing to regional peace and security.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for attending
today’s meeting.
We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mladenov, for his informative
briefing. China welcomes His Excellency President
Abbas of Palestine at today’s meeting and thanks him
for his remarks.
The question of Palestine is the most protracted
regional hotspot since the Second World War. It lies at
the heart of the Middle East issue and is fundamental
to achieving peace in the region. Only by establishing
a genuine State of Palestine can Israel enjoy lasting
security. Only a comprehensive settlement to the
question of Palestine can bring about a fundamental
shift in the situation in the Middle East. China
is gravely concerned about the situation between
Palestine and Israel, which remains tenuous, and the
dire humanitarian situation in Gaza.
All parties should faithfully implement resolution
2334 (2016), cease all settlement activities in the
occupied territory and act to prevent further violence
against civilians. All parties should remain calm,
exercise restraint and move towards each other, thereby
helping to foster the necessary conditions for the
resumption of talks. We believe that a two-State solution
represents the right way forward towards resolving the
question of Palestine. The international community
should uphold the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative, while jointly exploring ways and means to
promote peace so as to achieve an early, comprehensive,
just and durable solution to the question of Palestine.

18-0454923/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

20/02/2018

The international community should offer
guarantees regarding Israeli-Palestinian peace talks.
Parties with major influence on the Middle East
should all play a constructive role in that regard. China
remains committed to supporting and facilitating the
Middle East peace process. We support the Palestinians
establishing a fully sovereign and independent
Palestinian State on the basis of the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.

the Palestinian question, and thanks the SecretaryGeneral and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for the
quality of their comments and briefings on the subject
under consideration. We also welcome the presence
among us at this morning’s debate of the President of the
Palestinian Authority, His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, as well as the Permanent Representative of the
State of Israel to the United Nations.

In July last year, Chinese President Xi Jinping
put forward a four-point proposal to promote the
resolution of the question of Palestine, calling for the
advancement of the political process on the basis of
the two-State solution, adherence to the philosophy of
shared, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security, greater coordination of international efforts to
maximize synergy for peace, and a holistic approach
for peace through development. Work is in full swing
to implement that proposal. In December last year,
China successfully hosted a symposium of Palestinian
and Israeli pro-peace actors and will continue to
push for a political settlement to the question in a
constructive fashion.

Twenty-five years after the signing of the Oslo
Accords, hopes for a peaceful settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict have dwindled, and the
compromise solution of two States living side by side
in peace and security seems increasingly to recede.
This lack of political prospects has contributed to a
serious deterioration of the humanitarian situation for
the Palestinian communities in the West Bank.

The question of Jerusalem is complex and delicate,
but it underpins the future solution to the question of
Palestine. All parties should respect historical plurality,
uphold fairness and justice, implement international
consensus, strive for peaceful coexistence and act upon
the relevant United Nations resolutions so as to reach
a solution that accommodates all parties’ interests
through final-status negotiations. Palestine and Israel
should respect each other’s right to live and avoid any
action that may aggravate the current situation.
The international community needs to continue
providing humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian
people and refugees, which can help improve the
political, security and humanitarian situation there.
Over the past six decades and more, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) has played an indispensable role in
easing the humanitarian crisis in the occupied territories.
We call upon all parties to scale up their support for
UNRWA and countries hosting the Palestinian refugees
so as to steadily improve the humanitarian conditions
in which the refugees are living.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the holding of today’s
meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including
24/30

Given this alarming situation, my delegation is
worried about a renewed outbreak of violence and
confrontation, which would put at even greater risk
the possibility of a peaceful settlement of the IsraeliPalestinian crisis. After the clashes of recent days that
caused the deaths of two Palestinians and wounded
Israeli soldiers, we therefore call on the Israeli and
Palestinian parties to exercise the utmost restraint.
My delegation continues to believe that peace
between Palestinians and Israelis is still possible,
despite the current impasse. My country remains
convinced that there is no alternative to peace, which
is why we call on the parties to the conflict to engage
in constructive dialogue in order to overcome the
obstacles. In that context, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the
parties — for both sides — to renounce any unilateral
initiative that could only jeopardize the chances of a
political and peaceful settlement of the crisis.
We would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
our principled position in favour of a two-State solution
as the only viable option to enable the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples to live and coexist in peace and security.
Côte d’Ivoire also believes that the final status of
the City of Jerusalem must be negotiated as part of a
mutually agreed solution between the two parties, as
provided for in the relevant United Nations resolutions.
The consequences of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, it should be recalled, are disastrous for the
people living in the Gaza Strip, who have been faced
with an unprecedented humanitarian crisis, a high youth
unemployment rate of up to 47 per cent, and shortages
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of water and electricity. My delegation therefore calls
for the resumption of negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, on the basis of
enhanced cooperation, we encourage the Palestinian
parties to continue to pursue dialogue with a view
to achieving an effective return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza, which would allow for a better
handling of current humanitarian issues.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of today’s meeting and welcome
the presence among us this morning of the SecretaryGeneral. We would also like to express our gratitude
for Mr. Nickolay Mladenov’s very detailed briefing.
We particularly welcome the presence of Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, President of the State of Palestine, and other
sennior officials.
Peru follows the situation in Palestine with deep
concern. The inflexibility of positions, the absence of
dialogue between the parties and the unbroken stream
of violent episodes have led to a stalemate in the peace
process in the form of an unstable and unsustainable
status quo. Against that backdrop, we stress the
importance and urgency of a forging a basic framework
of understanding that would help to reverse negative
trends on the ground and favour the resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties, with a view to
achieving the only viable solution: two States living side
by side with secure and mutually recognized borders.
In that connection, we should remember the relevance
and validity of the Oslo Accords, which provided the
parameters necessary for such a solution, as well as the
important role of the Quartet.
We consider it necessary, in the political, religious
and social spheres, to act with respect, while also
seeking to build mutual trust as a precursor to the
resumption of constructive dialogue. Leaders on both
sides are responsible for showing tangible restraint, a
commitment to peace and respect for international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.
This leads me to recall the obligation to implement
the resolutions of the Security Council. In particular,
we deem it urgent to put an end to some practices
that have been on the rise in the past year, that is,
settlements, the demolition of homes and eviction, in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. All
of this must stop, in line with resolution 2334 (2016).
Moreover, we urge those parties directly involved to
desist from, investigate and punish all violations of and

S/PV. 8183

international humanitarian law, all terrorists act and all
attacks on civilians.
Tangible steps to this end must be taken. For
example, information must be forthcoming on the
plight of fallen or detained Israeli soldiers. We believe
that the return of the remains of the fallen to their
relatives would be an important gesture of humanity.
By the same token, we believe that it is essential that
the right to legitimate defence be invoked by the Israeli
authorities legally and proportionally and in a careful
manner. The human rights of Palestinian citizens,
including minors, cannot be trampled upon.
In a similar vein, we also believe that it is crucial
to reject hate speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination
in all its forms. In any society, ethnic, cultural and
religious diversity should be viewed as something
precious, never as a threat.
We note with concern the ongoing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, described
a few months ago by Secretary-General António
Guterres himself as
“one of the most dramatic humanitarian situations
I have seen in many years working at the
United Nations”.
We deem it urgent to meet the basic needs of the
people in Gaza. Poverty and marginalization are
fertile breeding grounds for radicalization and violent
extremism. It is important to promote sustainable peace,
twinning humanitarian assistance with development
plans that offer hope and opportunities to the youth.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It is
important to support the Agency and to endow it with
stable and predictable financing. This leads me to hail
the extraordinary meeting of the donors conference that
took place in Brussels on 31 January, and I also hail the
willingness stated by many countries to use their good
offices and to contribute to alleviating the situation on
the ground.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First let me
welcome the presence earlier of President Abbas here
in the Council, and let me thank Mr. Mladenov for his
detailed briefing and certainly for his efforts for peace.
The facts on the ground speak for themselves and
leave little room for optimism. We face a growing

18-0454925/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

humanitarian and economic crisis in Gaza, and we see
a lack of possibilities for Palestinian development in the
West Bank.
I will touch on three points in that context: first,
the two-State solution and the need for tangible steps;
secondly, the need for commitment and international
support; and, thirdly, the situation in Gaza.
With regard to my first point, the two-State
solution, it is worth recalling the Oslo accords, signed
by President Abbas, who has always advocated a
peaceful road towards a Palestinian State. The Oslo
accords held the promise of two States within five years
of their signing, in 1993. We are now in the twentyfifth year since Oslo, and the obstacles to peace have
only grown.
Oslo was not just a document; it was a vision.
We remain firmly convinced that only the two-State
solution, based on the borders of 1967, will lead to
sustainable peace. We recall that a lasting solution
to the conflict must be achieved on the basis of the
relevant Council resolutions; the Madrid principles,
including land for peace; the road map; the agreements
previously reached by the parties; and the Arab Peace
Initiative, with the State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable State of
Palestine living side by side in peace and security and
mutual recognition.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that clear
parameters define the basis for negotiations, including
on Jerusalem. These parameters are key elements of a
successful outcome.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon both
sides to translate their stated desire for peace into
tangible steps, steps that build trust and contribute
to the preservation of the possibility of the two-State
solution, in line with resolution 2334 (2016). This
requires a fundamental change in the developments on
the ground, which continue to undermine the prospect
of a two-State solution.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its strong
opposition to Israel’s settlement policy and the actions
taken in this context, including continuous demolitions;
plans leading to the forced transfer of Bedouin
communities in the West Bank; the announcement
that the Havat Gilad outpost would be legalized into a
settlement; and legislative proposals that entail nothing
26/30

20/02/2018

less than annexation. Such actions and proposals are
cause for serious concern.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands’ position has not
changed: settlements are illegal under international law
and undermine the viability of the two-State solution
and prospects for a lasting peace. At the same time, the
continued violence, including the firing of rockets, as
well as incitement, needs to stop.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is deeply
concerned by the escalation of violence in and around
Gaza. Rocket attacks by militants from Gaza are
unacceptable and need to stop. The leadership on both
sides must work to prevent escalation.
Secondly, concerning the need for commitment and
international support, the current lack of confidence
between parties but also in tried formats for negotiations
creates a dangerous vacuum. They cause both the Israeli
and Palestinian populations to lose hope.
Worldwide examples of resolved conflicts show
that negotiations do not start with trust, they start with
courage and the political commitment to reach out,
build bridges and create trust, taking people along step
by step.
The international community can certainly help
in providing a political horizon for the two-State
solution, in line with relevant Council resolutions. The
international community can support the parties to
find a path back to the negotiation table. To this end,
cooperation between the Quartet partners as well as
regional players and with both parties is crucial.
We fully support the initiatives for the two-State
solution taken by the High Representative of the
European Union, working together with both parties,
the other members of the Quartet and regional partners.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands will continue to
play a constructive role, building on our good relations
with both sides.
This brings me to my third point: Gaza. As others
have said, the crisis in Gaza is growing rapidly.
Unemployment is rising, and the economy is coming
to virtual standstill. Gaza faces a lack of energy supply
that affects all aspects of life, including the provision
of water and the treatment of sewage. Almost none of
the groundwater is now fit for human consumption,
and raw sewage flows into the sea, polluting the water
needed for desalination. The people of Gaza suffer
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

from insufficient access to adequate health care. In
the words of the Secretary-General, Gaza will become
unlivable by 2020.
But for many, it is hardly livable this very day.
A growing number of people there are dependent on
humanitarian aid, and the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), as we all know, is the largest provider of
this aid. The critical financial situation of UNRWA is
undermining its ability to provide basic services to the
people of Gaza. We are concerned that this negative
forecast will lead to growing despair in Gaza. It will
add to the unpredictability of the situation and increase
the risk of instability in the other areas of operations
of UNRWA. It is our collective responsibility to ensure
that UNRWA is able to execute its mandate as given by
the General Assembly.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands calls upon all
stakeholders to put the needs of the population at the
forefront in future decisions regarding Gaza.
The positive measures suggested by the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee in Brussels can lead to a significant
improvement in living conditions. This includes
the expansion of possibilities for trade and support
for essential services such as water and energy. We
therefore call upon all parties involved to live up to
the commitments made. We call on the Palestinian
Authority to proceed on the challenging path of
intra-Palestinian reconciliation. We support the efforts
to restore unity between the West Bank and Gaza, and
the return of the Palestinian Authority to Gaza as the
single, legitimate governing authority. The incidents
over the weekend showed again the need for a political
solution for Gaza.
In conclusion, I started by saying there was little
cause for optimism. However, in the Middle East
optimism is not so much a choice as it is a necessity.
This conflict can be solved; the conflict must be solved.
We should all work diligently and in concert to advance
the two-State solution: the parties themselves, the
region and the international community at large.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like, as always, to
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his useful and
comprehensive briefing on the most recent developments
concerning the Middle East and Palestine. We have
always benefited from his briefings. We were pleased
and honoured to have had His Excellency President
Mahmoud Abbas with us this morning. We thank him

S/PV. 8183

for having been at this meeting and for sharing with
us his thoughts and vision on the very critical issue at
hand. We also thank Ambassador Danny Danon for
having been at this meeting and for sharing with us the
Israeli perspective.
We are very concerned about the lack of progress
in the Israel-Palestinian peace process. The most
recent developments have once again brought the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute back to the fore, thereby
underscoring the urgency of renewed commitment to
the peace process without any further delay. It is also
our conviction that there is also a need for honest and
transparent readiness on the part of all those with the
capacity to make a difference to help the two parties
move towards mutual accommodation.
Of course, we are deeply concerned by the dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The lack of funding
for critical facilities has left many Palestinians without
life-saving health, water and sanitation services. There
is need for the mobilization of international support to
avert a humanitarian disaster. All those who responded
to the urgent appeal must be commended, but there is
still a shortfall in funding and more needs to be done to
ensure that Palestinians have access to life-saving basic
services. It is our earnest hope that humanitarian needs
will be protected from any temptation to politicize them.
What could be looked at together with this is the
need to enable the Palestinian Authority to exercise full
control over Gaza based on the Cairo agreement. We
believe progress on this issue will not only improve the
economic and humanitarian situation, but also advance
Palestinian unity, which hopefully could provide
impetus for the peace process, which now remains
dormant. Although the signing of the Cairo agreement
was very welcomed, not much progress has been
made in terms of its implementation. That, coupled
with access restrictions, continues to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation. In that connection, we note the
trilateral meeting held recently between the Special
Coordinator, the Palestinian Prime Minister and the
Israeli coordinator and the discussion held, among
others, on facilitating critical humanitarian solutions
and revitalizing the economy in Gaza.
Ethiopia’s position on the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute has always been unambiguous, as well as
very transparent. As much as we support the right of
Israel to exist in peace and security, we also support
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-

18-0454927/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

determination and the right of Palestine to exist as a free
and independent State. That is also the position of the
African Union, whose decision we have a responsibility
to respect. Accordingly, Ethiopia fully supports the
goal of two States living side by side in peace and
security as the only viable option for resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute. We believe that is not only
in the best interests of both Israel and Palestine, but it
will also significantly advance peace and security in
the Middle East region.
However, it seems to us self-evident that lately
moves have been made and actions have been taken
that might not contribute to making progress towards a
resolution of the outstanding issues on the basis of the
two-State formula. Those steps are not only increasing
frustration and mistrust, but are also undermining the
very viability of the two-State solution. Removing those
long-standing obstacles is imperative in order to create
the necessary conditions for progress in negotiations
between the two parties to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution on the basis of mutual trust and
a spirit of compromise that ensures Israel’s security and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood. That is what the
situation calls for, and it is also in the best interests of
the two parties as well as the international community
as a whole.
Many have said that there is no plan B to the
two-State solution. The Secretary-General repeated
the same thing today. That cannot be contested. That
is why we supported the call for the intensification
and acceleration of international and regional efforts
aimed at achieving a comprehensive, lasting and just
solution. In that regard, we welcome the holding of
the extraordinary session of the international donor
group for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
which met in Brussels last month, bringing together the
Israelis and the Palestinians, as well as all other relevant
partners for the first time in a while to discuss measures
to speed up efforts that can underpin a negotiated twoState solution.
The resumption of negotiations requires the full
support of all partners, and all should play their part
for any meaningful progress to be achieved. In that
context, it is incumbent upon the Council to discharge
its responsibilities and support such efforts for the sake
of peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians and
peace in the broader Middle East region. No doubt, at
the end of the day the responsibility for making progress
28/30

20/02/2018

toward lasting peace and mutual accommodation based
on justice and fair play falls on the two parties.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.
At the outset, I welcome the presence of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and thank him for
participating in this important and historic meeting on
a crucial issue that has occupied the attention of the
international community for the past five decades,
during which we have witnessed ongoing violations of
international humanitarian law through the continued
Israeli occupation of occupied Arab territories. The
occupation has been condemned and denounced in
resolutions of the Security Council that call for it to be
brought to an end. I also thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his valuable briefing.
We are honoured by the participation of His
Excellency President Mahmoud Abbas of the sisterly
State of Palestine in today’s meeting, under my country’s
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
His participation was a valuable opportunity to listen
directly to the protagonist of this just cause and to hear
what the international community must do to honour
its commitment to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations in order to guarantee the
right of peoples to self-determination.
Prior to assuming its non-permanent membership
of the Security Council early this year, the State of
Kuwait pledged to make every possible effort to support
the Palestinian cause as the most important cause for
Arabs and Muslims everywhere and one of the pillars
of Kuwait’s foreign policy. We remain firm in our
principled commitment to shouldering the concerns
and meeting the aspirations of the brotherly Palestinian
people to establish an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, by implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Israel, as the occupying Power, continues to place
obstacles in the way of a process towards a lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. On the basis
of our duty and the common responsibility of Council
members to maintain international peace and security,
we must stress the implementation of the Council’s
resolutions, which are binding on all Member States,
in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations. How can we ignore the fact that the
occupation continues to flout the United Nations and
18-04549

20/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the relevant resolutions of international legitimacy?
The occupation perpetrates physical violation of
the provisions of international law that mediate
international relations today.
The peace process in the Middle East has witnessed
many milestones and international initiatives that
have resulted in the adoption of many United Nations
resolutions. However, failure to commit to these
resolutions has exacerbated the humanitarian crisis
confronting the defenceless Palestinian people and
increased tensions in the region. That has had an impact
on international security and stability, and we have
witnessed the emergence of other crises in the region
that affect us all, such as extremism and terrorism. These
cannot be tackled without addressing the root cause and
essence of the conflict — the Palestinian question.
We have all witnessed the repercussions of the
recent decision on Jerusalem, which is hindering our
efforts, jeopardizing the peace process and affecting
the balance of the negotiating process. Because we are
confident that the United States plays an important role
in the peace process, we therefore call on it to work
with the international community to compel Israel to
implement the resolutions of international legitimacy
and end its occupation of all Arab and Palestinian
territories, occupied since 4 June 1967, in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy, the
principle of land for peace, the road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative adopted by all Arab countries in Beirut
summit of 2002, through a peaceful resolution that
establishes the State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem
as its capital.
I do not exaggerate when I say that the political
will to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) will help achieve that goal, because that
historic resolution reaffirmed the most important legal
principles linked to the Palestinian question, that is, the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.
Israel, the occupying Power, should strictly honour
its commitments and legal responsibilities under the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War.
In addition to that, the resolution condemns
measures to change the demographic composition,
character and status of the Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem. In
resolution 2334 (2016), the Council also condemns
Israeli settlement activity as an illegal, illegitimate and

S/PV. 8183

a blatant violation of international law, recognizing
that it is a major obstacle to achieving the two-State
solution and a comprehensive and lasting peace.
Moreover, resolution 2334 (2016) also states that any
changes in the border lines of 4 June 1967 will not be
recognized by the Security Council, including changes
to the legal and historic status of Jerusalem as one of
the final-status issues.
Regrettably, more than a year has passed since
that historic resolution was adopted, and it still has
not been implemented. Worse yet, when the provisions
of the resolution were violated, we witnessed unusual
record levels of Israeli settlement activity in occupied
Palestinian territory — be it the construction of new
settlements or the expansion of existing ones — and a
blatant violation of resolution 2334 (2016), which led to
the forced displacement of the land-owning Palestinian
families. The State of Kuwait strongly condemns
Israel’s illegal and illegitimate policies in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and its
ongoing violations of the inalienable rights of the our
Palestinian brethren people,
I cannot fail to address the humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, which we are following with great
concern, given its dangerous consequences for the lives
of 2 million Palestinians there, restricting the delivery
of basic services, including health services. The
blockade is unjust and we condemn yet again Israel’s
inhumane practices, which represent a grave violation
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
The blockade imposed on Gaza is an example of such a
violation. I reaffirm that the State of Kuwait will spare
no effort to stand by our Palestinian brethren people in
all the occupied territories.
The State of Kuwait supports the request of Palestine
to operationalize some international mechanisms, such
as the Quartet, by expanding its membership to include
Arab countries, adding more vitality to its work. We
also support all legal and peaceful steps taken by the
State of Palestine at the national and international levels
to strengthen its sovereignty over Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the occupied Palestinian territory.
The Palestinian people expect the United Nations,
and the Security Council in particular, to honour their
commitment to maintaining international peace and
security. We reiterate our solidarity with and stand
by the Palestinian people in defending their just cause
and legitimate rights, including their historic and

18-0454929/30

S/PV.8183

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

unshakable right to Jerusalem, as guaranteed by the
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy. We
reaffirm that East Jerusalem is the capital of the State
of Palestine. We call on all countries to recognize the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In conclusion, we renew our call on all present to
participate in the Arria Formula meeting, to be held in
cooperation with a group of Security Council members,
to discuss the implementation of resolution 2334

30/30

20/02/2018

(2016) following more than one year of its adoption
and 50 years of the Israeli occupation of the occupied
Palestinian territory.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose 1.05 p.m.

18-04549
