A /71/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

60th plenary meeting

Monday, 12 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations
Tribute to the Secretary-General (A/71/L.40)
Oath of office of the Secretary-General
designate
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.40.
Mr. Thammavongsa (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s important meeting.
On behalf of the States members of the Group of
Asia-Pacific States, I have the great honour to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.40, entitled “Tribute to Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations”.
My delegation would like to express its profound
gratitude to all of the groups of States that have
sponsored the draft resolution. Such sponsorship is
a tradition, but it is also logical. The draft resolution
takes tradition into account, as the Assembly generally
honours the outgoing Secretary-General under similar
circumstances. However, it is also logical, because
it reflects the reality that the outgoing SecretaryGeneral was a figure who displayed great professional
and personal qualities and contributed, through many
initiatives that have been welcomed by all, to helping

the Organization make progress towards modernization
and democratization.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon has made many sacrifices and
undertaken extraordinary efforts, often under very
difficult circumstances. It is with gratitude for those
efforts that the draft resolution has been submitted.
Furthermore, I know that you, Mr. President, share
these sincere feelings of affection and esteem, and I
am equally certain that they are sentiments felt by all
for Mr. Ban Ki-moon. I have no doubt that the draft
resolution will meet with unanimous approval.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.40,
entitled “Tribute to Mr. Ban Ki-moon, SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations”?
Draft resolution A/71/L.40 was adopted (resolution
71/131).
The President: The General Assembly’s adoption
of resolution 71/131 by acclamation today is indeed a
fitting tribute to the outstanding tenure of SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
Over the past 10 years, Secretary-General Ban has
led the United Nations with unwavering principles for
the good, with dedicated professionalism and with nevertiring service to humankind. Beginning his term with
the world on the brink of a financial crisis, he guided
the United Nations through a period of extraordinary
global change. Whether it was shifting international
dynamics, a rebalancing of economic influence, rapid
technological advances or the rising interconnectivity

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-43170 (E)

*1643170*

A/71/PV.60

and mobility of people, Secretary-General Ban was
always in the vanguard.
Throughout the widening inequality within and
between nations, the spread of violent extremism and
terrorism, the emergence of new global health threats
and the growing frequency and severity of natural
disasters due to climate change, his leadership has stood
firm. As these epochal changes unfolded and major
new challenges emerged, our Secretary-General has
never swayed from his determination to ensure that the
United Nations was always a resolute force for global
good. He has advanced the values of the United Nations
across the world, at the front line of trouble spots and
at international summits alike. And through it all, he
has pursued measures to make the Organization more
transparent, more effective and, yes, fit for purpose.
Secretary-General Ban has overseen innumerable
accomplishments during his time in office, covering
all three pillars of the United Nations, from advancing
preventative diplomacy to promoting inclusiveness and
strengthening the United Nations partnerships with
regional organizations. From appointing the first Youth
Envoy and deepening the United Nations focus on
young people to pursuing disarmament and overseeing
the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty, from serving
as a committed advocate for the interests of the least
developed countries and small island developing States
to overseeing the delivery of critical humanitarian
assistance and development programmes across the
world, the list of accomplishments goes on and on.
But today we can reflect in particular on three of the
Secretary-General’s achievements.
First, there is his unswerving leadership in
advancing global action on climate change. For 10
years, Secretary-General Ban was an unrelenting
force in raising global awareness of the catastrophic
consequences of our planet’s warming and in galvanizing
world leaders to act. His unceasing efforts ultimately
led to the adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, which fittingly entered into force during his
tenure. During the course of that mammoth process, he
successfully mobilized businesses, cities, civil society
and other partners for progress to act collectively to
address the great challenges of climate change.
The second great accomplishment on which to
reflect today is Secretary-General Ban’s vision and
determination to realize a more just, prosperous and
secure world through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
2/15

12/12/2016

for Sustainable Development. Together with the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Action
and other multilateral agreements adopted by Member
States during the past 15 months, the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development provides humankind with
the universal master plan to end extreme poverty,
increase prosperity, empower women and girls and
build peaceful and inclusive societies. Combined with
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, if universally
implemented, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development gives us all a secure pathway away from
the unsustainable future looming ahead.
Thirdly, it must be said that Secretary-General Ban’s
support for gender equality has been the cornerstone
of his tenure. He oversaw the establishment of UNWomen and pushed for a stronger role for women at
the United Nations. He has championed numerous
campaigns related to women’s rights and is the first
Secretary-General in history to identify as a feminist.
As a tireless advocate for good, Secretary-General Ban
leaves an enduring legacy, rooted in a commitment to
peace, human rights, justice and equality.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I offer
profound thanks to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his service to the United Nations. In times of quiet
reflection ahead, may he take great and richly deserved
pride in all he achieved as Secretary-General of the
United Nations. I would also like to thank, on behalf
of the Assembly, Mrs. Ban Soon-taek for the steadfast
support she gave throughout the decade of her husband’s
work and for her own dedication to the good works of
the United Nations.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I also take this
opportunity to pay tribute to Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson for his long service to the United Nations.
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson will serve as an
exemplar for young diplomats and all those who, amid
the torturous struggles, conflicts and strife of difficult
days, hold fast to a belief in universal rights and the
infinite potential and beauty of humankind. On behalf
of the Assembly, I wish the Deputy Secretary-General
and Mrs. Kerstin Eliasson many years of happiness
upon their return to Sweden.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Burkina Faso, who will speak on behalf of the Group
of African States.
Mr. Tiare (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): It is
a great privilege and honour for me to speak on behalf
16-43170

12/12/2016

of the Group of African States on this special occasion
to pay tribute to Mr. Ban Ki-moon as he completes his
term as head of the United Nations after 10 years of
good, faithful service.
The African Group co-sponsored resolution 71/131,
which has just been adopted by acclamation, both to
convey to the Secretary-General our recognition and to
commend the results achieved in the implementation of
his vision. We join the consensus on the great progress
made under his tenure. The African Group commends
his efforts and the series of structural reforms that he
launched with a view to improving the operation and
effectiveness of the Organization.
In the area of development, following the
Millennium Development Goals and the implementation
of the action plan set forth in “The future we want”,
which is composed of five main pillars, he mobilized
a remarkable global coalition for the drafting and
adoption of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
His leadership has also led to the adoption of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, as well as
the adoption and entry into force of the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change.
With regard to international peace and security,
the African Group would like to congratulate him on
his major reforms of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, on resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, and on the adoption of the SecretaryGeneral’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
In the area of human rights, the African Group
commends the Rights Up Front initiative, which brings
together the three pillars of the United Nations, namely,
peace and security, development and human rights.
On the management of conflicts and crises in
Africa, the African Group wishes to express its
gratitude for the role the Organization has played
in regard to regional and subregional organizations.
Furthermore, we commend his exemplary leadership in
the management of the health crisis related to the Ebola
virus in the three West African countries of Guinea,
Sierra Leone and Liberia. His leadership allowed the
international community to tackle the crisis.
Allow me to commend Mrs. Ban for her tireless
efforts and for the steadfast support she has given the

A/71/PV.60

Secretary-General during his term as the Head of our
shared Organization.
In conclusion, the African Group, through me,
would like to enthusiastically pay tribute to him for the
numerous services has has rendered to humankind. We
reiterate our sincere acknowledgement and gratitude
and wish him every success in his future endeavours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
Asia-Pacific States.
Mr. Thammavongsa (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the States members of the Asia-Pacific Group on this
special occasion to pay tribute and bid farewell to His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon and to hear the taking of the
oath of office by His Excellency Mr. António Guterres,
Secretary-General-designate of the United Nations.
The Group is pleased to note that, during his tenure
as Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Ban
has fulfilled the responsibilities entrusted to him.
His two terms in office are sound testimony to his
capability, dedication and success in administering the
world’s only universal Organization and in navigating
the choppy waters of an increasingly challenging world.
He leaves behind a legacy that sets the path for us to
follow in making the world a better and more peaceful
place in which to live. He has shown great commitment
and a deeply held belief that no challenge or obstruction
is implacable. We applaud Mr. Ban for his commitment,
dedication and steadfastness towards overcoming those
challenges and obstructions.
Mr. Ban Ki-moon will complete his term of office
as the Secretary-General at the end of this year. During
his 10-year tenure, he has had numerous achievements,
all of which we cannot list here because they are indeed
many. But we would just like to highlight some of
the more important ones, in particular those that will
help pave the way for the international community to
work together in the years ahead to address the most
pressing issues of our time, namely, the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, which has promised
that, by 2030, no one will be left behind, the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change, which entered into
force on 4 November, the advancement of human rights
including in the areas of women’s empowerment and
gender equality, and United Nations reform.

16-431703/15

A/71/PV.60

The Group wishes to put on record its appreciation
to Mr. Ban for his long, illustrious service to the
United Nations and, in particular, for his service as the
Secretary-General of the Organization. We would like
to take this opportunity to express our sincerest thanks
and deepest appreciation to him for his leadership
and stewardship in steering the United Nations and
for his tireless efforts aimed at promoting peace and
development. We wish Mr. Ban Ki-moon all the best in
his future undertakings.
The Group would also like to express its
congratulations to Mr. António Guterres on his
appointment as the next Secretary-General. Mr. Guterres
brings to the position of Secretary-General a wealth
of knowledge, professional skills, vision, experience
and wisdom as a veteran political leader. We wish the
Secretary-General designate success in fulfilling his
central role at an exceedingly critical time in United
Nations history. Mr. Guterres is now entrusted with
all our hopes, aspirations and dreams for a peaceful
and prosperous world. It is an honourable and heavy
responsibility that he takes on as Secretary-General.
The States members of the Asia-Pacific Group will
extend our full support and cooperation to him as he
leads the United Nations in the next five years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Eastern European States.
Mr. Mažeiks (Latvia): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Eastern
European States.
The Group of Eastern European States expresses
its deep and sincere gratitude to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his excellent service as the eighth
Secretary-General of the United Nations. His calm and
steady hand at the helm of the United Nations charted
a stable course for the Organization through a decade
that was, at times, turbulent.
When he entered office in 2007, the world was a
quieter place. It had yet to face the challenges of the
economic recession and the crises that arose in many
parts of the world. Conflicts, poverty, natural disasters
and climate change, the unprecedented large movements
of refugees and migrants, humanitarian crises, and the
growing threat of violent extremism, which can be
conducive to terrorism, have contributed immensely to
today’s global challenges; all of them have been on his
agenda.
4/15

12/12/2016

We are mindful of the immense responsibilities the
head of as vast and diverse a global body as the United
Nations, charged with the task of building a safer, more
peaceful and prosperous world for future generations,
has to assume. In this respect, I recall the words of
the first Secretary-General, who once described his
position as “the most impossible job on this earth”.
We commend the Secretary-General for his
personal commitment and professionalism as well as
his tireless efforts, openness and subtle humour as
he tackled the “most impossible job”. He has worked
hard to fulfil his pledge to be a bridge-builder for 193
nations, forging consensus on the most pressing issues
on the global agenda. His dedication to do everything
in his power to ensure that the United Nations lives up
to its name is well respected and appreciated.
The world will remember his leadership on global
achievements that aim to improve people’s lives and
protect our planet for future generations. As he said in
his acceptance speech 10 years ago,
“our Organization is modest in its means, but not in
its values. We should be more modest in our words,
but not in our performance. The true measure of
success for the United Nations is not how much we
promise, but how much we deliver for those who
need us most” (A/61/PV.31, p. 9).
He has indeed been a strong supporter in advancing the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and in the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals,
in which we pledged to leave no one behind. Largely
thanks to his deep personal commitment, the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change became a reality.
Those far-reaching agreements on sustainable
development and climate change not only represent
hope for a better future for the people and the planet,
but they have also restored trust in the multilateral
system’s ability to deliver solutions to pressing global
issues. More than ever, there are great expectations
for the United Nations to meet the challenges for
peace, development and human rights and to deliver
results effectively.
We appreciate Secretary-General Ban’s quest for
equality and non-discrimination, not only throughout
the world, but also within the United Nations system.
Under his leadership, the United Nations became
more inclusive, strengthened the role of civil society
within the United Nations system and empowered
16-43170

12/12/2016

youth activists. His championship of gender equality
and the empowerment of women helped to push for
the creation of a single, dedicated United Nations
body — UN-Women. His initiatives UNiTE to End
Violence against Women, Every Woman Every Child
and Global Education First reflect a desire to make a
real difference for countless women and girls. He has
also shown great leadership in highlighting the needs
of the largest generation of young people the world has
ever known.
We commend his support for multilingualism at the
United Nations, which has contributed to harmonious
communication and tolerance among peoples as well
as everyone’s participation in the Organization’s
work. Although my Korean is quite limited, I think
that a Korean proverb is quite appropriate today: “At
the end of hardship comes happiness”. The Group of
Eastern European States wishes Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon success in his future endeavours and thanks
him once again for his service to our Organization and
all of its nations.
In conclusion, the Group of Eastern European
States welcomes Secretary-General-designate António
Guterres and reiterates its full support to him in
promoting effective multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica, who will speak on behalf
of the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of Latin American and Caribbean States (GRULAC) at
this special meeting to pay tribute to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon.
At the outset, we would like to commend him for
his wise leadership of the Organization, carried out
with determination, coherence and integrity. Ten years
ago, when he took his oath, Mr. Ban placed his hand
on the Charter of the United Nations and promised
to strengthen the three pillars of the Organization in
order to help build a more peaceful, prosperous and just
world. The Secretary-General has delivered.
Mr. Ban’s legacy is broad and diverse. To name only
a few achievements, it ranges from setting up the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda to launching renewed efforts to
combat terrorism, and from promoting the rule of law
at the national and international levels to mobilizing

A/71/PV.60

the international community to work to resolve the
refugee crisis.
In the area of peace and security, we would like to
underscore our appreciation for the Secretary-General’s
work on the reviews of peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture and the role
of women in the promotion of international peace and
security, including his efforts to appropriately address
alleged and confirmed acts of sexual exploitation
and abuse by peacekeepers within the framework of
implementing and reinforcing the United Nations zerotolerance policy for such acts. All of his reports put the
emphasis on prevention for both the General Assembly
and the Security Council, on strengthening sustainable
peace as a way to promote it in a lasting and sustainable
form, and on ensuring the primacy of politics and
diplomacy. He has always sent a clear message that
military action should always be a last resort and
carried out in full compliance with the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations.
We should also call attention to the value of
Mr. Ban’s efforts to highlight the place of disarmament
issues on the United Nations political agenda with his
five-point proposal for nuclear disarmament. We have
made the Secretary-General’s view — that there are
no right hands for the wrong weapons — our own,
and we are grateful for the support he has given to the
Humanitarian Initiative and to the negotiating process
on a legal instrument banning nuclear weapons. He has
also highlighted the problem of the lack of resources
that are devoted to peace and disarmament, pointing out
that the world is overarmed while peace is underfunded.
And he has supported our efforts to achieve a more
secure world through international law and cooperation
rather than weapons.
Our Group would like to highlight the SecretaryGeneral’s remarkable legacy in the area of sustainable
development. Not only did he build up political will and
mobilize global action for the Millennium Development
Goals, he was one of the chief proponents of the 2030
Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals, which
will guide global development for the next 15 years.
Furthermore, the Sustainable Development Goals have
become the axis of the operational activities of the
United Nations development system and have injected
a potentially transformative burst of energy into the
revitalization and renewal of the main organs of the
United Nations.

16-431705/15

A/71/PV.60

An example of his persistence has been his efforts
to focus the attention of the international community
on the issue of climate change, as he worked tirelessly
to overcome the setbacks of Copenhagen to achieve the
adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
which was a milestone in its success in securing
guarantees to reduce global emissions. In that regard,
we would like to recall his words when he said that
there is no plan B because we do not have a planet B.
(spoke in English)
It is in the area of human rights that the SecretaryGeneral has probably left his most lasting mark,
and we should particularly acknowledge his crucial
contribution to gender equality through his women’s
rights advocacy. After pushing for the creation of UNWomen as a separate agency in 2011, he has promoted
several campaigns and initiatives aimed at addressing
violence against women. In that regard, GRULAC would
like to highlight the He for She campaign, an initiative
that invites men to join by committing to taking action
against all forms of violence and discrimination against
women and girls.
More recently, the Secretary-General established
the High-level Panel on Women’s Economic
Empowerment, part of a global campaign to fully
mobilize the untapped economic potential of half the
world’s population. The panel aims to address the
structural barriers to women’s economic empowerment
and their full inclusion in economic activities. The
Secretary-General also spearheaded Every Woman
Every Child, an unprecedented global movement
for mobilizing and intensifying international and
national action on the part of Governments and other
stakeholders to address the major health challenges
faced by women, children and adolescents.
The Secretary-General will also be remembered
for his efforts to bring new generations closer to the
Organization and give them the energy and drive that
can lead to change. He established the Office of the
Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth and convened the
Economic and Social Council Youth Forum, an annual
event where young people from every corner of the
world can meet to exchange ideas.
There can be no question that the SecretaryGeneral has been a great defender of vulnerable groups,
championing the protection of the human rights of
everyone, everywhere, as he did in his famous speech
to the Human Rights Council entitled “The time has
6/15

12/12/2016

come”. Another of his signature initiatives, Human
Rights Up Front, has improved early United Nations
engagement with national authorities, as well as United
Nations support for nation-led solutions for promoting
and protecting human rights.
We should also highlight Mr. Ban’s commitment
to protecting the human rights of asylum-seekers,
refugees and migrants, particularly those, like women
and children, who are especially vulnerable. We
commend his efforts to mobilize the international
community’s response around those issues without
losing sight of their root causes. And even after his
tireless efforts to strengthen all three United Nations
pillars, challenges remain for his successor, including
making the Organization better equipped to face the
pressing demands of our times.
Ten years ago, Mr. Ban promised to be a
bridge-builder. Where GRULAC is concerned, every
time he reached out to our region or opened his door to
any of us, he built those bridges. Every time he helped
Latin America and the Caribbean to overcome their
challenges or celebrated our achievements with us, he
kept that promise. When he expressed his regret for the
cholera epidemic in Haiti and apologized for the moral
responsibility of the United Nations there, he built a
final bridge to our region that will stand the test of time.
Every time he made an effort to speak to us in
Spanish or French, we felt appreciated. It is our turn now
to say thank you in Korean. We thank the SecretaryGeneral very much for his commitment and his legacy.
And we also wish to express our gratitude to Mrs. Ban
for working side by side with the Secretary-General for
this entire decade.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden, who will speak on behalf of
the Group of Western European and other States.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the pleasure and
honour to speak today on behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States. I would like to
express our sincere appreciation for the leadership and
commitment that the Secretary-General has shown to
our Organization and the people that it serves over the
past 10 years. That appreciation also extends to the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson.
The Secretary-General has dedicated himself to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. Internally, he has initiated important
16-43170

12/12/2016

reforms within the Organization with a view to making
it fit for purpose. Externally, he has been the face and
the voice of the United Nations, tirelessly advocating for
a better world for all people. His belief in the power of
the United Nations to touch the lives of individuals for
the better is not surprising. It is built on his own early
childhood experience. We have heard him movingly
describe how, as a child he and others
“survived on food from UNICEF. We were schooled
with textbooks from UNESCO. We were protected
by the troops of many nations serving under the
blue flag of the United Nations”.
That experience is at the heart of his desire to build
the One United Nations model that we must continue to
foster and develop.
Throughout his term, he has focused on improving
the lives of people, particularly women and the very poor.
He has shown admirable courage and determination in
his quest to address the negative impacts of climate
change and deliver sustainable development. He has
eloquently advocated for an end to conflict and a
coherent approach to peacebuilding, based on human
rights and inclusivity. Through his Human Rights Up
Front initiative, he has strengthened the Organization’s
ability to ensure that human rights are at the heart of all
its work. He has actively demanded and claimed justice
and equality for every member of our human family,
including by clearly stating that lesbian, gay, bisexual
and transgender individuals and communities should
enjoy the same rights as everyone else.
He has also promoted women’s increased
participation at all levels and in all areas of the work
of the United Nations, including by establishing UNWomen. He has championed the human rights of
refugees and migrants, who are particularly vulnerable
to human trafficking, by promoting the New York
Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (resolution
71/1), launching the TOGETHER — Respect, Safety
and Dignity for All campaign and beginning the process
that should eventually result in global compacts on
migration and refugees.
Sadly, the period of his term in office has also been
marked by new threats to people’s lives and dignity. The
adverse effects of climate change are already affecting
millions worldwide. The emergence of new global
health threats, such as Ebola and Zika, has underlined
the challenges of a more interconnected world. Threats
from terrorism and the growing spread of violent

A/71/PV.60

extremism have led to fear and, for some, a desire for
less, rather than more, international cooperation. And
ever graver acts of war, some of which we thought were
consigned to history, have re-emerged, undermining
respect for international humanitarian law and leading
to human suffering and mass displacements.
Through the good and bad times, he has stood firm
in his commitment to the Charter of the United Nations,
and has shown leadership by using all the tools available
to him to ensure that the United Nations could respond
to the best of its ability. His term as Secretary-General
has covered a period of unprecedented technological
change. Advances in access to technology — the iPhone
entered our lives in the same month that the SecretaryGeneral took up his post — mean that the world is more
interconnected than ever. That has created opportunities
for the United Nations. Under the Secretary-General’s
leadership, the Organization has recognized the
potential of new technologies for development and
has sought to exploit those opportunities to the full.
Recognizing that complex challenges need collective
responses, he has championed partnerships and an
inclusive approach, inside and outside the United
Nations system, as essential to achieving humankind’s
common goals.
He has also sought to leave the United Nations
better prepared to respond to the needs of those
threatened by violence and conflict. With his support,
his Advisory Group of Experts on the 2015 Review of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and
the important global study on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, have provided us with thoughtful
guidance on the future of peacekeeping. That has led to
the General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 70/262
and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), aimed
at strengthening the collective capacity of the entire
United Nations system to sustain peace.
There have also been dark days for the United
Nations family. On 12 January 2010, an earthquake hit
Haiti, devastating the country and killing an estimated
220,000 people. Among them were 102 United Nations
staff members. The Secretary-General captured the
ongoing impact a year later, when he said, “Every
day, I see the faces of our fallen colleagues. I hear
their voices. Like you, I remember.” Indeed, as leader
of the Organization, he has consistently remembered
and honoured all United Nations peacekeepers and

16-431707/15

A/71/PV.60

12/12/2016

humanitarian staff, women and men, who lost their
lives in the service of peace and humankind. In his
remembrance, he has underlined the need for respect
and safe access for those whose only role is to maintain
peace and to respond to the needs of the most vulnerable.
We strongly echo that sentiment.

The Secretary-General has been a defender of
those values throughout his term in office. As he leaves
his post, he can look back with pride on a decade of
achievements and with satisfaction for a job well done,
knowing that he has given his all. We thank him for that
and wish him the very best for the future.

I would like to highlight two particular
achievements that have occurred under the SecretaryGeneral’s leadership. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, adopted by the General Assembly in
September of last year (resolution 70/1), presents a
blueprint for global development for the next 15 years. It
recognizes the interconnected nature of the challenges
facing humankind, and the fact that our responses must
reflect that interconnectedness. Together with the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Action
and the outcome of the World Humanitarian Summit, the
2030 Agenda and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals
pave the way for a global transformation that can deliver
prosperity and peace for all people and the planet. As
Secretary-General, he has provided every support and
worked closely with Member States to ensure a positive
outcome for that process. Over the past year, he has
vigorously advocated for its implementation.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the host country.

The second achievement I would like to mention is
the historic Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The
Secretary-General has been a true climate champion,
determined in his efforts to draw the world’s attention to
the existential threat posed by global warming and the
need for collective action at the global level in response.
Undeterred by setbacks on the road, he showed a belief
and personal commitment that significantly contributed
to the Agreement. I assure him that our Group will work
tirelessly to make a reality of the vision of a sustainable,
low-carbon world set out in the Paris Agreement.
Under the Secretary-General’s leadership, the
United Nations has tackled many global challenges.
More remain, and others will emerge only in the coming
years. At this moment, as he ends his term, we are
reflecting on how the United Nations can continue to
strive to deliver for those who depend on it. To answer
that question, I would like to recall the SecretaryGeneral’s own sentiments, expressed in the 2016 Dag
Hammarskjöld lecture, in which he underlined the fact
that evolving threats can be addressed only if we devote
ourselves to timeless values. For that reason, it is of
crucial importance to defend the values enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations every day.
8/15

Ms. Power (United States of America): Before I
begin, I would like to join the President of the General
Assembly and others in thanking the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his truly remarkable service. We have every
expectation that he will continue to carry the Charter of
the United Nations in his pocket for the rest of time
and continue to do what he has done during his entire
career, which is to advance the principles within it. Let
me also thank Mrs. Ban for her exemplary service, for
the compassion that she exudes everywhere she goes,
and also — perhaps less heralded — for her sacrifice
and that of her family. It is not easy to marry into a job
like this one, but she has shown nothing but grace from
the beginning.
Now, if one were to take a bet on the likelihood
of a child becoming Secretary-General of the United
Nations, Ban Ki-moon would have been a long shot
at best. Ban does not speak often of himself or of his
upbringing, but his journey to this position was a
remarkable one. He was born in May 1944 in Sangdong
Number 1, a village of approximately 100 people,
named to distinguish it from nearby Sangdong Number
2, another tiny, rural village. To this day, SecretaryGeneral Ban does not know his exact birthdate. His
parents had lost infants before him, so they decided
they would not get a birth certificate unless he survived
his first month.
Secretary-General Ban was born into a world
torn apart by conflict — first as a baby at the end of
the Second World War, and then, of course, as child
during the Korean War, which erupted when he was
just 5 years old. Months into the fighting, Ban’s parents
fled with him and his newborn sister to a remote home
that Ban’s grandparents had in the mountains. It was
January — the peak of winter — and the house was
reachable only by foot. The family trekked for miles
through the snow, without boots or warm clothes, until
they eventually reached the secluded house. From there,
a young Ban watched as fighter jets bombed nearby
16-43170

12/12/2016

towns and cities. “We were safe,” he would later recall,
“but we were poor and hungry.”
When the war ended and Ban’s family returned to
their home village, he saw a United Nations flag for
the very first time. Upon returning to school, he was
given a textbook created by the United Nations Korean
Reconstruction Agency, as well as food and clothes,
which helped his family as they struggled to get back
on their feet. He would later say that he remembered
feeling as though “the United Nations was a beacon
of hope for all Korean people”. That idea — that the
United Nations should serve as a beacon of hope for
the world’s most vulnerable people — has clearly never
left him.
In 1962, when Ban was just 18 years old, he won
a competition organized by the American Red Cross
to tour the United States with a group of international
students. Ban, at that time, had never left the rural area
where he had grown up, never mind his country, but
that August he boarded his first flight to America. On
29 August, he and students from 41 other countries
visited the White House, where they were greeted on
the South Lawn by then President John F. Kennedy.
It was a tense time in the world, as the United States
and the Soviet Union were competing for primacy, yet
Kennedy told the young representatives that he felt a
great sense of hope in seeing this global mix assembled
there together. “I think it is most encouraging,”
Kennedy told young Ban and the others, “to have people
from so many different countries, including countries
where the Government leaders do not always get on,
but the people do.” Kennedy encouraged the students
to dedicate themselves to serving those in need, a cause
in which, he said, “there are no national boundaries…
only a question of whether we can extend a helping
hand”. Secretary-General Ban would later say of that
meeting,
“Even as a young man who didn’t know much
about the world, I was able to understand something
crucial about the values of humanity from President
Kennedy.”
It was a turning point. The Secretary-General
would later write, “Kennedy’s words that day on the
South Lawn sparked my decision to become a diplomat
and dedicate myself to public service.” This is a path
from which the Secretary-General has never strayed.
I share these moments from Secretary-General Ban’s
early life today because, in them, we can see at least the

A/71/PV.60

origins of so many of the qualities that would define
him as a leader — someone who, in one of the most
tumultuous periods in the seven-decade history of the
United Nations, has continued to try to strengthen this
institution and has championed the cause of solving the
world’s problems together. Let me touch very briefly on
three of those qualities.
The first is the abiding belief that nobody
anywhere should be left behind. We are all equal.
We are all equally entitled to our rights. SecretaryGeneral Ban made this part of his core argument for
the Sustainable Development Goals — one of the most
important achievements of his tenure — which he said
are in fact “all based on a single, guiding principle: to
leave no one behind”. His own upbringing taught him
the importance of giving people, particularly young
people, living in places ravaged by war and poverty,
hope — hope of being able to improve their lives. The
Secretary-General understands this because he lived
it, experiencing first-hand many of the hardships that
we diplomats at the United Nations can only imagine,
such as true hunger, cold and the deep-seated fear of
being obliterated by an air strike or picked up by enemy
soldiers. That, I believe, is why he takes it personally
when he believes that we at the United Nations are
not doing all we can to, as he put it, “extend a helping
hand” to people in such desperate situations. He can
see himself in those in need because he has been there.
There but for the grace of God go I. Do unto others as
you would have done unto you.
The second is the idea President Kennedy planted
that day in 1962 of service — serving others, the
ultimate calling. This unflagging devotion can be seen
across Secretary-General Ban’s work, but perhaps none
so much as in his determined, relentless effort to curb
climate change. After all, what is a true reform of being
for others than convincing people around the world to
make changes that will preserve our planet for future
generations? Not only did he possess absolute clarity
about the existential threat that climate change poses and
the urgent need to take action to stop it; he also invested
all of his diplomatic energy in persuading countries to
negotiate and then to sign onto the Paris Agreement,
helping it cross over the threshold to come into force far
swifter than any of us had thought possible. On behalf
of our children and our children’s children, we will
never be able to thank the Secretary-General enough
for those efforts, and we owe it to those generations

16-431709/15

A/71/PV.60

12/12/2016

to ensure that the agreement is implemented in full by
all countries.

our time? It is a trajectory that affirms why we do what
we do at the United Nations.

The third is the way Ban has defended the dignity
of the most vulnerable and marginalized among us.
Examples of this abound. Others have touched on
many, including the unprecedented decision under his
leadership to open the gates of the United Nations bases
in South Sudan to admit thousands of civilians fleeing
mass atrocities. But none is more groundbreaking than
the stand he took on behalf of protecting the equal
rights and dignity of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex (LGBTI) people. Mr. Ban Ki-moon did not
come into the job of Secretary-General as a champion
of LGBTI rights. As he said himself, “Growing up in
the Republic of Korea, we did not talk about sexual
orientation or gender identity”. But, when he heard
the way LGBTI people were discriminated against
because of who they are and whom they love — bullied
by classmates and neighbours, fired from jobs,
denied basic services and physically attacked or even
killed — he became a zealous defender of their rights.
He spoke out against leaders who fanned hatred and
he spoke directly to LGBTI people who were under
attack, telling them, “You are not alone… Any attack
on you is an attack on the universal values the United
Nations and I have sworn to defend and uphold.” This
was not popular with some — with many in fact — but
it mattered enormously to real people facing real and
sometimes mortal threats.

It is remarkable to think how many kids there are
out there — whether it is the girl in a rural village who,
as a result of the Sustainable Development Goals, will
be the first in her family to finish secondary school;
or the boy living on a Pacific island, whose home now
may not be submerged in water in the future, as a result
of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change; or the
LGBTI teenager who, in spite of what her parents and
her classmates and her Government tell her, believes
for the first time that she is entitled to be treated with
the same basic dignity as everyone else and to have the
same rights. Imagine all of those children out there who,
as a result of this man’s leadership — Ban Ki-moon’s
leadership — over the past decade, will have hope that
they otherwise would not have had. Just think what a
difference that hope, their hope, our hope, will make
in shaping the future of our world for the better. We
are so grateful to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his service and for doing so much to make the United
Nations into the beacon of hope he has always seen it
to be.

These achievements show what a difference the
leadership of a Secretary-General can make when it
comes to tackling some of the gravest threats and most
intractable-seeming problems. We are fully confident
that António Guterres will build on these efforts as the
new Secretary-General of the United Nations, and we
congratulate him on his imminent swearing-in today.
He is the man for the job in such challenging times.
Let me conclude. In 1962, speaking to that group
of international students on the White House lawn,
President Kennedy said, “What hopes we can have for
the future are in all of you”. Who could have thought
that among those kids was an 18-year-old from South
Korea who, on his first trip outside the country, would
find the inspiration that would set him on a path to
one day becoming the Secretary-General of the United
Nations — a boy who had grown up in poverty, in a
war-torn country, whose circumstances otherwise gave
no indication that he would have the chance to play such
a leading role in addressing the greatest challenges of
10/15

The President: It is now my privilege to give the
floor to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: I thank representatives
for their kind words and for their trust. I am deeply
moved by their tributes. Serving as Secretary-General
of this great Organization has been the privilege of a
lifetime for me.
As some representatives have said, I am a child
of the United Nations. After the Korean War, United
Nations aid fed us. United Nations textbooks taught us.
United Nations global solidarity showed us we were
not alone. For me, the power of the United Nations
was never abstract or academic. It is the story of my
life and that of many Korean people. It is the story
of many millions of people around the world, many
children — young boys and girls. This profound
appreciation grew even stronger every day during my
service with the United Nations.
For the past 10 years, I have been honoured to serve
alongside the many courageous, dedicated and talented
women and men of the United Nations. I have seen the
power of international cooperation in taking on our
most pressing challenges, and I have seen the United
Nations open its doors wider than ever to civil society
16-43170

12/12/2016

and many partners to help us transform our world.
Together, we have faced years filled with challenge: the
worst financial collapse since the Great Depression;
eruptions of conflict and uprisings for freedom;
record numbers of people fleeing war, persecution and
poverty; and disruptions brought by disease, disasters
and a rapidly warming planet. This turmoil tested us.
Despite huge difficulties, we helped save lives and
protect tens of millions.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change have opened
a pathway to a safer and more just and peaceful world
for all of us. The empowerment of women took great
strides during these years. Youth took on new levels of
leadership. New mindsets took hold. Day by day, brick
by brick, we built stronger foundations for peace and
progress.
Yet so much suffering and strife endure. So many
women and children face violence and exploitation. So
many people face hatred solely because of who they are.
And so many problems have proven intractable — none
more so than the bloodshed in Syria and the upheaval
it has spawned.
(spoke in French)
Countries are more interdependent than ever.
Economies are more integrated than ever. People are
more interconnected than ever. It would seem selfevident that international solutions serve national
interests. Yet many question global institutions and see
them as out of step and unable to deliver. Many others
see in them a growing leadership deficit.
Everyone, wherever we are, has the right to live
free from want and fear, the right to look ahead with
hope, and the right to consider ourselves bound by the
standards enshrined in our founding Charter. These
goals and ideas are not luxuries or bargaining chips.
They are what people need and deserve — not in the
distant future, but today. They are as relevant to the
inhabitants of the richest countries as to those of the
poorest countries. These principles should continue to
motivate and guide our work. All of us must rise above
the narrow national interests, in a spirit of enlightened
self-interest in our international community.
(spoke in English)
As I contemplate how well we have upheld that
responsibility across a decade in office, a kaleidoscope
of faces is at the forefront of my mind — memories

A/71/PV.60

of my visits to the front lines of human need and the
frontiers of human progress. I have maintained a
focus on people’s dignity and rights, the pillars of our
common humanity. I have sought to stand up for the
vulnerable and those who have been left behind today.
And I have tried to be sure that we are doing all that we
can so that future generations can live in peace.
Even as I prepare to leave, my heart will be, as it has
since I was a child, right here with the United Nations.
And that heart is greatly comforted by knowing that
I am passing the baton to Secretary-General-designate
António Guterres, a man of integrity and principle. I
have no doubt that, with his passion and compassion,
he will successfully navigate many complex challenges
and steer the Organization to new and greater heights.
I would also like to express my most profound
appreciation to my home country, the Korean people and
the Government. Their whole-hearted support for the
past 10 years has been a great source of encouragement
in working proudly for peace, development and human
rights throughout the world.
I would also like to take this opportunity to express
my deepest thanks to Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson for his outstanding leadership and compassion
for humankind. I thank him and the hard-working staff
of the United Nations.
In closing, I wish the new Secretary-General
and all of our Member States peace, prosperity and
every success. It has been an honour to serve our
United Nations and work together with everyone as
“We the peoples”. I thank everyone for their support
and continued commitment to the noble purposes and
principles of the United Nations.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
The General Assembly will now continue with the
appointment process of the Secretary-General-designate,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I have the
honour to welcome the Secretary-General-designate,
His Excellency António Guterres, to take the oath of
office. On behalf of everyone, I wish to congratulate
Mr. Guterres on his appointment as the ninth SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.
António Guterres emerged as the winning
candidate for the role of Secretary-General following

16-4317011/15

A/71/PV.60

a historically public and comprehensive selection
process at the United Nations during which his
integrity, values and competence showed through. The
Secretary-General-designate is indeed recognized as a
man who embodies the universal spirit of the United
Nations. We have every confidence that he will lead
our Organization with wisdom and rectitude, everdedicated to the common good of humankind.
As President of the General Assembly, I will do all
within my power to facilitate a smooth transition and
strong start in office for Mr. Guterres. We all stand ready
to work in support of the Secretary-General-designate
in the priority areas that he has already identified.
Those include building the interlinkages between peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights and taking a universal and integrated approach
to implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. We will support
him in his work to pursue the centrality of prevention
with emphasis on sustaining peace. We will help him
strengthen strategic cooperation with key partners,
including
regional
organizations,
international
financial institutions and civil society. We will buttress
his efforts to promote reform and innovation so that the
United Nations is better able to deliver to the people that
it serves, and we will stand firm with him in advancing
the core values of the United Nations relating to peace,
justice, inclusion and diversity throughout the world.
The world is facing serious global challenges,
some of which go so far as to threaten humankind’s
ongoing place on this planet. Finding the necessary
global solutions will require tireless commitment from
all who possess a sense of responsibility for the wellbeing of future generations. We the peoples of the
United Nations have in Secretary-General-designate
Guterres a man who can shape our common endeavour
to overcome those many challenges and a leader for
this time when we must transform the world to be a
sustainable and better place for all.
In the daily toil ahead, may the heartened mind of
António Guterres be ever fortified by the high purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
I now invite the President of the Security Council,
the President of the Economic and Social Council, the
President of the Trusteeship Council, the President of
the International Court of Justice, the Vice-Presidents
of the General Assembly, the Chairpersons of the Main
12/15

12/12/2016

Committees, and the President and the Prime Minister
of the Republic of Portugal to come to the platform.
The President of the Security Council, the President
of the Economic and Social Council, the President
of the Trusteeship Council, the President of the
International Court of Justice, the Vice-Presidents
of the General Assembly, the Chairpersons of the
Main Committees, and the President and the Prime
Minister of the Portuguese Republic took places on
the platform.
The President: I request the Chief of Protocol to
escort the Secretary-General-designate, His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, to the platform.
The Chief of Protocol escorted the SecretaryGeneral-designate, Mr. António Guterres, to the
platform.
The President: Your Excellency, by resolution
71/4, of 13 October 2016, the General Assembly has
appointed you Secretary-General of the United Nations
for a term of office beginning on 1 January 2017 and
ending on 31 December 2021.
I ask Mr. Guterres to repeat after me the oath
of office.
Mr. Guterres: I, António Guterres, solemnly swear
to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience
the functions entrusted to me as Secretary-General
of the United Nations, to discharge these functions
and regulate my conduct with the interests of the
United Nations only in view, and not to seek or accept
instructions in regard to the performance of my duties
from any Government or other authority external to
the Organization.
The Chief of Protocol escorted the President of the
Security Council, the President of the Economic
and Social Council, the President of the Trusteeship
Council, the President of the International Court
of Justice, the Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly, the Chairpersons of the Main Committees
and the President and the Prime Minister of the
Portuguese Republic from the platform.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General-designate, to
make a statement.
Mr. Guterres: I thank speakers very much for all
their kind words. I am deeply honoured by the trust and
confidence Member States have placed in me, and I am
16-43170

12/12/2016

determined to be guided by the purposes and principles
of the Charter.
First of all, I would like to pay tribute to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon. His principled leadership has
helped to chart the future of the United Nations, through
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, through
his commitment to peace and security and through his
initiative to put human rights at the heart of our work.
Under his direction, the world committed to the historic
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and ratified it in
record time. I strongly believe that this momentum
is unstoppable. It is an honour to follow in his steps,
defending the same values that unite us.
Twenty-one years ago, when I took the oath of
office to become Prime Minister of Portugal, the world
was riding a wave of optimism. The Cold War had
ended and some described that as the end of history.
They believed that we would live in a peaceful, stable
world with economic growth and prosperity for all. But
the end of the Cold War was not the end of history. On
the contrary, history had simply been frozen in some
places, and when the old order melted away history
came back with a vengeance. Hidden contradictions
and tensions resurfaced. New wars multiplied and old
ones reignited. The lack of clarity in power relations led
progressively to greater unpredictability and impunity.
Conflicts have become more complex and
interlinked than ever before. They produce horrific
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights abuses, and people have been forced to flee
their homes on a scale unseen in decades. And a new
threat has emerged — global terrorism. Megatrends,
including climate change, population growth, rapid
urbanization, food insecurity and water scarcity, have
increased competition for resources and heightened
tension and instability.
At the same time, the past 20 years have seen
extraordinary technological progress. The global
economy has grown and basic social indicators have
improved. The proportion of people living in absolute
poverty has fallen dramatically. But globalization and
technological progress have also contributed to growing
inequalities. A lot of people have been left behind,
including in developed countries, where millions of old
jobs have disappeared and new ones are out of reach for
many. In many parts of the world, youth unemployment
has exploded. Globalization has also broadened the
reach of organized crime and trafficking.

A/71/PV.60

All of this has deepened the divide between people
and political establishments. In some countries, we
have seen growing instability, social unrest and even
violence and conflict. In many parts of the world, voters
now tend to reject the status quo, and any Government
proposal is put to a referendum. Many have lost
confidence not only in their Governments, but in global
institutions, including the United Nations.
Fear is driving the decisions of many people around
the world. We must understand their anxieties and meet
their needs without losing sight of our universal values.
It is time to reconstruct relations between people and
leaders national and international. It is time for leaders
to listen and show that they care about their own people
and about the global stability and solidarity on which
we all depend.
It is time for the United Nations to do the same — to
recognize its shortcomings and reform the way it works.
The Organization is the cornerstone of multilateralism
and has contributed to decades of relative peace. But the
challenges are now surpassing our ability to respond.
The United Nations must be ready to change. Our most
serious shortcoming — and here I refer to the entire
international community — is our inability to prevent
crises. The United Nations was born from war. Today,
we must be here for peace.
(spoke in French)
Prevention requires us to address root causes
across the three pillars of the United Nations: peace and
security, sustainable development and human rights. It
must be the priority in everything we do. Prevention
requires us to better support countries in strengthening
their institutions and in making their societies more
resilient. It also means reinstating human rights as a
fundamental value to be pursued for its own sake and
not as a means to a political end. All people, including
minorities of every kind, must enjoy the full range of
human rights — civil, political, economic, social and
cultural — without discrimination. The protection
and empowerment of women and girls are paramount.
Gender equality is key to development and there is
growing evidence of its critical role in building and
maintaining peace.
Prevention is not a novel concept; it is what the
founders of the United Nations asked us to do. It is the
best way to save lives and reduce human suffering.
Where prevention fails, we must do more to resolve
conflicts. From the acute crises in Syria, Yemen,

16-4317013/15

A/71/PV.60

12/12/2016

South Sudan and elsewhere to long-running disputes,
including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we need
mediation, arbitration and creative diplomacy. Through
my good offices, I am ready to engage personally in
conflict resolution where it brings added value, while
recognizing the lead role of Member States.

our work and engage in comprehensive reform of the
United Nations development system at Headquarters
and at the country level. That must involve leadership,
coordination, delivery and accountability. We will
build on the outcome of the recent discussions among
Member States.

The scale of the challenges that we face requires us
to work together on a deep and continuous process of
reform of the United Nations. I want to highlight here
three strategic priorities for that reform: our work for
peace, our support for sustainable development and our
internal management.

We must also bring the humanitarian and
development spheres closer together from the very
beginning of a crisis in order to support affected
communities, address structural and economic impacts
and help prevent a new spiral of fragility and instability.
Humanitarian response, sustainable development and
sustaining peace are three sides of the same triangle.
This approach relates to the new way of working agreed
at the World Humanitarian Summit. To achieve this, we
need more accountability not only at the level of each
individual agency carrying out its mandate, but also
in its contribution to the work of the United Nations
system and of the system as a whole. A strong culture of
accountability also requires effective and independent
evaluation mechanisms.

The women and men working in United Nations
peace operations make a heroic contribution while
putting their lives at risk. However, they are often tasked
with peacekeeping where there is no peace to keep. We
must therefore reach a shared understanding of the scope
of peacekeeping so as to pave the way for urgent reforms.
We must create a peace continuum from prevention and
conflict resolution to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development. We must build on the conclusions of the
three recent reports and the parallel resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. Inspired
by the new concept of sustaining peace, it is time for
all of us to engage in a comprehensive reform of the
strategy of the United Nations, its operational setup and
structures for peace and security. This reform must also
include a review of our work on counter-terrorism and
a better coordination mechanism among the 38 United
Nations entities involved.
(spoke in English)
The United Nations system has not yet done enough
to prevent and respond to the appalling crimes of sexual
violence and exploitation committed under the flag of
the United Nations against those whom we are supposed
to protect. I will work closely with Member States on
structural, legal and operational measures to make the
zero-tolerance policy for which Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon has fought so hard a reality. We must ensure
transparency and accountability and offer protection
and effective remedies to victims.
The second key element of the reform agenda
concerns the support of the United Nations to Member
States in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and the objectives of the Paris Agreement,
which through their promise to leave no one behind
represent an expression of global solidarity. To do
this, we will reposition development at the centre of
14/15

The third key area is management reform. We
will build on existing efforts and implement recent
initiatives. But looking at United Nations staff and
budgetary rules and regulations, one might think some
of them were designed to prevent rather than to enable
the effective delivery of our mandates. We need to create
a consensus around simplification, decentralization and
flexibility. It benefits no one if it takes nine months to
deploy a staff member to the field. The United Nations
needs to be nimble, efficient and effective. It must focus
more on delivery and less on process; more on people
and less on bureaucracy. A culture of accountability
requires strong performance management and effective
protection for whistleblowers.
It is not enough just to do better. We must be able
to communicate better about what we do in ways that
everybody understands. We need a substantial reform of
our communications strategy, upgrading our tools and
platforms to reach people around the world. Moreover,
management reform must ensure that we reach gender
parity sooner rather than later. The initial target for the
equal representation of women and men among United
Nations staff was the year 2000. Sixteen years later,
we are far from that goal. I pledge to respect gender
parity from the start in all my appointments to the
Senior Management Group and the Chief Executives
Board. By the end of my mandate, we should reach
full gender parity at the Under-Secretary-General and
16-43170

12/12/2016

Assistant Secretary-General levels, including special
representatives and special envoys. We need a clear
road map, with benchmarks and time frames, to achieve
parity across the system well before the target of 2030.
The same concern applies to regional diversity.
Finally, any investment in a stronger United Nations
must take staff into account. I look forward to working
once again alongside the more than 85,000 men and
women carrying out our mandate in 180 countries
across the globe, many of whom work in difficult
and sometimes dangerous circumstances. With their
professionalism, expertise and dedication, they are the
most important resource of the United Nations — a
resource that has to be cared for, developed and used
effectively, and whose voice needs to be heard.
We live in a complex world. The United Nations
cannot succeed alone. Partnership must be at the
heart of our strategy. We should have the humility to
acknowledge the essential role of other actors, while
maintaining full awareness of our unique convening
power. Our humanitarian and development efforts
would be insignificant without the active involvement
of Member States and the contributions of civil society,
international financial institutions, private investors
and even financial markets. Several mediation efforts
and peace operations would not be possible without the
engagement of regional organizations, particularly the
African Union, which is our most relevant international
regional partner both in peace and security and
in development.
(spoke in Spanish)
Many important initiatives have been launched
recently with our partners. We must now see them
through before we introduce new ones. One missing
link in our strategy is our work with young people.
They have been excluded for far too long from making
the decisions that will affect their futures. We must

A/71/PV.60

build on the work that already has been done with the
support of Member States, the Youth Envoy and civil
society. But this cannot be an initiative led by older
people discussing the younger generation. The United
Nations must empower young people, increase their
participation in society and their access to education,
training and jobs.
(spoke in English)
Today’s paradox is that despite greater connectivity,
societies are becoming more fragmented. More and
more people live within their own bubbles, unable to
appreciate their links with the whole human family. In
the end, it comes down to values, as has been said so
many times today. We want the world that our children
inherit to be defined by the values enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations: peace, justice, respect,
human rights, tolerance and solidarity. All major
religions embrace these principles, and we will strive
to reflect them in our daily lives.
The threats to these values are most often based
on fear. Our duty to the peoples we serve is to work
together to move from fear of each other to trust in each
other. Trust in the values that bind us, and trust in the
institutions that serve and protect us. My contribution
to the United Nations will be aimed at inspiring that
trust as I do my best to serve our common humanity.
The President: I thank the
General-designate for his statement.

Secretary-

Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General-designate,
was escorted from the rostrum.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at noon.

16-4317015/15
