132

General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in
the number of States which have ratified the Convention
or acceded thereto;
3. Requests all States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to accede thereto as soon
as possible;
4. Welcomes the establishment by the Chairman of
the thirty-third session of the Commission on Human
Rights of a group as provided for by article IX of the
Convention; 10
5. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to
continue its efforts to undertake the functions set out
in article X of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to include in
his next annual report under General Assembly resolution 3380 (XXX) a special section concerning the
implementation of the Convention.
60th plenary meeting
7 November 1977
32/13.

Report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973 and 32/10 of 7 November 1977 on the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, resolution 31/81 of 13 December 1976
on the reports of the Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination and resolution 32/11 of
7 November 1977 on the status of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on its fifteenth
and sixteenth sessions 11 submitted under article 9,
paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
Noting with appreciation the decisions taken by the
Committee at its sixteenth session about its contribution
to the World Conference to Combat Racism and Racial
Discrimination by preparing a document on the Convention and a relevant study on the acceptance and
implementation of the Convention,
Stressing the importance of the undertaking of States
parties to the Convention to engage in no act or practice
of racial discrimination against any person, groups of
persons or national or ethnic minorities, and to ensure
that all public authorities and public institutions, national and local, shall act in conformity with this obligation, in accordance with relevant provisions of the
Convention,
Noting the decisions adopted by the Committee at
its fifteenth and sixteenth sessions,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of
the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Takes note also of the part of the report relating
to Trust and Non-Self-Governing Territories and to
10 The Working Group on the Implementation of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of
the Crime of Apartheid consists of the following members:
Cuba, Nigeria and Syrian Arab Republic.
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/32/18).

all other Territories to which General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 applies, draws
the attention of the relevant United Nations bodies to
the opinions and recommendations of the Committee
relating to those Territories and stresses the necessity
of providing the Committee with sufficient information
in order to enable it to discharge fully its responsibilities
under article 15 of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
3. Commends the Committee for furthering the
implementation of the Convention by requesting the
States parties to the Convention to include in their
reports under article 9 information on the measures
which they have adopted to give effect to article 7 of
the Convention in the fields of teaching, education,
culture and information with a view to combating prejudices which lead to racial discrimination, promoting
understanding, tolerance and friendship among nations
and racial or ethnic groups, and propagating the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Convention;
4. Welcomes decision 2 (XVI) of 9 August 1977
in which the Committee decided in principle to give
general distribution to the reports of States parties to
the Convention and other official documents of the
Committee which would bring about greater awareness
by world public opinion of the problem of racial discrimination and mobilize it on the realization of the
goals and principles contained in the Convention;
5. Welcomes all efforts by the Committee to focus
the greatest attention on the just cause of the peoples
struggling against the oppression of the colonialist and
racist regimes in southern Africa;
6. Invites States parties to the Convention to provide necessary information to the Committee in accordance with article 9 of the Convention, taking into
account in particular:
(a)
General recommendation III of 18 August
1972 and decision 2 (XI) of 7 April 1975 on the
status of their relations with the racist regimes in southern Africa;
(b) General recommendation IV of 16 August
1973 on the demographic composition of their population;
( c) General recommendation V of 13 April 1977
on measures adopted to give effect to article 7 of the
Convention;
7. Expresses its grave concern that some States
parties to the Convention, for reasons beyond their
control, are prevented from fulfilling their obligation
under the Convention in parts of their respective territories, endorses the relevant decisions of the Committee and recalls General Assembly resolution 2784
(XXVI) of 6 December 1971 and Assembly resolution 3266 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974 concerning
the situation in the Golan Heights;
8. Invites the States parties to the Convention to
observe fully the provisions of the Convention and
other international instruments and agreements to which
they are parties concerning the elimination of all forms
of discrimination based on race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin;
9. Invites all States which are not yet parties tn
the Convention to ratify or accede to it and, pending

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third (:ommittee

such ratification or accession, to be guided by the
basic provisions of the Convention in their internal
and foreign policies.
60th plenary meeting
7 November 1977
32/14.

Importance of the universal realiza~ion
of the right of peoples to self-determmation and of the speedy granting of in•
dependence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and
observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November 1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
3070 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX)
of 29 November 1974, 3382 (XXX) of 10 November
1975 and 31/34 of 30 November 1976,
Recalling also its resolutions 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII)
of 12 December 1973 and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 on the use and recruitment of mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States,
Recalling the Maputo Declaration in Support of the
Peoples of Zimbabwe and Nami~ia and the Progra1?1?e
of Action for the Liberation of Zimbabwe and Namibia,
adopted by the International Conference in Support
of the Peoples of Zimbabwe and Namibia, 12 held at
Maputo from 16 to 21 May 1977, and the declaration
adopted by the World Conference for Action against
Apartheid, 13 held at Lagos from 22 to 26 August 1977,
Taking note of the declaration of the First Afro-Arab
Summit Conference, 14 held at Cairo from 7 to 9 March
1977,
Reaffirming its faith in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and the importance of
its implementation,
Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples as imperatives for the enjoyment of human
rights,
Affirming that "bantustanization" is incompatible
with genuine independence, unity and national_ sovereignty and would have the effect of perpetuating the
power of the white minority and the racist system of
apartheid in South Africa,
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to
comply with the principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise
of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial and alien domination,
12A/32/109/Rev.l-S/12344/Rev.J, annex V. For the printed
text, see Official Records of the Security Council, Thirtysecond Year, Supplement for July, August and September
1977.
13 A/CONF.91/9 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.77.XIV.2 and cmrigendum), sect. X.
14 A/32/61, annex I.

133

Welcoming the independence of Djibouti,
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Indignant at the continued violations_ of the hun~an
rights of the peoples still under colonial ~nd f?re1gn
domination and alien subjugation, the contmuatlon of
the illegal occupation of Namibia and South Afri~a's
attempts to dismember its territory, the perpetuation
of the racist minority regimes in Zimbabwe and Sout_h
Africa and the denial to the Palestinian people of their
inalienable national rights,
1. Calls upon all States to implement fully and
faithfully the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination by
peoples under colonial and alien domination;
2. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples for independence, territorial integri~y, natic:mal
unity and liberation from colonial and foreign dommation and alien subjugation by all available means, including armed struggle;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples
of Namibia and Zimbabwe, of the Palestinian people
and of all peoples under alien and colonial domination
to self-determination, national independence, territorial
integrity, national unity and sovereignty without external interference;
4. Demands the immediate evacuation of the
French administration and forces from the Comorian
territory of Mayotte;
5. Condemns the policy of "bantustanization" and
reiterates its support for the oppressed people of South
Africa in their just and legitimate struggle against the
racist minority regime in Pretoria;
6. Reaffirms that the practice of using mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries
themselves are criminals, and calls upon the Governments of all countries to enact legislation declaring the
recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in
their territory and the transit of mercenaries through
their territory to be punishable offences and prohibiting
their nationals from serving as mercenaries, and to report on such legislation to the Secretary-General;
7. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries whose political, economic, military or sporting
relations with the racist regimes in southern Africa and
elsewhere encourage these regimes to persist in their
suppression of the aspirations of peoples for self-determination and independence;
8. Strongly condemns all Governments which do
not recognize the right to self-determination and independence of all peoples still under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation, notably the
peop!es of Africa and the Palestinian people;
9. Strongly condemns the ever increasing massacres
of innocent and defenceless people, including women
and children. by the racist minority regimes of southern
Africa i11 their desperate attempt to thwart the legitimate
demands of the people:
10. Demands the immediate release of all persons
detained or imprisoned as a result of their struggle
for self-determination and independence, full respect
for their fundamental personal rights and the observance
of article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human
