NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/f 969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , *. . . . . . , , , . . . . . .

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12218) . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . *. . . . * * . . . . . . . . . . *. *. .

1

SIPV. 1969

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations’ document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemnts
of the Official Recosds qf the Security Courwil.
The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutior?s
und
Decisiom
r~f the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1969th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
Mr. Jorge Enrique ILLUECA

President:

(Panama),

P~srnt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union Of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l969)

1.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/12218)
The meeting

of the agenda

wns called

to order

nf 4.20 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
Letter dated 20 October 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations
addressedto the President of the Security Council
(S/12218)

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fiouz SprrnishJ:
In accordance with the decisions adopted at past
meetings [/966fh IO 1968rh meetings],
I invite the
representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Mauritania,
Morocco and Nigeria as well as the representative of
the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
(PLO), to
participate in the debate without the right to vote.

9-.

(interpwtrrfion
./h/l1
Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China)
Cl~i/lc,sc): The Chinese delegation has listened atten-

11 November 1976, at 4 p.m.
tively to the statements on the situation in the Israeli
occupied territories made by the representatives of
Egypt [1966th /??eeting]and other Arab countries and
bY the PLO [ibid.]. It is clear from the abundance of
irrefutable facts they have enumerated that, since the
Security Council considered the relevant question
last May, the .Israeli Zionists, far from showing any
restraint, have stepped up their policies of aggression
and expansion in the occupied territories, committing
a new series of atrocities against the people there.
In these circumstances, we consider it entirely necessary for the Egyptian Government to request the
convening of the Council meetings for the consideration of this question. The Chinese delegation firmly
supports the solemn position of the Arab countries in
strong condemnation of the Israeli Zionists’ atrocities.
3. Over a long period, Israeli Zionism has pursued in
the occupied territories a policy aimed at the perpetual
occupation of Arab territories. To achieve this aim, it
has proceeded feverishly with the so-called zionization
of the occupied territories, forcibly confiscated large
tracts of Arab land, driven out large numbers of
Arab inhabitants and established many Jewish, settlements in a deliberate attempt to change the demographic composition of the occupied territories in
defiance of the stern condemnation by the world’s
people and in disregard of the many resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and the Security
Council. It has unscrupulously plundered the resources
of the territories and carried out devastating exploitations in disregard of the consequences. It openly
violated the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem in gross
interference in the religious freedom of the Arab
inhabitants. It has subjected the Palestinian and other
Arab inhabitants in the occupied territories to frantic
persecution and barbarous repression, in an attempt
to stamp out the flames of the local people’s struggle
against aggression. The crimes committed by the
Israeli Zionists in the occupied territories are too many
to be enumerated here.
4. Confronted with ruthless persecution by the Israeli
authorities, the Palestinian and other Arab peoples in
the occupied territories have never ceased their
resistance against the Israeli military Occupation.
Since the beginning of this year their struggle has
undergone a new development in the forms of strikes,
shop closings and student boycotts, and SOon, to
protest the occupation by the Israeli authorities and the
atrocities committed by them.

5. In the struggle the people there have put forward
the militant slogan: “Get organized to resist Israel!”
Last October, in defiance of the bloody repression
by the Israeli military and police forces, the Palestinian
and other Arab peoples in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip again held mammoth demonstrations
to mark the
third anniversary of the October War, and the
demonstrators
shouted slogans against the Israeli
occupation and they courageously fought against the
Israeli troops and police force. Such a state of affairs
has reflected the strong will and heroic mettle of the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples in the occupied
territories in defying brute force, strengthening their
unity and persevering in their struggle.

territories against
brutal domination.

Israel’s

military

occupation

and

8. The Arab nation is a great nation, and the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples are heroic peoples
who have been tempered in the flames of prolonged
struggles. We are deeply convinced that by continuously strengthening
their militant
unity, and
persevering in protracted struggle, they will certainly
be able to frustrate the conspiracies and intrigues of
the super-Powers, defeat -the Israeli aggressors and
finally achieve their national liberation with the
support of the people of all countries.
9. Mr. MIRZA (Pakistan): Mr. President, may I, on
behalf of the delegation of Pakistan, congratulate you
on your assumption of the office of President of the
Security Council. We are certain that under your able
leadership the Council will acquit itself well in the
important tasks before it.

6. We have always held that the question of the
Israeli occupied territories is an inseparable part of
the whole Middle East question. In the final analysis,
the dire miseries suffered by the people there are
caused by the rivalry between the two super-Powers
for hegemony in the Middle East. In their prolonged
struggle the Palestinian and other Arab peoples have
come to realize that, to achieve a fundamental solution
of the question of the occupied territories,
it is
imperative to do away with super-Power interference,
regain the national rights of the Palestinian people and
secure Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied Arab
territories.
Otherwise, there can be no talk about
the solution of the question of the occupied territories
and of the Middle East, still less the realization of
genuine peace. At present, the true behaviour of the
two super-Powers is being further exposed, that is,
their behaviour of carrying out aggression and rivalry
for hegemony in the Middle East. In particular, the
nature of that super-Power which styles itself as “the
natural ally of the Arab world” is being seen through
by more and more countries and people, that is, its
policy of carrying out aggression and expansion in the
name of “friendship”
and “assistance”.
The situation
in the Middle East as a whole is developing in a
direction Favourable to the Palestinian and other Arab
peoples and unfavourable to Israeli Zionism and bigPower hegemonism. The road is not smooth, and there
will be many more difficulties and twists and turns,
but the future of the struggle of the Palestinian and
other Arab peoples is infinitely bright.

10. On behalf of Mr. Iqbal Akhund, I should also
like to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, and the representatives of the United States,
Sweden,. the Soviet Union, Egypt, Jordan and the
United Republic of Tanzania for the kind words
addressed to him.
11. Nearly six months ago, the Council considered
the situation in the occupied Arab territories and concluded its deliberations expressing grave anxiety over
the situation in the territories and the well-being of
the population in those areas. In the statement of the
President it was also affirmed at that time [1922/?tI
u7eeting]
that the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’
was applicable to the occupied territories and that the
occupying Power should comply strictly with its provisions. Furthermore, Israel was asked to refrain from
and to rescind any measures that violated the provisions of that Convention. The measures taken by
Israel to alter the demographic
composition
or
geographical nature of the Arab territories, and in
particular the establishment of settlements, were ~ISO
deplored. That statement of the President expressed
the majority opinion. In fact, there was general agreement on most of the text among the Council members,
since it was in accordance with the previous resolution
of the Security Council itself.

7. The Chinese Government
and people strongly
condemn Israeli Zionism for its atrocities in the
occupied territories, and we deeply sympathize with
the sufferings of the people in those territories. We
remain unswerving in giving firm support to the
Palestinian and other Arab peoples in theirjust struggle
against Israeli Zionism and big-Power hegemonism
and in their just struggle to recover their lost territories and regain their national rights. We firmly hold
that the Security Council
should uphold justice,
sternly condemn the Israeli authorities for their atrocities, and adopt effective measures to stop the Israeli
atrocities in the occupied territories, which trample
upon the fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949’, and
support the struggles of the people in the occupied

12. The evidence available to us now, based on the
reports which have appeared in the international press
as well as in the Israeli press itself, and the statements
of the representatives of Egypt, Syria, Jordan and
the PLO [1966r/l nle~i&,
amply demonstrate that
the situation in the occupied Arab territories has continued to deteriorate and that acts of violence against
the Arabs have continued to increase. The protests
and uprisings by the Palestinians against the acts of
omission and commission of the occupying Power
point to the existence of a manifestly unjust situation
in those areas.
2

inhabitants of Hebron, and the situation was further
aggravated by other acts, including the desecration by
groups of Jews of the Holy Koran inside the Mosque.
There can be no doubt that these acts of sacrilege
and the Israeli action aimed at changing the institutional structures and established religious practices
have created a situation which endangers the peace
and security of the area and causes deep anguish to
the hundreds of millions of Moslems everywhere.

13. The continued occupation of the Arab territories,
which came under Israeli rule as a result of war and
bloodshed in 1967, is wrong in itself. This wrong is
being further compounded by the fact that the occupying Power is not applying the generally accepted
law of occupation: the fourth Geneva Convention.
Indeed, the evidence shows that Israel is acting against
the basic precepts of the fourth Geneva Convention.
The declarations of the Israeli leaders, including
Israel’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Allon, clearly indicate
that Israel plans to annex a considerable portion of
the occupied territories in return for a peace settlement and withdrawal from the present demarcation
lines. Also, in pursuance of this policy, Jewish settlements are being established in the occupied territories, and Israeli leaders have made it clear that these
settlements are there to stay. Further, rules and
regulations are being devised and action is being taken
to change the demographic,
cultural and religious
character of the occupied territories through expulsions, evictions and other repressive measures against
the Palestinians.
Imposition
of a curfew, arrests,
physical abuse and mass persecution, including that
of women and children, are aimed at intimidation
and
subjugation of the local inhabitants in order to make
them comply with Israeli designs and intentions.

16. In their history of almost 1,400 years, Moslems
of all races and continents have revered and guarded
the shrines and places, in the Holy Land and elsewhere, holy in the eyes of both the Jews and the
Christians.
As the representative
of Jordan pointed
out in his statement [ihid.], these places are regarded
as their own sacred heritage by the Moslems. The AlIbrahimi Mosque contains the mortal remains of three
of the prophets of Islam: Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
-peace be upon them. For the last I4 centuries the
Moslems have shown the utmost respect for those
tombs and have held their sanctity dearer than life
itself. Indeed, for centuries caliphs, sultans, saints
and millions
of Moslem pilgrims
have prayed in
Jerusalem and at the tombs of the prophets Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob in Hebron.
Moslems in the four
corners of the world, from the Atlantic Ocean to
Central Asia, have been praying and continue to pray
five times a day, every day, blessing the prophet
Abraham and his descendants. Consequently,
the
desecration of the Al-Jbrahimi
Mosque has caused
the deepest pain and anguish to Moslems the world
over.

14. These actions are against the provisions of the
fourth Geneva Convention and contrary to the resolutions of the United Nations, including those of the
Security Council, relating to those territories
in
particular and the Middle East situation in general.
Obviously, they also constitute very serious obstacles
to the attainment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

17. The Government.of
Pakistan issued a statement
on the incident in Hebron as follows:

15. Another very serious aspect of the situation in
the occupied territories relates to the Holy Places.
Since the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem and the
West Bank in 1967, a large number of acts of desecration and profanation have been committed
in the
holiest of places and shrines held in utmost reverence
by both Christians and Moslems. The burning of AlAqsa Mosque in 1969 caused extreme anguish to the
Moslems in every part of the world. The violation of
its sanctity early this year was also deplored by the
international community in gdneral and the Moslem
world in particular.
Recently, acts of profanation
against the Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque in Hebron have
multiplied. The information received from the Islamic
Conference,2 describes in detail the acts of desecration
perpetrated by Israel and the Zionists against one of
the holiest mosques of Islam. According to this dbcument, Israeli authorities have encroached on the
premises of the Mosque slowly and gradually since the
occupation of the West Bank in 1967. In August 1975,
the Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque was formally divided, and
only a very’ small area, 20 metres by 5 metres, has
been made available to the Moslems for prayers.
Action has also been taken to effect modifications
in the physical aspects of the Mosque. These acts
caused resentment and indignation among the local

“The Government
and people of Pakistan have
been deeply shocked and outraged at the desecration
of the sacred tomb of the prophets in Hebron. The
recent incident in Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi
involved
the desecration by groups of Jews of a copy of the
Holy Koran, destruction of the furniture and beating
up of Moslems inside the Mosque. In spite of
repeated assurances by the Israeli authorities,
incidents of desecration of and insult to the Holy
Places have occurred with regularity in the Israeli
occupied areas. Irrespective of religious, racial or
political affiliations, the insult to the Holy Book of
a world religion betrays a state of mind which is
out of keeping with universal notions of civilized
conduct
and minimum
standards
of human
decency.”
18. The basic cause of the turmoil and trouble in
the Middle East is the continued occupation of the
Arab territories occupied by Israel in 1967. For over
10 years the IsraeIi occupation
of Jerusalem,
the
West Bank, Gaza, Sinai and the Golan Heights has
continued and their populations
have suffered under
Israeli oppression. If a juts and lasting peace is to be
achieved in the Middle East, then this occupation
3

tration prove that so long as there is military occupation and therefore, injustice, the legitimate and natural
opposition to the foreign occupation can only increase.
Since those territories do not belong to Israel, the
situation in the occupied Arab territories is of concern
to the entire international community which has the
duty and the responsibility
to insist on respect foi
international
law with regard to the status of the
territories. It is obvious that, so long as Israel does not
evacuate the Arab territories it occupied after the
1967 war, it is constrained to respect the provisions of
international law set forth in the applicable international conventions.

must come to an end. Further, the rights of the
Palestinians, including their right to self-determination,
nationhood and a State of their own, must be implemented. Security and safety should also be ensured
for all the peoples and the States of the region.
19. As regards the issue now under consideration,
the Pakistan delegation regards it as essential that
the Council should express strongly its grave anxiety
and concern over the present serious situation in the
occupied Arab territories and call upon Israel to ensure
the safety, welfare and security of the inhabitants of
those territories. The return of those inhabitants who
have fled the areas since the outbreak of hostilities
should also be ensured. Israel should be called upon
to implement faithfully and scrupulously the fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 and to rescind all measures
incompatible
with that Convention. In accordance
with its previous decision, the Council should also
reaffirm that the actions taken by Israel, including
the transfer of populations and expropriation of land
and property, are invalid, cannot change the status of
the Holy City of Jerusalem and should be rescinded.

25. At the same time, it is imperative that the Israeli
authorities respect the resolutions of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council that have
proclaimed the inadmissibility
of any modification of
the demographic character of Jerusalem and other
occupied Arab territories. My country disapproves
of acts and measures to change the status of the
occupied territories, such as the establishment
of
Israeli settlements, since that is contrary to the terms
of international
law. We also feel that the Israeli
authorities must put an end to all forms of persecution
of the Palestinian population.

20. Lastly, and equally important, the Council should
declare any acts of profanation of the Holy Places,
religious buildings or sites seriousIy endanger international peace and security, as they injure the feelings
and deepest sentiments of the Moslems and Christians
all over the world.

26. We take part in this debate once again to set
forth our views on a problem which is of the greatest
concern to the people and Government of Romania.
In fact, my country considers that the continuation
of the tension in the Middle East is a constant
threat to peace, not only in the region itself, but all
over the world. It is for this reason that Romania,
which is located very near the zone of conflict, is,
together with many other States, extremely eager to
arrive as soon as possible at the establishment
of
a stable and lasting peace in the Middle East.

21. Mr. DATCU (Romania) (interpretatiorz
from
French): Mr. President, it is a special pleasure for me
to greet you as President of the Security Council for
this month. Our gratification at seeing you preside
over the Council is all the more justified since you
represent Panama, a country with which Romania
enjoys friendly relations, and since you yourself are an
eminent advocate of the progressive traditions of the
diplomatic and legal schools of Latin America; those
schools have contributed enormously to the develop.ment of international law on the basis of justice and
equality. In wishing you success in the performance of
your important tasks, I can assure you that the support of the Romanian delegation is available to you.

27. The resumption of the Geneva peace talks, with
the participation of the countries concerned and othet
States which might contribute to a just and lasting
settlement of the problem, might be a very valuable
initiative towards ,this end. So far, resumption
of
multilateral peace negotiations has been delayed by
the refusal to accept the Palestinian people as a party
to the negotiations and by a challenge of that people’s
right to be represented by the PLO. But that state of
affairs is only a reflection of the refusal to accept
the principle of the inadmissibility
of occupation of
territory by force and the consequent obligation to
withdraw from any territories so occupied.

22. I should also like to ask the Pakistani delegation
to be good enough to convey my warmest congratulations to Mr. Iqbal A. Akhund for the exemplary
way in which he presided over our work during the
month of October.
23. For the third time this year we are here to discuss
the situation prevailing in the Arab territories occupied
after the 1967 war. And if we are called upon to do so,
it is precisely because the problem still exists; the
problem continues to grow more serious, and thus far
nothing has been done to solve it.

28. It is axiomatic that a stable and just peace in the
Middle East cannot be achieved without settling the
problem of the Palestinian people. That. presupposes
the withdrawal from the territories occupied in 1967.
But it seems to me very difficult to imagine the fate
of the Palestinian people being decided without the
participation of its legitimate representative, namely.
the PLO. Therefore&is
imperative that the Palestinian
Arab people, through the PLO, should participate in’

24. We have stated in the past, and today we reiterate,
that the tragic events that have taken place in the
Arab territories placed under Israeli military adminis4

all the peace-making
efforts on the Middle
including the Geneva Conference,

East,

Council, as members of the Latin American
and as members of the non-aligned movement.

29. A just and lasting peace cannot be conceived of
without adequate guarantees being given with respect
to the independence and territorial integrity of all the
States involved in the conflict in the Middle East,
We are convinced that the problem of the Middle
East can and should be settled by peaceful means
involving negotiations
and the political
methods
provided for in the Charter of the United Nations.

group

1 should like also to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Akhund of Pakistan, who conducted our
debates during October with the skill and wisdom that
we have come to associate with his qualities as a
diplomat. We thank him most Sincerely.
34.

35. Six months ago when the Council discussed the
situation in the occupied territories, a majority of the
Council members expressed, through a statement
made by its President [see 1922mi meethg], their
anxiety over the events occurring in the occupied areas
and their concern about the welfare of the population
of those territories. Council members also deplored
measures taken by Israel to alter the demographic
composition or geographical nature of the occupied
territories and warned that such measures were an
obstacle to peace. In addition, the Council decided
to keep a continuing close watch over the situation.

30. We also believe that the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, must play an even more
important role in the solution of the conflict and for
that purpose they must be more directly associated
with all the initiatives aimed at solving the problem,
including, above all, the convening and the work of
the Geneva Conference. We feel that the efforts
of the Security Council and the parties directly concerned that must resolutely grapple with the substantive issues in the future should be in those directions in order to reach a negotiated overall settlement
of the conflict in the Middle East.

36. TO my delegation’s regret, the intervening period
has shown no improvement in the situation prevailing
in the occupied territories. Tension in the area remains.
Incidents,
particularly
those concerning sensitive
religious issues, have occurred. Recent events have
only served to underline what has been reiterated time
and again, that so long as the occupation continues,
so long will the international community be faced with
a potentially explosive situation which poses a threat
to international peace and security.

31. We are aware of the fact that a comprehensive
settlement of the matter we are now discussing cannot
be achieved unless there is an overall political solution of all the problems which are at the heart of
the conflict in that region. We have supported for
many years, and we are prepared to continue to
support, all recommendations
concerning the situation
in the occupied Arab territories that will maintain or
enhance the possibility of an overall political settlement of the Middle East question.

37. It is thus correct that the Council should meet
to discuss .this situation which gives ominous indications of its potential for generalized conflict. For it
is the Council’s responsibility under the Charter to
seek to take speedy and effective action to deal with
threats to international peace and security. The Council cannot by inaction acquiesce in the continuance
of a sftrfrrs yl,cj that represents the triumph of aggression and the consolidation of rule by force of arms.
The Council cannot succumb to a strategy that seeks,
with the passage of time, to convert afirit ~rcc~~~fp/i
into unquestioning
acceptance of and indefinite
resignation to acts of injustice. The Council cannot
accept a rationale that would let the aggressor define
what constitutes a threat to global peace and security
in the Middle EaSt. We must be vigilant and ever on
our guard against any subtle or open attempt to
distract us from our responsibility to the oppressed
people of the occupied territories in the Middle East.

32. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President, it is
fitting that a distinguished son of Panama should be
presiding this month over the meetings of the Security
Council, for it was 150 years ago in your country that
the ideals of international
co-operation and understanding, ideals that have come to form the very
basis of the Organisation, were demonstrated at the
Amphictyonic
Congress of Panama. It is a notable
tribute to the vision of that Congress that we are
gathered here a century and a half later in an Organization comprising so many nations and dedicated to
the promotion
of the noble ideals so eloquently
defended by the great liberator Sim6n Bolivar at the
Congress of Panama.
33. Like so many countries in the new world, your
country has been the meeting place of a diversity Of
peoples and a diversity of nations. My country thus
feels a special bond with Panama that goes beyond
the mere geographical factor of our location in the
same hemisphere. We are honoured to see YOU, a man
of such wide experience and proved diplomatic
acumen, presiding over the Council for this month.
We pledge .the continuation of the close and fruitful
co-operation that we have enjoyed as members of the

38. In considering the situation, the Council has
returned once more to the substance of the Middle
East tragedy. I feel constrained.to make what should
be to all an obvious point, because of late, the substantive issues of the Middle East problem have been
clouded, sometimes unwittingly and sometimes by
design, by an excessive and often tendentious
exploitation
of those tragic events that have caused
so much pain to all those who so desperately long for
5

“2. To reaffirm its call upon the Government of
Israel to ensure the safety, welfare and security of
the inhabitants of the territories and to facilitate
the return of those inhabitants who have fled the
areas since the outbreak of hostilities.

the restoration of justice in the Middle East. DO we
need to be reminded that the present situation stems
from an act of dispossession of an entire nation, an
injustice of such magnitude that now, nearly three
decades later, the world community is still grappling
with its far-reaching consequences?

“3. To reaffirm that the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War’ is applicable to the Arab territories
occupied by Israel since 1967. Therefore, the
occupying Power is called upon once again to
comply strictly with the provisions of that Convention and to refrain from any measure that violates
them. In this regard, the measures taken by Israel
in the occupied Arab territories which alter their
demographic composition or geographical character,
and in particular the establishment of settlements,
are strongly deplored. Such measures, which have no
legal validity and cannot prejudge the outcome of
the efforts to achieve peace, constitute an obstacle
to peace.

39. The occupation by Israel of Arab land is but one
of the substantive aspects of the Middle East conflict.
Another is the Palestinian question. The third is the
right of all States in the area to live within secure and
recognized boundaries. It is almost universally recognized that any long-term settlement of the Middle
East problem must take account of these three fundamental aspects. The General Assembly has in recent
years adopted a number of resolutions which have
complemented
resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on the Middle East question. The net effect
of United Nations action has led to the elaboration
of a formula that can serve as the indispensable groundwork for future negotiations on a final Middle East
peace settlement. The formula is balanced and just. It
is well known to the international
community.
It
caters to the interests of all the parties concerned-the
Palestinians,
the Israelis and the other interested
parties. I feel that, if the Security Council can in
unity actively support the implementation
of these
equitable principles, an impetus will be given to a
response to the understandable demands for an urgent
overall settlement of the Middle East conflict. Let us
not shy away from the challenge. It is trite but nevertheless true to say that, in the Middle East, time is
not on the side of peace. My delegation trusts that the
action we shall take today will make a contribution
in this regard.

“4. To consider once more that all legislative
and administrative
measures and actions taken by
Israel, including expropriation
of land and properties thereon and the transfer of populations, which
tend to change the legal status of Jerusalem, are
invalid and cannot change that status, and urgently
to call upon Israel once more to rescind all such
measures already taken and to desist forthwith from
taking any further action which tends to change the
status of Jerusalem. In this connexion, the Council
deplores the failure of Israel to show any regard
for Security Council resolutions 237 (1967) of 14 June
1967, 252 (1968) of 21 May 1968 and 298 (1971) of
2.5 September I971 and General Assembly resolutions 2253 (ES-V) and 22.54 (ES-V) of 4 and 14 July
1967.

40. The PRESIDENT
(illter~r’rtrrtic,,~ ,fio/lr Sprr/li.s/r):
I thank the representative of Guyana for the very
significant words he addressed to me and my country.
As a Latin American brother and one whose country
is part of the third world, he can be sure that his
words have special meaning for us.

“5. To recognize that any act of profanation of
the Holy Places, religious buildings and sites or
any encouragement of, or connivance at, any such
act may seriously endanger international peace and
security.

41. There are no further names on the list of speakers
at this stage. As a result of consultations over which
I presided with all members of the Council, I am
authorized as President to make the following statement on behalf of the Council.

“The Council decides to keep the situation under
constant attention with a view to meeting again
should circumstances require.”

“Following
the request submitted by Egypt on
20 October 1976, the Security Council held four
meetings between 1 November and 11 November
to consider the situation in the occupied Arab territories with the participation of the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization.
After consulting all the members, the President of the Council
states that the Council has agreed:

42. Mr. SHERER
(United
States of America):
Mr. President, the United States has joined the other
members of the Security Council in the consensus
statement which you have read out because we believe
that statement affirms several important principles in
regard to the occupied territories. First is the principle
that the fourth Geneva Convention’
applies to the
present situation in the occupied territories. Under that
Convention and under international law the occupying
Power has rights as well as responsibilities,
Secondly,
we have supported and we continue to support the
principle that persons displaced in the 1967 War
should be permitted to return to their places of habita-

“1. To express its grave anxiety and concern
over the present serious situation in the occupied
Arab territories as a result of continued Israeli
occupation.
6

tion af the time of that war. Filially, we welcome the
concern in that statement for the sanctity of the Holy
Places, which we consider to be a particularly sensitive
and important matter.

48. Mr. ABE (Japan): I should like, first of all, to
express to YOU, Mr. President, the heartfelt congratulations Of my delegation on your assumption
of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. We are confident that with your great
competence and diplomatic skill you will guide our
deliberations successfully,

43. While my Government has associated itself with
the results of this debate, I must in candour observe
that the criticism of Israel which dominated these
proceedings has been largely one-sided and excessive.
This was particularly true as regards the question of
access to the holy sites, specifically the burial site of
the patriarch Abraham.

49. I take this opportunity also to express our deep
appreciation to Mr. Akhund of Pakistan for the great
distinction with which he presided over the work of
the Council during the month of October.
50. The Japanese delegation agrees with the statement which you have just made, Mr, President, in
concluding our debate on the present item. I fee] that
the Council can be proud of the manner in which it
has concluded the debate. Being fully aware of the
difficult nature of the problem and, at the same time,
mindful of the need for the Council to keep its unity
and weight, the members of the Council have made all
possible efforts to reach agreement on the conclusion
by consensus. My delegation wishes to express its
gratitude and admiration to you, Mr. President for the
impeccable leadership you have demonstrated in this
matter.

44. We agree with the other members of the Council
that the fourth Geneva Convention’,
specifically article 27, provides the standard for measuring Israeli
conduct in this matter. We are also fully aware that
in recent weeks there have occurred deplorable acts
of desecration and violence in and around that site,
which is holy to Moslems, Jews and Christians alike.
However, it is only fair and proper to point out that
the Israeli Government has condemned and opposed
those activities and has most recently brought charges
in a military court against a rather prominent Israeli
citizen for his role in them. The question of access
to and worship within this site is a particularly complex
and difficult matter, but we believe that the occupying
authorities have acted in good faith to protect and
preserve the religious rights set forth in the fourth
Geneva Convention.

51. The Council discussed the situation in the occupied Arab territories last May, and once again this
issue. has been br6ught before it. My delegation
listened with close attention to the statements,
particularly those made by the parties directly concerned. We recognize the legitimate concern and
anxiety felt by the Governments of Egypt and other
Arab States over the situation in the occupied Arab
territories. It is obvious that the situation has not
improved and that the population in the occupied
areas continues to be restless as a result of the
prolonged occupation of the areas.

45. The Council’s statement of consensus speaks of
the danger to peace of any act of profanation of the
Holy Places. This we take to mean any act by the
population,
the local authorities or the occupying
Power.
46. In closing, I should like to observe that in this
debate we have been dealing with the symptoms of the
problem rather than with the problem itself. The conditions we have been discussing will be satisfactorily
resolved only in the context of the negotiation of a
just and lasting peace in accordance with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), with
respect
to which we stand by all our previous
positions.

52. It may be recalled that the debate on this question
last May was concluded by the statement of the
President [ihid.], which expressed the views of ,the
majority of the Council’s members on the following
three points: first, the necessity to pay particular
attention to the well-being of the population in the
occupied areas; secondly, the observance by Israel
of the Geneva Convention relative to the PrOteCtiOn
of Civilian Persons in Time of War;’ and thirdly,
disapproval of the measures taken by Israel in the
occupied Arab territories to alter the demographic
composition or geographic nature, and, in particular,
the establishment of settlements.

47. There is good reason to hope that conditions in
the Middle East have improved to the point that
renewed efforts towards such a settlement will be
possible. The recent meetings of Arab leaders at
Riyadh and Cairo promise to contribute to an end to
the fighting in Lebanon and to the preservation
Of
territorial
integrity and national
its independence,
unity, to which we attach the highest importance.
More broadly, Ihe statesmanship displayed by the
Governments principally involved promises to establish the constructive atmosphere and the conditions
necessary if there is to be progress towards resolving
the problems which continue to beset the Middle
East.

53. While there has been no clear indication from
Israel as to whether it is heeding the conclusion of the
Council, the uneasy situation in the occupied areas
has continued. Demonstrations, riots or disturbances
have taken place with such frequency that the sltuation needed to be re-examined this time.
54. When the Council considered this question last
May [ibid.], my delegation stated that the Government
7

of Israel should realize that the situation would not
have worsened as it had if Israel had complied with
the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention,
and
we urged Israel, which is a party to the Convention,
to comply strictly with it. Today we reiterate our
strgng appeal to the Government of Israel to consider
strict observance of the provisions
of that Convention.

Mr. President, and to the members of the Council
for agreeing to Egypt’s request that the Council be
convened to discuss the explosive and deteriorating
situation in the occupied Arab territories. That is, in
our opinion, a clear indication of the Council’s preoccupation with all issues that affect peace and security
in the world. It is also a clear manifestation to the
people of the occupied territories-in
fact, to a]1
oppressed peoples-that
they are not alone in their
struggle. The Council clearly emphasized to Israel
that its oppressive policies and measures could not
be condoned or allowed to go on unhindered.

55. Further, my delegation
wishes to emphasize
once again, as we did during the previous debate,
that the settlement policy of the Israeli Government
in the occupied areas constitutes an additional factor
in aggravating the fear and hostility of the Arab population, and threatens to produce an explosion in the very
tense situation already existing in those areas. Indeed,
the continued establishment
of Israeli settlements in
the occupied areas has aroused increased apprehension
among the Arab population,
and among the Arab
parties directly inirolved, that the occupation will be
prolonged by the use of fdits uccomplis,
and indeed
will last indefinitely.
My delegation therefore once
again urges the Government
of Israel to end immediately its settlement
policy, which constitutes
a
formidable
obstacle to a peaceful solution of the
problem of the Middle East.

60. Mr. President,
from the beginning of the
debate, under ‘your wise leadership, my delegation
was sure that the Council would rise to its responsibilities. The unanimous consensus statement you have
just read out on behalf of the Council is indicative
and constitutes an important sign of those responsibilities. It is a clear and direct warning to Israel
that it cannot go on unhindered in its barbaric policies
in the occupied Arab territories.
The Council has
made it very clear to Israel that the whole range of its
policies is strongly deplored and can in no way be
condoned. Its refusal to apply the fourth Geneva
Convention, its refusal to ensure the safety, welfare
and security of the inhabitants of those territories,
its refusal to allow those inhabitants who fled to
return to their homes, its refusal to abide by previous
Council resolutions, especially those concerning the
measures it introduced in the occupied Arab territories, which altered their demographic composition
or geographical nature, and in particular the establishment of settlements-all
these refusals were
strongly deplored by the Council, and the Council
correctly warned Israel that such measures as Israel
has adopted have no legal validity and constitute an
obstacle to peace.

56. As for the status of the City of Jerusalem, my
delegation strongly believes that the Government
of
Israel should pay the fullest respect to the special
character of the City and should not take any legislative
or administrative
measures which might change the
legal status of Jerusalem.
57. Clearly, the principal cause of those troubles in
the area is the continuing
occupation.
It is also
obvious that the problem of the withdrawal of Israel
from the occupied territories will not be solved in
isolation,
but within the framework
of an overall
settlement. The position of Japan on this problem has
been stated many times, and I do not intend to repeat
it in detail now. In summary, I would say that my
Government
believes that a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East will be achieved through the prompt
and complete implementation
of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as through
the recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
As steps to that end, my Government
hopes that the present standstill in the negotiation
process for achieving a peaceful solution will be overcome, so that the momentum.
in the search for a
peaceful overall settlement will not be lost. We continue to believe that such a just and lasting settlement
will be obtained.

61. More important is the fact that the Council is
very clear on an essential point: that the present
serious situation in the occupied Arab territories is
a result of continued Israeli occupation. This occupation, which should come to an end, and Israel’s continuing refusal ‘to abide by United Nations resolutions
and withdraw from the occupied Arab territories will
only lead to further deterioration
in the situation.
I hope that Israel will consider wisely this very clear
warning from the Council and the consequences of
ignoring it,

58. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
fro/n Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative
of Egypt.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.

62. The C,ouncil has also shown its determination
concerning the Holy Places in. the occupied ferritories by again calling on Israel to rescind all measures-and I repeat, “to rescind all measures”-it
has undertaken to change the legal status of Jerusalem
and forthwith to desist from taking any further action
which would tend to change that status. In this
connexion, the Council correctly considers that those
Israeli measures are invalid.

59. Mr. ABDEL
MEGUID
(Egypt): I should like
first to express my Government’s
thanks to YOU,

63. I take this opportunity once again to express in
the clearest terms Egypt’s determination
not tQ
8

accept in any way and under any circumstances the
policies Israel is pursuing in the occupied territories
in trying to establish a fuit accompli. The systematic
policy’ of Israel in establishing
settlements
and
plundering our natural resources, such as oil, should
be severely condemned and discontinued at once. If
Israel persists in this dangerous policy it must alone
bear the grave consequences of such a policy for the
prospects of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

logic, saw fit to blame Israel for what is happening
in Lebanon. I can understand &nd appreciate the
measure of his obsessive interest in what is happening
in Lebanon. After all, all the weapons used on both
sides of the conflict there are Soviet-produced and
Soviet-supplied,
which, of course, according to the
peculiar logic obtaining here, makes it only too natural
to blame Israel. Why not? After all, it fits into a
natural and historic pattern.

64. At the same time I should like to assure the
Council that, as we are determined to liberate our
land and to fulfil the Palestinians’ rights, so we are
determined to work for a just and lasting peace in the
area.

72. But why continue? What purpose is there, in
discussing this matter? The statement you, Mr. President, have made on behalf of the Council is unfortunately most illustrative of the biased selectivity, onesidedness and political expediency which motivates
statements or resolutions in this body.,

65. Allow me also to thank the Council for its
decision to keep the situation under constant attention
with a view to meeting again should circumstances
require.
66. The PRESIDENT
(inte,p,‘etatiorlfr’om
I call upon the representative of Israel.

73. Just think of it: in an incident which occurred
in Hebron, in an ancient Jewish holy site cited as such
in the Bible, an Arab mob defiled and desecrated
the Holy Scrolls of the Law, which the Jewish people
hold in more reverence and sanctity than anything
else in the world. Those Scrolls contain the principles
of the brotherhood of man and .the social and moral
values which are supposed to have inspired this
Organization.

Spnnish):

67. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): I could take hours and
go into detail in refuting the baseless allegations
made against us at this meeting. But what is the
purpose? The members’ minds are made up and they
would rather not be confused with facts.

74. Following those events, the Moslem leaders in
the West Bank and in Israel publicly apologized for
the acts of desecration, maintaining that by the defiling
of the Holy Scrolls of the Law part of the Moslem
heritage was being defiled. The Arab leadership and
the Arab press condemned that act of desecration.
What then happens here? There is a statement,
accepted by consensus, which condemns, of all coun-’
tries, Israel. But not one word has been uttered by
you, Mr. President, on behalf of the representatives
here, to deplore or condemn this insult, this act of
violation and religious desecration, this slur on the
Jewish people and the Jewish faith. I protest against
this despicable behaviour on the part of the Security
Council on behalf of Jewish people, wherever they
may be, and deeply regret the lack of moral courage
on the part of the members which it reflects. The
Council has not even had the good grace to do what
the Moslem leaders in Hebron, in the West Bank and
elsewhere did publicly. In so doing, the Council has
in consensus displayed the most blatant disregard
for the sensitivities of a small but great people which
has given so much to the world, and for a religion
which has given so much to the moral values of the
world. There has been not one word of regret; not
one word deploring what occurred; not one wordbecause the Arab representatives will not agree and,
if they do not agree, who is to gainsay them’?

68. I could devote a long speech to refuting the
remarks made by those who went before me, but there
is no purpose. Each argument is more ludicrous than
the other. We have heard remarks here about aggression from countries who would have been better
advised to remain silent.
69. History is already being rewritten in true
Orwellian fashion. A great new discovery has been
made by some of the representatives-namely,
that
Israel was the culprit in Lebanon. Apparently, it was
Israeli troops who stormed into Tel Zaatar and
massacred Palestinian women and children, not the
Syrian so-called peace-keeping force-heaven
forbid.
It was the Israeli troops who caused the deaths and
wounding of 150,000 men, women and children in the
Lebanon, not the Syrians or the PLO.
70, By the same logic I suppose the Jordanian
representative will maintain that it was Israeli tanks
that crossed the Jordanian border from Syria in
September 1970 and stabbed Jordan in the back and
that it was the Israeli forces which fought in the
streets of Amman in 1970 in an endeavour to overthrow
King Hussein. Apparently,
it is quite unimportant
what the representative
of Lebanon states to the
General Assembly about events in Lebanon. That is,
apparently, entirely irrelevant.

75. We’ have, this week, in this btiilding, been
involved in five major attacks on Israel, a small
country of 3 million people-five
attacks, almost
simultaneously. On Monday of next week a further
debate begins. In the meantime, a number of other
discussions will also take place. We are reaching a

71. The facts are also irrelevant to the representative of the Soviet Union, who, with his customary
9

80. Let me make it quite clear: no amount of threats,
no amount of brow-beating, no amount of biased and
no amount of anti-Semitic
one-sided resolutions,
innuendos such as we hear from time to time in this
building, will change our basic attitude or influence
us in any way. On the contrary, that can only
strengthen our resolve to resist those attempts 40
impose solutions. The solution must be arrived at
in direct negotiations between the States parties to the
conflict on the basis of mutual respect and recognition. Discussions such as we have had here and in
other parts of the United Nations, and to which we
shall be subjected in the coming weeks and months,
have only one purpose and one effect-namely,
to
put off negotiations for peace. It is a tragic commentary
on the state of world morality that this is exactly
what the Council is engaged in doing.

situation such as that last year, when 50 per cent of
the time of the General Assembly was being used in
barren diatribe castigating Israel.
76. There surely must be a limit to this modern
international
expression of anti-Semitism. There are
other evils, after all, in this world. A major portion
of our time is devoted to a recurrent and incessant
outpouring of hate and vilification, of vituperation
and slander, which dulls the wits, impresses nobody,
and has. no effect on anyone. Is this the purpose for
which the world body was established? Have all the
problems which face each and every one of YOU been
solved? Are the hundreds of millions of hungry, illfed masses of the world being cared for? Have the
.freedoms which have been trampled upon and the
wrongs
which have been inflicted upon countless
millions daily in this world been righted, that you can
devote so much time to listening to this incredible
barrage of rancour and malice? Is the purpose for
which the United Nations was established to issue
statements and resolutions which encourage extremism
and discourage negotiation and reason? Has not this
paranoic obsession with Israel gone beyond the bounds
of logic and ordinary common sense? Do you really
believe that this is the manner in which we are going
to achieve peace in the Middle East?

81. Mr. President, I regret to say that your consensus
statement only widens the gap in our war-torn area.
Is it not time that >the Council did something to close
the gap, to bring the parties closer, to move towards
peace?
82. The PRESIDENT
(inte,prc>tcltio/~ j?onz Sptrnish):
The representative of Jordan has asked to be allowed
to exercise his right of reply. I therefore invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

77. What is so disturbing about this whole situation
is that I am given to understand that, during the unofficial consultations which took place among members of the Security Council, an attempt to allude to
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)
in your statement, Mr. President, was dismissed by
the majority and the reference removed. In other
words, the whole concept of negotiating for peace
on the basis of mutual recognition and respect, free
from threats or acts of war, is gradually becoming
taboo, as indeed has become the word “peace”. What
a terrifying commentary on the Council.

83. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The discussion in the
Council of Israeli practices in the occupied Arab
territories has focused attention upon one of the most
crucial issues affecting the prospects for a just and
equitable peace in the Middle East. This oft-repeated
but in practice, largely ignored objective, is now
delicately poised at a dangerous crossroads and may
sooner rather than later reach an irrevocable point
of no return, to no one’s advantage.
84. If rationally assessed in an appropriate time
perspective, the peripheral and transient practices and
occurrences which we have discussed in the course
of the debate, important and agonizing though they be,
are not the crux of the complaint made by the representative of Egypt, in which several other countries
have participated. The real crux and challenge confronting the Council is to its ability to act promptly
and decisively to counteract
measures which are
currently being carried out by the Israeli occupation
authorities and which have been persistently carried
out during a decade of occupation, and the inevitable
results of which will be to negate, if not obliterate,
the prospects for a just peace in the Middle East.

78. Mr. President, I regret that your statement is not
acceptable as far as we are concerned, ignoring as it
does the basic problems facing us, ignoring as it does
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), and containing by implication, as I pointed out
before, a very serious insult to the Jewish people,
completely ignoring as it does an act of desecration
which should have aroused the reaction of those who
believe in the principles which were incorporated in
that part of the Bible that was destroyed.
79. The statement is unacceptable because it ignores
the root of the problem-namely,
the fact that the Arab
States are unwilling to sit down and negotiate face
to face with Israel. They are unable to do so because
they do not recognize Israel’s right to exist. They can
engage in their usual hypocrisy and semantic antics,
but until they sit down and negotiate with us on a
basis of respect for peace-and I mean peace-there
will be no advance towards accommodation
and
peace.

85. Let there be no ambiguity about it: rhe Arabs,
including the Palestinians,
are here at the United
Nations in a genuine effort to seek and pursue prospects for a just and equitable peace. If this were Ilot
their resolve there would be no point in their coffling
before the Council and other organs of the United
Nations to argue for it. Resolutions apart, we andcm
10

people in the occupied territories would like to know
whether they are the object of occupation-this
is
the question which I posed in my first statement
before the Council [196&h ~ec~li/?g], and if so, there
are governing rules that must be respected, namely,
the fourth Geneva Convention-or
the object of
annexation, just fading away, perhaps, to their
ultimate perdition‘? While seeking and probing the
prospects of a just solution and pending such a
solution, we are understandably,
I hope, requesting
the Security Council to order “a stay of execution”
in order to preserve intact the occupied territories
and their people before it is too late.
86. My delegation has not been unduly perturbed
that the debate has not been concluded with a forma1
resolution, although we were certainly gratified by
the consensus which deplored the practices of the
Israeli authorities; because ,resolutions have not been
wanting in the past, but they were, unfortunately,
conspicuous
by non-compliance,
notwithstanding
their inherent worth and the staunch dedication to the
Charter and to justice- and the statesmanship of all
the delegations which adopted them.
87. The statement made earlier on behalf of the
Security Council by you, Mr. President, was a categorical record of the Security Council’s views on
Israeli practices in the occupied Arab territories.
It is the earnest hope of my delegation that it will
not be long before those definitive views are translated
into speedy action.
88. I wish, in conclusion, to express my profound
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the efforts
which you so untiringly
and ably made and to the
members of the Council, whose profound grasp of the
situation was clearly reflected in your statement.
89. I do not want to digress, but I should like to
assure the representative
of Israel that when we
talk about the desecration of the hoIy Al-Ibrahimi
Mosque we do not make any distinction as to whether
the desecration occurred to Moslem shrines or to
Jewish shrines, As I said in one of my earlier statements, we consider that Islam has its foundations in
Judaism and in Christianity,
and that one who
desecrated a holy shrine, whether it was Jewish,
Moslem or Christian, would become a non-Moslem.
I think I made that clear, and I am surprised that the
representative of Israel does not seem to have listened
to what I said on that subject.

90. The PRESIDENT
(itlte~pr.etation~onl
Spcrnish):
I call upon the representative of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics who wishes to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.
91. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (it?te/pretatiotz j7om Russiat~): The representative of Israel, Mr. Herzog, was either surprised
or annoyed by the fact that the Soviet Union is
showing interest in the situation in the Middle East.
This interest is completely legitimate. In the first place,
that region is very close to the borders of the Soviet
Union. Secondly, in that region the elementary principles and norms of international law and the many
resolutions of the United Nations, including those of
the Security Council, are being trampled underfoot
by Israel, and the Soviet Union is entitled to express
its opinion here.
92. The object of the interests of the Soviet Union
in the Middle East is simple and understandable; it is
to achieve a just and stable peace in the Middle East,
a peace that would be in the interest of the Arab
countries and peoples, in the interest of the Arab people
of Palestine and in the interest of Israel also.
93. The policy of the leaders of Israel is very shortsighted indeed. The Israeli leaders, encouraged by
the fact that at the present time they are pushing their
way through the occupied Arab territories, do not see
the terrible alternative facing them, because they are
short-sighted. These are the choices: either Israel withdraws its troops from the Arab territories occupied in
1967 and receives in exchange an international
guarantee, or Israel will be forced to set free those
territories without any guarantees. The responsibility,
if the second alternative is adopted, will be borne by
the leaders of Israel.
94. The PRESIDENT
(interpretatiorzfiom Spanish):
The Security Council has now concluded its consideration of the item on the situation. in the occupied
Arab territories.
The meeting rose at 6 pm.

Notes

1 United Nations, Twaty Series, vol. 75, NO. 973, pa 287.
2 Ofjciol
R~corcls qf the General Assembly, Thirty-j% Session,
agcnda’item 55, document A/31/235, annex II.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

publications
may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
New

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes, New York ou Genbe.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United Nations, New York

DES NATIONS

sont en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
es&n en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et les agences
21: Nations

dipositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Seccibn
de Ventas,

83-60801-April

1985-2,2@
