206

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Women and the Committee against Torture are made
available to ali the members of these bodies;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit, as expeditiously as possible, the text of the present resolution to
ali members of the treaty bodies;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session as a separate ítem, the item entitled
"Reporting obligations of States parties to United Nations
instruments on human rights".
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/106.

International Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in
Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Gravely concerned at the deteriorating situation in
southem Africa arising from the continued domination
and oppression of the peoples of South Africa and Namibia by the minority racist régime of South Africa,
Conscious of the need to provide increased assistance to
the peoples of the region and the liberation movements of
South Africa and Namibia in their struggle against colonialism, racial discrimination and the policies of apartheid,
Conscious a/so of its responsibility to provide economic,
material and humanitarian assistance to independent
States in southern Africa in order to assist them in coping
with the situation resulting from the acts of aggression and
destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of
South Africa,
Aware that apartheid in South Africa, the illegal occupation of Namibia and acts of destabilization carried out by
South Africa and its surrogate elements continue to be the
main causes of refugee flows and the displacement of persons in the southern region of Africa,
Taking note of the decision of the Council of Ministers
ofthe Organization of African Unity at its forty-sixth session, held at Addis Ababa from 20 to 25 July 1987, to convene an International Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Retumees and Displaced Persons in Southern Africa
and to enlist the active support of the international community, in particular the United Nations, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the Southern
African Development Co-ordination Conference, to that
end, 99
Taking note also of the decision by the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to endorse the proposal for
the convening of an international conference to address
the specific situation of refugees and displaced persons in
southern Africa, 100
Appreciating the current efforts ofthe intemational community to provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and
other persons displaced by armed conflict in the countries
of southern Africa,
Recognizing that the task of caring for refugees is a matter of international concern and solidarity in keeping with
the Charter of the United Nations, international and regional instruments, in particular the 1951 Convention 10 1
and the 1967 Protocoi 102 relating to the Status of Refu99 See A/42/699, annex I, resolution CM/Res.1117 (XLVII).
100 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-second Session,

Supplement No. 12A (A/42/12/ Add.1), para. 209.
IOI United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545.
102 /bid., vol. 606, No. 879 l.

gees, as well as the Organization of African Unity Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems
in Africa, 103 of 1969,
Convinced that there is an urgent need for the international community to extend maximum and concerted assistance to southern African countries sheltering refugees,
returnees and displaced persons and also to highlight the
plight of the refugees, returnees and displaced persons in
southern Africa,
l. Welcomes the decision of the Organization of African Unity to convene in September 1988 an lnternational
Conference on the Plight of Refugees, Returnees and Displaced Persons in Southern Africa;
2. Reiterates its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for bis efforts, on behalf of the international community,
to organize and mobilize special programmes of economic
assistance for those African States facing grave economic
difficulties, the front-line States and other independent
States of southern Africa to help them to withstand the effects of the acts of aggression and destabilization committed by the apartheid régime of South Africa;
3. Welcomes the decision by the Executive Committee
of the Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees on the convening of the Conference;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in close co-operation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to give ali possible assistance
to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity in the preparation and organization of the Conference;
5. Appeals to ali Member States, the specialized agencies of the United Nations system and regional, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to provide ali the necessary support and resources needed for the
convening and success of the Conference;
6. Calls upan the international community to provide
increased assistance to the countries of southern Africa to
enable them to strengthen their capacity to provide the
necessary facilities and services for the care and well-being
of refugees, returnees and displaced persons in their countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to apprise the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of
1988 and to report to the General Assembly at its fortythird session on the implementation of the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/107.

Second lnternational Conference on Assistance
to Refugees in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its resolutions, particularly resolution
41/122 of 4 December 1986, relating to the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Africa, 104
Mindful that the fundamental purpose of the Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in
Africa, held at Geneva from 9 to 11 July 1984, 105 was to
103 /bid., vol. 1001, No. 14691.
I04 A/42/491.
IOS A/39/402,

annex.
