S/2000/1120

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 November 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 24 November 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period from 23 September to 22 October 2000.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

00-76265 (E) 271100
`````````

S/2000/1120

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (23 September-22 October), there were
approximately 45,000 troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) deployed in theatre, with
no major changes in deployments since the last report. On 16 October, Lieutenant
General Cabigiosu succeeded Lieutenant General Ortuño as COMKFOR.
Security
2.
The situation in Kosovo remained relatively calm and stable over the reporting
period. However, there were a number of incidents of harassment and intimidation
by Kosovar Albanians against Kosovar Serbs, including a grenade attack from a
vehicle in Pasjane (Multinational Brigade (MNB) (East)) on 2 October, which
injured five Kosovar Serbs. Following that incident, 300 to 400 Kosovar Serbs held
a demonstration in the town. There was no violence and local authorities dispersed
the demonstration peacefully. On 11 October, a number of explosive devices and
hand grenades were thrown at Kosovar Serb houses in Kosovo Polje (MNB
(Centre)) and Kamenica (MNB (East)). On 18 October, two Roma were injured in a
grenade attack in Stimlje (MNB (Centre)).
3.
Throughout the period, the Zvecan smelter plant near Kosovska Mitrovica
(MNB (North)) was the scene of daily demonstrations by Kosovar Serbs protesting
against the plant’s closure. All the demonstrations were conducted peacefully. On 30
September, the plant was damaged in an arson attack, which resulted in disruption of
the electricity supply to the village of Zvecan. While the factory was burning, some
50 to 100 Kosovar Serbs harassed personnel of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR troops at the factory
entrance, and an UNMIK vehicle was set on fire. KFOR troops were positioned to
respond to any further incident.
4.
In the run-up to the local elections in Kosovo on 28 October, there were
several cases of political violence and intra-ethnic intimidation directed at members
of the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK). On 23 October, four such incidents
were reported in Dokovica (MNB (West)), with grenades or explosives thrown at
houses belonging to three separate LDK candidates and an attempt to set fire to a
wooden platform at the scene of an LDK rally. There were no injuries.
5.
On 19 October, KFOR troops were attacked near Brocna (MNB (North)). Two
grenades exploded 200 metres away from their checkpoint and approximately 100
rounds were fired with automatic weapons. The troops were also fired at the
following day in a drive-by shooting incident. No casualties were reported.
6.
Throughout the period, KFOR troops continued to uncover and confiscate
caches of weapons, ammunition and explosives. On 26 September, a house search in
the northern part of Kosovo Polje (MNB (Centre)) led to the seizure of an arsenal of
small arms, grenades, assorted ammunition, explosives and electronic devices. Two
Kosovar Serbs were detained following the operation. On 28 September, during a
house search operation in Rudnik and Srbica (MNB (North)), a large number of
weapons and ammunition were confiscated and two Kosovar Albanians were
arrested. One of the arrested men was subsequently discovered to be a prisoner who
had escaped from custody after being arrested for the murder of a KFOR soldier in

2

S/2000/1120

March 2000. Both men were turned over to UNMIK and were transferred to the
prison in Kosovska Mitrovica.
7.
Confiscated weapons continue to be destroyed as part of the commercial
destruction programme. Between 20 September and 19 October, KFOR destroyed
418 weapons, including rifles, pistols, anti-tank and air defence weapons.
Illegal border activity
8.
KFOR troops continued to provide appropriate control of Kosovo’s internal
boundaries and external borders, and recognized crossing points. All but two of the
recognized crossing points within each MNB into the ground safety zone remain
closed. On 14 October, a patrol from MNB (West) stopped a car near the Kosovo/
Albania border and discovered 50 AK-47 rifles and 42 AK-47 magazines. The
occupants of the car fled. The destination of the weapons is still under investigation.
9.
There were continued reports of paramilitary activities being conducted by the
“Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac” in and around the ground
safety zone.
Security Council resolution 1160 (1998)
10. Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures, there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1998).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
11. Seven incidents of non-compliance by the Kosovo Protection Corps were
reported over the period, mainly related to the possession of illegal weapons and
ammunition violations.
12. The engagement of the Kosovo Protection Corps in humanitarian work projects
increased over the period, with approximately 400 members involved in 36 projects.
13. On 5 October, a high-level meeting of the Joint Implementation Commission
was held to review the progress made by the Kosovo Protection Corps since the
previous such meeting on 7 July. Overall, considerable progress was judged to have
been made over the previous three months, with the Kosovo Protection Corps
becoming much more transparent and cooperative in its dealings with KFOR and
UNMIK. However, despite the decline in the number of incidents of noncompliance, there were still a sufficient number of occurrences of criminal activity
and non-compliance to give KFOR and UNMIK cause for concern.
14. The Army (VJ) and security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
remain generally compliant with the terms of the military technical agreement and
continue to be cooperative in their dealings with KFOR. On 28 September, a joint
KFOR/VJ/Serbian Special Police (MUP) reconnaissance team searched a tunnel
inside the ground safety zone to ensure that there was no equipment which might
violate the terms of the military technical agreement. In the event, the tunnel was
empty. In mid-October, as a result of agreements reached at the regular meetings of
the Joint Implementation Committee, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia began to
conduct overflights of the city of Novi Pazar, located in the air security zone, to
collect photographic data to facilitate planning for the reconstruction of the city.

3

S/2000/1120

Cooperation with international organizations
15. KFOR continued to provide regular assistance on request to international
organizations and non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo on a daily
basis.
16. On 16 October, KFOR troops supported UNMIK police during “Operation
Norfolk” to combat organized crime in the Pristina area. A large quantity of
evidence was confiscated during a search of more than 13 locations in the city, and a
total of 27 arrests were made, 9 of which related to high-priority cases of serious
crime and murder.
17. In the run-up to the 28 October municipal elections in Kosovo, KFOR troops,
in coordination with UNMIK, provided selected, planned support to the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, focusing on ensuring freedom
of movement.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
18. During September, there were 9,592 organized voluntary returns, mostly
Kosovar Albanian. Since 1 January, there have been over 73,000 organized returns,
again mostly Kosovar Albanian. Approximately 200,000 Kosovar Serbs and 30,000
to 40,000 members of other ethnic minorities remain displaced within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.
Outlook
19. The security situation in the province is expected to remain relatively stable,
but tense.

4
