’

UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY

2296’”

MEETING:

COUNCIL

28 AUGUST

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisionlciagenda(SIAgenda12296) .,........,......

.. . . . .. . . . .. . . .. . . . ..

l

Adoption of rhe agenda.. , , . . , , . , . , , , , , , , , . . . , . , , , . , . . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/14647). . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I....

I

WV a2296

”

I

‘,

,

)

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplsnwtts
of the Ofj%iol R~wvds of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about It is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964,are published in yearly volumes of Rcwlutiotrs
utd
Dsclsiotts
of the Sccurlty Comdl.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adoptedbefore 1January 196S,becamefully operative
on that date.

2296th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 28 August 1981, at 6 p.m.
Prcsidenr: Mr. JorgeE. ILLUECA (Panama),

requestcontainedin a letter dated26 August 19&I
addressed
to the Secretary-General
by the Chargd
d’affairesa.i. of the Permanent
Missionof Angolato
the UnitedNations[S/f4&17l.

Present: Therepresentatives
of thefollowingStates:
China,France,GermanDemocraticRepublic,Ireland,
Japan,Mexico, Niger, Panama,Philippines,Spain,
Tunisia,Uganda,Unionof SovietSocialistRepublics, 3. 1shouldalsoliketo drawtheattentionof members
United Kingdomof Great Britain and Northern of the Councilto :he followingdocuments
whichare
related to this question: S/14643, letter dated
Ireland,UnitedStatesof America.
25Augustaddressedto the Secretary-General
from
the representativeof Angola; S/14646,letter dated
Frovislonal
agendaWAgenda/22%)
26August addressed
to the Secretary-General
from
the representativeof Angola; S/14650,letter dated
I, Adoptionof the agenda
27Augustaddressed
to the Presidentof the Council
2. Complaintby AngolaagainstSouthAfrica:
fromthe representative
of Spain;S/14652,
letterdated
Letter dated26 August 1981from the Charge 27 Augustaddr,essed
to the Secretary-General
from
d’affairesa.i. of the PermanentMissionof the representative
of SouthAfrica; andS/14654,
letter
Angola to the United Nationsaddressed
to dated 27 August addressed
to the Presidentof the
the Secretary-General
(S/14647)
Councilfrom the representative
of Angola.
The meetitlg was caled to order at 6.00 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

4. The first speakeris the representative
of Angola,
on whomI now call.
5. Mr. deFIGUEIREDO (Angola):Sir, onbehalfof

The agenda was adopted.

the delegationof the People’sRepublicof Angola,

pleaseacceptour bestwisheson your assumption
of
the presidencyof the Security Council. We are
gratified to see an erstwhile colleague,now the
Ministerfor ForeignAffairs of an esteemed
country,
presiding
over a mitter of suchvital concernto us.dn
behalfof my Government,I shouldalsolike to extend
our deepestsympathyfor the tragic loss to your
1. The PRESIDENTUnterpretarfon from Spanish~:
country in the deathof GeneralTorriios.And,finally,
1 shouldlike to inform mkmbersd the security I shouidlike to conveythroughyou,-Sir, myGovernCouncilthat I havereceivedlettersfromthe represen- ment’sgreetings
to the newleadership
of thecountry
tatives of Angola, Brazil, Cuba, Viet Nam and of Panama.
Zimbabwein which they ask to be invited to narticipate in the discussion
of the item on the C&n6. May I alsotake this opportunityto expressmy
cil’s agenda.In accordancewith the usualpractice, Government’sappreciationto the Secretary-General
I propose,with the consent of the Council,to invite for havingcut short hishard-earned
vacationto rush
thoserepresentatives
to participatein the discussion, back to New York. We acknowledgehis constant
withouttherightto vote, in accordance
with rule37of concernover issueswhichaffect ussodeeply.
the provisionalrulesof procedure,
7. On certainoccasions
1 havemournedmy lackof
AI the iwitutiotl
of the Presidetlt,
Mr. de Figueiredo
eloquence;1 have grieved over the inadequacyof
(Atrgolu)
took u place NI the Coutxil
table; Mr. Buetlo
language;1 have regrettedthe impotenceof words.
(Bruzil),
Mr. Hou Kouri (Cubu),
Mr. Ha Van Larr
Neverhave1felt thiscombinedlackmoreacutelythan
(Viet Nm)
md Mr. Mashinpaidze
(.Zit&abwe)
took
whenI havetried to pleadmy country’scaseiu this
the places reserved for them at the side of the Coumil
chamber.As onthosepreviousoccasions,
1comehere
chanther.
in angerand iu sorrow, 1 speakwith disgustof the
disgusting;1 speakwith grief of the painful; and
2. The PRESIDENT(hterpretation
frotn Spanish):
1speakwith courageof the just aud the inevitable.
The Council is meetingtoday in response
to the 1wish1hadthefacility of a Ciceroor a Homer.I wish
Complaint by Angola agalnst South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Charg6
d’affairea a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the SeeretaryGeneral (S/14647)

i
p
I could recreate the actuality of war and suffering, of
loss and death. But 1 have neither the powers of the
wizard.nor the gift of the poet. 1 do, though, have the
passion of the wronged. And with it I shah try to
* convey to this gathering what is happening to my
:country and to my people today,

fluousin meto pointout to your Lordshipthat thisis
war.” Yes,this iswar, andwaris politicswith a loud
noise and many deaths, and the politics of the
apartheid regimeisracismat homeandracismabroad.

12. Peaceis indivisible,Eachwaristhecreationof a
precedingwar andthe generatorof new,presentand
8. There is a stench in soutt.:rn Africa. It comes future. wars.SouthAfrica’s racistregimehasbeenat
-from the rotting corpse of colonialism. There are war with the People’sRepublicof An8olasince1975.
savage cries in the air-those of a still triumphant
But we havenot wonthe war againstcolonialism
and
-racism. There are heart-rending screams, those of the
imperialism
only to loseit to theracistbullies,Evenif
victims of colonialism and of racism, There is blood every Angolanhasto diein the defenceof hiscountry
-againon the sacredsoilof Africa, froma massacre
not to maintainAngola’sfreedomandintegrity, thenthat
too far from genocide.The world can congratulate is the priceevery Angolanman,womanandchildwill
itself: here is yet anotherwar to feed the greedy gladlypay.
appetitesof thosefor whomwar is an extensionof
their domesticand foreignpolicies-theimperialists, 13, Comrade
President
JoseEduardodosSantos,the
the neo-colonialists
and the racists,Theirsare the Presidentof the Workers’ Party of the Popular
criesof victory today. But in the distancewealready Movementfor the Liberationof Angola(MPLA-PT)
heartheir deathknell.
andPresident
of thePeople’sRepublicof Angola,has
ably leadingtherevolutionandthecountry since
9, However,that is in the future-the nearfuture been
hisassumption
of the presidencyin September1979.
I hone.But today the skiesover Angolaarerent with Guided
bv our ComradePresidentand the Central
thescreams
of thedying;thegroundh litteredwiththe Committeeof the MPLA-PT, the Angolan nation
corpsesof the dead.And let memovefrommetaphor standsas one beforeany enemy.Our task may be
to hard fact: three days ago, the racist apartheld infinite,but sois our duty andour faith in ourselves.
regimein Pretoriasentits murderous
armedforces
Angolansarehardenedworkersandwarriorsand
into the southernpart of Angola, 100to 115miles The
revolutionaries.Even our pioneers,boys and
deep, in the.form of an armedinvasionof massive tried
in their pre-teenyears, are mobilizedagainst
proportions.The racists are accompaniedby 135 girls
who threaten the stability and security of
tanks, 140armouredvehicles,38 helicoptersand 3 those
artillery units.The aircraft beingusedfor reconnals- Angola.
sance,bombingandstrafingareof thefollowingtypes: 14. The apartheid minorityregimeof Pretoriais not
Mirage, Impala MKA, Buccaneer,Alouette and contentwith enslaving
themajorityof itsinhabitants
in
Puma.Theyare also-deployiganti-radarmissilesof their own country and
denying-themtheir human,
2O+lometrerange,
civil, politicalandeconomicrights.It is not content
IO. The South African invaders,who are still in with illegallyoccupyinganothercountryin defianceof
UnitedNationsresolumilitary occupationof narts of southernAnnola. internationallawandcountless
tions.To maintainits hegemony
in the regionandits
includegangs-ofmercenaries,
those“dogs of war”
who havebeeninvolved in the rapeof Africa. The positionasa bastionof minorityrule andprivilegeit
racistshaveoccupieda numberof townsandtotally or has,since1975,carriedits racistandimperialistwars
partiallydestroyedothers.The provincesof Cunene, acrossits bordersinto the territory of neighbouring
Hula andMogamedes
arebeingbombedfromthe air. sovereignStates.The sovereignStatethat hasborne
The townsof Monguaand Tchimbembe
have been the brunt of those attacks in terms of intensity,
bombed.Partsof Ngiva, the capitalof our Cunene violence,brutality and frequencyhasbeenthe Peoprovince, and the town of Cahamahave been de- ple’sRepublicof Angola.
stroyed,and-Xangongo
hasbeentotally devastated.
This invasionin particularis beingaccompanied
and 15, South Africa has beenaided wliticallv. ecoaccomplished
by means
of terriblebrutalities.In many nomically,militarily anddiplomaticailyby its’alhes,
and neo-colonialareaswomen-have been raped insfront of their the Westernpatronsof imperialism
of such
husbands.
Whenthe racisttroopsface&stance, the is& This year we have seena resurgence
peopleare shotor buriedalive. Younggirlsscarcely supportfor theracistregime.SouthAfrica’s language
over 12yearsof agehavebeenbrutalizedandraoed. whenit speaksto Africa and the third world hasbv
In the town of Xindu, a largegroup of mouriters now becomesofamiliarthat we areableto decipher
returningfrom a burialwereall strafedto death.The the reasonsfor this presentand continuingact of
SouthAfrica wantsto sendanotherhostile
poor peopleliving in the borderareashave been aggression:
to theinternational
communityin generaland
robbedof their livestockanddomestic
animals
andare message
of racism
being forcibly pressedinto servicefor the South to the friendsof liberationaudthe enemies
and neo-colonialism
in particular-that Pretoriahas
African racists.
‘neverbeenso strong,that it hasregainedits formet
11. To quote the nineteenth-century
dispatchfrom levelof supportandpatronage
andthat the restof the
CharlesAdamsto Earl Russell:“It wouldbe supcr- world cango hang.

attitudes, activities, even its justification, all point to
South Africa’s leadership in regional and international
terrorism. With a mouriting campaign against terrorism, we have yet to hear the racist r6gime being
condemned. It is not even admonished fo! terrorist
activities that others would hang for.

16. Also as part of its strategy to remain the
dominant Power in the area and to show its eminent
suitability as the South Atlantic counterpart and
partner of the North Atlantic alliance,Pretoria is doing
evervthine it can to destabilize the nroeressive Independent Gates of the region, those that oppose all that
South Africa stands for. In the same context. South
Africa has for the past six years artificially propped up
puppets, often hiding its own acts of military aggression under the pretence that these are the puppets’
activities. In fact, without South African money, arms,
vehicles and even South African commm~d, those
puppets could never physically exist in the area.

22. My Government and people demand redress. We
demand the immediate and unconditional withdrawal
of the racist troops from the territory of Angola. We
also request valid assistance to enableus to strengthen
our defence capability in the face of South Africa’s
military and nuclear might, In fact, all of Africa needs
to be irotected from South Africa’s terrorism and, if
the friends of racism and imperialism cannot bring
Pretoria into line, then the enemies of racism and
imperialism must book the criminal under Chapter VII
of-theCharter of-theunited Nations.

17. Past crimes against Africa and the Africans are
appearing again in the form of present follies. Those
who support the racist r6gime and its puppets should
know that the Angolan people are on guard not only
against enemies from without, but also against
enemies and subversion from within. They should
remember that what is morally wrong cannot be
politically right.

23. I should like to quote Hannah Arendt, who wrote
so brilliantly on evil and the banality of evil:
:
“In a constellation that poses the threat of total
annihilation through war against the hope for the
emancipation of all mankind through revolution . . .
no cause is lefi but the most ancient of all, the one,
-in fact, that from the beginning of our history has
-determined the very existence of politics, the cause
of freedom versus tyranny.”

18. I wish to offend no one, but I must point out that
the countless times 1 have spoken here on the subject
of South Africa’s attacks on Angola and its massacres
of Angolans point to obstacles set up by certain
Powers which make the Council’s action ineffective
and indecisive. For me, this also points to the
importance of the United Nations and the Security
Council because, as things stand, they are the only
recourse we have and the one to which we all turn
again and again.

Let me not take back to my people another paper
resolution. Let me take back to them a cause for hope
and action to end the tyranny by which Pretoria seeks
to subjugate southern Africa. In war there is no second
prize for the runner-up. That is why, in this unequal
war, we must fight for our liberty and our sovereignty.
And we shall not perish, because each generation must
discover its mission.and either fulfil it or betray it. We
Angolans know our mission and we shall be true to it.
As our late beloved leader, Agostinho Neto, wrote a
long time ago:

19. I have spoken at length, but in my heart and in
my mind I know that 1 cannoi possibly have succeeded
in conveying to the international community the full
extent of the devastation and brutality being inflicted
on the courageous peopleof Angola. I only wish there
were some way of transporting the Council to the
battlefield or of bringing the battlefield to this chamber. Words are no substitute for the actuality of war,
with~its-plunder, rape and murder.

“Our dreams crumble
Against a wall of bayonets
A new wave rises from the struggle
And still another a@ another.”

20. We are a proud people andJustly so, but we are
not ashamed to ask for help, es@cially from an
organization of which we are an equal Member and
which was set up to safeguard international peace,
security and co-operation. What is happening in
southern Africa today is so serious and its escalation is
so imminent that in&national peace and security are
in danger. If the situation is not brought under
immediate control it could easily provoke a widespread conflagration, and the mistakes of South Africa
and its friends could indeed turn into a catastrophe for
others.

24. The People’s Republic of Angola has once more
brought its cause and its case to the Security Council.
We are asking for long-lasting solutions to the problems that plague southern Africa. But these solutions
must be based on justice and the precepts of international law. Temporary measures and compromises
will only make matters worse, for those who can give
up essential liberty to obtain a little temporary safety
deserve neither their liberty nor safety. The Angolan
nation has proved its right to both.

21. South Africa’s acts of murder, kidnapping,
bombing, strafing, massacring of civilians and wanton
destruction of life and property are nothing short of
State terrorism. By any criteria whatsoever, the racist
rkgime stands indicted for terrorism. Its policies,

25. Until final victory, a lura corflinua.
26. Mr. WHYTE (United Kingdom): My delegation
has opted to speak early on the disturbing events
3

Africa will notput anendto conflictin that area.It will
not promotea just andlastingsettlementpermitting
the peopleof Namibiato determinetheir own future
throughfreeandfair elections.Onthe contrary,it has
alreadyledto a further escalation
of the conflict, with
potentially disastrousconsequences
in danger of
extendingthroughoutsouthernAfrica.

which have been brought to the Security Council’s
attention by the Government of Angola. We do this
because the need for action by this Council is urgent.
We have listened with the greatest care to the moving
andgraphic statsment by Mr, de Figueiredo.
27. While we do not have access to precise detahs of
the fighting, tt is evident that military activities had
escalated in the earlier part of this week and that there
has been a substantial South African incursion into
Angola. My Government has repeatedly condemned
violence in the region, from whichever quarter it has
come, My Government spoke to the South African
Ambassador in London as far back as 7 August 1981
and expressed our concern at the escalation of military
activities in the area. The Ambassador was summoned
to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office again two
days ago, and in a public statement following that call
my Government declared:

30. In the view of my Government,the Council
should,in thesegravecircumstances,
strive to agree
urgentlyon anappealin simpleanddirecttermsto the
South African Governmentto terminateits military
action in Angola and to withdrawits troops immediately. Thetimefor actionby the Councilis now.
31. Mr. dePINIES (Spain)(intepretutionfrom Spunis/t):My delegationhaslistenedwith specialattention
to the statement
madeby therepresentative
of Angola
andwe havetakenduenoteof it.

“We wholly deplore the latest South African
action, the consequences of which could be highly
~dangerousfor the stability of southern Africa. We
trust that the current action will be terminated and
Scnuita/$rican troops withdrawn immediately from

32. Wehadalreadyheardreportsof the eventsthat
hadoccurredin histormentedcountryandthat is why
my Government,deeplyconcerned
at the latestact of
aggression
by SouthAfrica againstAngola,yesterday
issuedthe followingpublicstatement:

28. Statements by the South African authorities seek
to justify that incursion, apparently on the grounds of
pre-empting potential aggressors. Speaking in another
debate in the Council last month, on 21 July, the
representative of the United Kingdom said the followjng;

“The SpanishGovernment,on learningof the
latestincursions
whichthe SouthAfrican army has
madeinto the territory of the People’sRepublicof
Angola,expresses
itsrepudiation
andcondemnation
of this aggression
againsta sovereigncountry,
togetherwith its deepconcernover the disturbing
consequences
for peaceand stability in southern
Africa.

“Surely 110one can claim that the policy of ‘preemptive strikes’, with its horrible trail of human
destruction, can conceivably advance the cause of
peace . . . All that it can . . . do is :o lead to
‘retalkuory acts’, which mean more death and more
destruction, That is ‘he so-called cycle of violence;
it can be broken only if restraint is exercised on ah
-sides and if the temptation to retaliate is resisted.
Otherwise, the sole result will be a prolongation of
human suffering and the evauoration of houes of
a just peace and the achievement of legitimate
rights for all peoples in the area.” i2293rd nteetlna.
-p&a. SO.]

-

“The Spanish
Governmenthopesthat therewill be
an immediateend to such acts of force, which
constitutea flagrantviolationof the Charterof the
United Nationsand a threat to world peaceand
security.” [S/14650.
]

-

Thosestatements’
in fact referredto the situationin
Lebanon,but they applywith similarandtragicforce
to thepresentsituationin theNamibia-Angola
border
region,

33. On other occasionsbefore the Council, my
delegationhasrejectedtheintensification
of theSouth
African militarypresence
in anareawhichit occupies
illegallyandits continuedacts of aggression
against
the neighbouring
African countries.

34. In my Government’sview, that flagrantact of
aggrossion
musthe condomnod
immediatelybecause
of thodangerit roprosonts
for thepeaceandstabilityof
29. My Governmentremainsfully committedto the entirearea,andthe Councilmust,in exerciseof
achieving independence
for Namibiaon *In inter- theattributesconferredonit undertheCharter,callon
nationally acceptablebasisas set out in Security the South African forces immediatelyto withdraw
Councilresolution435(1978).We are continuingto from the territory of a sovereigncountry whichthey
work with our partnersin the contactgroupto bring have penetratedin violation of all the principlesof
thisabout.TheMinisterfor ForeignAffairs of thefive internationallaw and the Charter of the United
mettogetherin Ottawalastmonthandwill do soagain Nations.In itselfthat isreprehensible,
but thefact that
but only
in the margins
of thethirty-sixth session
of theGeneral it is not the first timethat this hashappened
Assemblyhere next month.But meanwhilemilitary the latestin a longlist of actsof aggres-,ion
makesit
action suchas that now beingcarriedout by South evenmorereprehensible.
4

35. On various occasions and specifically at the
, thirty-fifth session of the General Assembly, our
Minister for Foreign Affairs has warned that:
“The continued occupation by South Africa of the
Territory of Namibia, contrary to the resolutions of
the United Nations, is a persistent element of
conflict in the entire region”.’
This latest violation simply reaffirms the truth of those
words and the tragic consequences of such a violation.
Nobody can convipco us in the present circumstances
that, as has been alleged by the South African Qovernment on other occasions, it is a preventive action
or Iegtdmatedefence of its territory. In the first place,
we have to bear in mind that that reprehensible action
did not even start from the territory of South Africa
itself and it would be difficult for that Government to
justify the presence of such large contingents in a place
so far removed from its country, a place, furthermore,
that is legally subject to United Nations authority.
I am, of course, referring to Namibia.
36. The Charter of the United Nations contains the
clear principle of the non-use or threat.of force and
perhaps less in this case than in any other can one
justify an action that once again endangers peace and
stability throughout southern Africa.
,37. My Government would be pleasedto see either a
resolution or, because of the urgency of the case and
given the circumstances, a statement by the President
of the Council condemning the growing armed activities in the territory of Angola and the consequent loss
of life and material damage, that we deplore, and
expressing grave concern at the continued hostilities,
which seriously jeopardize international peace and
security. At the same time we should require the
Government of South Africa to put an end to the
armed activities in Angoian territory to which I have
referred and urge it forthwith and unconditionally to
withdraw all its forces from the territory of Angola and
strictly to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of that country.
38. That will, of course, not prevent the Security
Council from continuing to work on the matter and
studying it in order to draft a resolution of wider
scope.

graphicallydrawna pictureof the extent of the new
aggression
of Pretoria againsthis country and its
territorial integrity, and he has thereby completely
unmaskedthe goalsbeingpursuedby the racistsof
southernAfrica. Weunderstand
theseriousness
of the
situationandwefully supportthe.legitimatedeq;ulds
: .
madeby Angola.
41. As early as30 July 1981,the representative
of
Angola addressed
to the Presidentof the Security
Councila letter [S/f46231in which he dealt with a
numberof serious,large-&aleactsof militaryaggressioncommittedby theracistminorityregimeof South
Africa againstthe sovereignty,stabilityandterritorial
integrity of Angola As early asthen,theracisttroops
of South Africa had penetrateddeepinto Angolan
territory and had occupieda number‘of populated
areas,As a result, incalculabledamagewasdoneto
the regionsoccupied.In that sameletter,therepresentative of AngolaindicatedthatneartheAngolanborder,
in illegallyoccupiedNamibianterritory, SouthAfrica
had stationedtroops numbering40,000men. That
letter drewattentionto the fact that for a numberof
yearsthe Governmentof Angolahadbeenreporting
unceasingacts of military aggression,
armedincursions,raids, plunder, the slaughterof people,the
destructionof propertyandotherflagrantviolationsof
the normsand principlesof internationallaw by the
racistPretoriaregimeagainstthePeople’sRepublicof
Angolasincethe very first hoursof Angoianindependence.
42. Savagemassmurdershave been perpetrated
againstthe civilian population.In that connexion,
the Councilhasrepeatedlyadoptedresolutionscondemningbets of aggression
carried out by South
Africa. The representatives
of manyStates,including
the GermanDemocraticRepublic,have repeatedly
called upon the Councilto adoptseriousmeasures
againstSouthAfrica to compelPretoriato abandon
its
policy of force, to abandonits acts of aggression
againstsovereignStatesandto guarantee
the peaceful
development
of southernAfrica. Evenso,nothinghas
beenundertaken,becausethosewhofeel linkedwith
SouthAfrica preventedthe Councilfromcarryingout
the duties_eqtrueted
.!o it un&&e Charter,

43. Now the Councilhasbeforeit the letter dated
25 August 1981from the Presidentof Angola ad.
dressedto the Secretary-General
[seeS//4643] which
39. -Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
speaksof a gravesituation,whichcoulddevelopinto
finterpretarion
from Russian): At the outset, war with unpredictableconsequences.
That assessMr. President,pleaseallowmeonceagainto saythat mentisjustifiedbecause
thistimelargedivisionsof the
it is an honourto address
the SecurityCouncilunder South African army with dozensof tanksand supyour presidency.
portedby aircrafthavemadea newincursioninto the
territory of the People’sRepublicof Angola.South
40. The Councilhasonceagainbeencompelledto African armedforces stationedin the illegallyoctake up the questionof aggression
by SouthAfrica cupiedTerritory of Namibiahave beenstrengthened
againstindependent
Angola.We have beenand are stillfurther,andthedepthof theinvasionintoAngolan
againwitnesses
to the constantexpansionof acts of territory, togetherwith the air attacks,demonstrates
aggression
by the apartheid regime.The represen- SouthAfrica’s intent to occupylargeportionsof the
tative of the People’sRepublicof Angolahasvery southernarcaof the People’sRepublicof Angola.

ment. They constantly place themselves at the service
of world imperialism, acting as a sort of advance guard
in the fight against progress in southern Africa. I must
say that some imperialist politicians seem to prefer to
play the “South African card”.

44. Naturally, the Govemtient of Angola has’taken
the necessary measures to protect itself from the
aggressor and to drive it out. The right of the People’s
Republic of Angola to defend itself cannot be &al-.
lenged. In that connexion, I should like to recall
resolution 387 (1976) which reaffirmed “the inherent
and lawful righi of ivery State, in the exercise of its
sovereignty, to request assistance from any other
State or group of States”. 1should also like to mention
4!!!& 519 the @u-W.

50. The delegation of the German Democratic Re‘public shares the view expressed in the United
Nations by many representatives that South Africa
would not have bken in a position to pursue this policy
of threatening the oeace and security of other States
wore it not fo? the diversified co-operation, assistance
and support given it by the ruling circles in the West.
The economic ties of some Western States with South
Africa are becomina closer than ever, while their
common political gime becomes ever clearer. The
facts thereof are a matter of oublic knowledge. The
time has come for those circledalso, those ros$nsible
for premeditated or inadvertent support for the aggressive plans of the South African racists, to begin
roalizing the danger of such a policy,

45. At the present time, the Council must shoulder
its responsibi!ity. The Security Council must come out
decisively against the aggression emanating from
South Africa and take up the defence of peace and
security in southern Africa as well. The Council
must assist Angola, which has been the victim of
aggression.
46, Through eloquent statements, many States have
already condemned this new act of aggression by
South Africa. The German Democratic Republic also
strongly denounces this attack against the People’s
Re.publicof Angola as a base crime of the racist Mime
against a sovereign African State whose people are
labouring to pu_t_
@tq pm&se their own concepts of a
.ner?r_society.

5 I. Furthermore, 1 should like to emphasizethat that
WIICY has no future whatsoever any more than has the
-&icb of whipping up internationai tension-a policy
oursued orimarilv bv imperialist circles in the United
states. The United state; encourages forces of aggrossion, such as those of Pretoria, to undertake fresh
adventures, but it is unable to resolve any problem. It
only digs deeper the abyss of a murderous war.

47. There is therefore no doubt as to the fact that the
attack of armed forces of South Africa against Angola
constitutes aggression, violating peace and security.
The aggressor itself does not dispute the fact that its
troops are stationed on Angolan territory. Yet, I must
with some perplexity note that some Western officials
are fearfully tryicg, as it were, to avoid calling things
by their true names. A question comes to mind: Are
they not continuing to view South Africa as their
pro#g&, one that Jhey do not wish to offend?

52. We prefer peace and that is why today, once
again, we must categorically speak out against the
danger threatonina southern Africa. One cannot turn a
blind eye to the-real state of affairs. The People’s
Republic of Angola is not alone. It has friends which
help it. Africa is not the only one standing behind it.
The German Democratic Reoublic affirms its total
solidarity with the long-sufferjng people of Angola, a
people to whom we are bound clnsoly by a treaty of
friendship and co-operation. The escalation of acts of
aggression by the racist regime of South Africa once
aeain demonstrates how necessary it is to ensure the
protection of the borders of neighbouring States from
attacks of this kind. I am stating this today as well,
since, as is common knowledge, ruling circles in the
United States have been making demands of the
Pooplo’s Republic of Angola that are aimed at disarming that State and handingit over to a South Africa
that icarmod to the tooth. -

48. As will be gathered from the text of an official
statement read by Mr. Dean Fischer, spokesman of
the’ State Department, which was published in an
article of The New York Thes of 27 Aunust and which
used the pretext that the over-all situatbn in that area
must be taken into account, the South African
aggression is in fact being justified; in other words,
that aggression is being encouraged. Probably the
conclusion is conzct that there is a convergence of
views based on the idea that aggression against an
ittdependont African countii that does not bend to the
will of imptialism as the latter pursues its gunboat
policy is desirable.

53, Security Council rosolution 428 (1978) states as
follows:

49. Clearly, South Africa must bear the main responsibility for its actions which jeopardize peace and for
their conseauences. Even resorting to the most refined
contortions; it is impossible to see here any threat by
Angola against South Africa. The truth is well known.
Beginning with the emergence of an independent
Angola, the leaders of South Africa, pursuing a policy
of destabilizing neighbouring countries, have tried to
stand in the way of independent, progressive develop-

“The

Security

Council,

..

.. * *

“Strongly
condemns
the latest armed invasion
perpetrated by the South African racist regime
against the People’s Republic of Angola, which
constitutes a llagrant violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Angola;
6

*,
1

t

.

“Decides to meet againin the event of further acts
~of violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola by the South
African racist regime in order to consider the
-adoption of more effective measures, in accordance
with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof.”
54. Two years later, the Security Council in an
identical paragraph in resolution 475(1980) once again
considered the adoption of effective measures in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, in the
event of further acts of aggression by South Africa,
55. This time it is our firm oonviction that the
Security Council must take measures. Chapter VII of
the Charter tells us what must be done. Apart from a
firm condemnation of South Africa with regard to
these new acts of aggression against the sovereignty,
stability and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola, which constitute a serious violation
of international peace and security, the Security
Council must, in the proper form, demandthat South
Africa cease its aggression forthwith and withdraw its
troops from the territory of the People’s Republic of
Angola. South Africa must undertake to provide
compensation for the damage caused the Angolan
people and State.
56. We have on the agenda the item of sanctions
against South Africa. All States Members of the
United Nations must be appealedto to provide the
People’s Republic of Angola with all necessary assistance in order to bring South African acts of aggression
to an immediate end.

country, destroyingandplundering
thepropertyof the
peopleof Angola.
60. TheAngolanGovernmentis takingall thenecessarymeasures
andwill continueto do soto defendits
territory and its populationagainstthis unprovoked
aggressionand internationalterrorism.We in the
African Group view the currentinvasionof a sovereignStatein the gravestlight. Wecondemn
andreject
outrightthe liesand misrepresentations
advancedby
that regimeto justify its blatantandnakedviolationof
internationallaw andof provisionsof the Charterof
the UnitedNations.
61, Wefurther wishto makeit abundantlyclearthat
thecurrentaggression
by the apartheid regimeagainst
the People’sRepublicof Angolacannotbe viewed
within any other context, as is beingsuggested
by
somespokesmen
of the Governmentin Washington,
than that of a violation of the sovereigntyand
territorialintegrityof the People’s
Republicof Angola.
62. Accordingly, we call upon the Council, the
custodianof internationalpeaceandsecurity,to take
appropriatestepsand measures
with the moralcourage,senseof urgencyandresponsibility
expectedof it
by thosevictimsof aggression,
the peopleof Angola,
by the peopleof Africa in their revulsionandby the
shockedinternationalcommunity,to ensurethe withdrawalof the invadingforcesof theapartheid rbgime
from Angolanterritory, withoutconditionsandforthwith. Wti further call uponthe Councilto treat this
matterwith the urgencydemanded
by the gravity of
the situation.

63. Finally, weof the Groupof African Statesat the
United Nationsshouldlike to stateclearly that we
standsolidly behindthe Governmentand peopleof
57. The PRESIDENT (interpreturion from Spanish):
Angolain this their hour of crisis,of sufferingand
The next speakeris the representative
of Zimbabwe, need.We wishto conveythroughyou, Mr. President,
who wishesto makea statementasChairmanof the andthroughthe representative
of Angolathe sincere
Grou of African St&esat the UnitedNationsfor the condolences
of the Group to the Governmentand
montRof August.I invite himto takea placeat the peopleof Angolafor this senseless
lossof humanlife
Counciltableandto makehisstatement.
andproperty. Weshouldlike tojoin with our brothers
from Angolain singingthe song:a I! i continua.
58. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE (Zimbabwe):
Thedelegation of Zimbabwe,in its capacityasChairmanof the 64. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Groupof African Statesat the UnitedNationsfor the Republics)(interpretation from Rimlan): This is not
monthof August,hasaskedto beallowedto speakat the first time tha: the Security Councilhashad to
this meetingof the Security Councilto expresson conveneto consideractsof aggression
by the racist
behalfof Africa our concernat the developments rbglmeof SouthAfrica againstthe People’s
Republic
takingplacein southernAfrica.
of Angola. But YOWthe Councilis facinga qualitatively new stagein that aggression--!South
Africa
59. Thisemergency
meetingof the Councilhasbeen hasdeterminedto throw off its nraskandproceedto
occasioned
by the seriousand very grave situation large-scale
actsof aggression.
createdby theunprovokedinvasionandoccupation
of
the Pcopie’sRepublicof Angolaby the murderous 65. This newstagein the aggression
perpetratedby
forcesof the upartheid r&dmeof racistSouthAfrica. the SouthAfrican racistshasclearlycometo maturity
It is importaiiito note that, just as this meetingis in recenttimes.A clearprologueto it couldbeseenin
taking placehere, the invadingforcesof the racist South Africa’s provocative refusalto accepta setr8gimeare deepinsideAngolanterritory murdering tlementof theproblemof Namibia.That wasfollowed
the innocentcivilian populationof that peace-loving by intensivepreparationby SouthAfrica for utilizing

is how the comer-stones have been laid with respect to
this direct and orovocative ~oiic~ and with respect to
free Africa. Abbut a year aio, thk Hoover Institute of
Stanford University, located In the United States,
prepared a study entitled “The United States in the
1980s”. That study was conceived as a summation of
proposals for a new policy of the United States with
respect to southern Africa, Those proposals, lnrer
alla, frankly stated the following:

thd Territory of Namibia for yet firther attacks against
independent African countries, and the purpose of
those attacks was extremely sinister. It was an
attempt, through the use of b&e force, to turn back
the process of decoionization in southern Africa as a
whole and, where possible, purely and simply to
recoionize the entire area. The most recent touch
added to this picture was the mobiiization by South
Africa of the necessary financial funds. On 12August
1981, a decision was taken on a sharp increase in
South Aftica’s military budget-by 40 per cent ail at
once. Thus the present armed aggression unleashedby
the South African racists against Angola and carried
out by them on an especially large scale and with
unprecedented insolence is all part of a broader plan.
Today the spearhead of South Africa’s aggression is
directed against the People’s Republic of Angola.
Tomorrow its target might once againbecomeZambia,
Mozambique, Lesotho or other independentAfrican
States.

“The friendship of Gabonor Burundi will not help
the West in the slightest , . . On the coh!trary, we
should seek to co-operate with Pretoria . . . We
need a new realism in our foreign policy to replace
our post-Vietnam timidity”.
Such statements have not remained on paper alone,
Many of the authors of that study now &&py highlevel economic. ooliticai and military posts in Washington..
*

66. Now wherein lies the special danger of the acts of
aggression undertaken recently by the South African
racists ag&M &g@a?

72. Further, at the very beginningof 1981,an article
was published in the magazineFore&w Affairs entitled
“South Africa: Strategy for Change”. The article
recommended
that oneof the corner-stones
of United
Statespolicy on southernAfrica shouldbe “the clear
Western refusal to resort to trade or investment
sanctionsagainstPretoria”. The new UnitedStates
Adminlstration,thearticleemphasizes,
wouldhaveto
“meet publicly with SouthAfrica’s top leadership”.
Finally, in the view of the authorof that article, it
wouldbe “unwise” to takea negativepositionon the
militarymachineof SouthAfrica asan“instrumentof
domesticbrutality” in that country or as something
“wrecking Westerninterests”outsideSouthAfrica
itself. Thoseconsiderations
have onceagainbecome
part of policy. Theauthorof thatarticlewasappointed
AssistantSecretaryof Statefor African Affairs.

67. First, it is in the unprecedented depth of the
invasion perpetrated by the racists into Acqoian
territory. Armoured columns from South Africa, as is
common knowledge. have uenetrated Annolan territory to a depth & between‘ 100and 150kjometres,
while the South African air force has strafed and
bombed targets situated 200 and even 300 kilometres
from Ang@a’s national frontier.
68. Secondly, the South African racists are trying at
the same time to effect a virtual occupation of part of
the territory of a sovereign African State, the State
of Angola. For that purpose more than 45,000 South
African soldiers have been stationed on the border between Angola and Namibia. Thus, generally
speaking, this is an attempt by South Africa to carry
out in southern Angola the same policy as the one
pursued by Israel in southern Lebanon. Racism and
zionism-are;once again showing their similarity.

73. Finally, we know of the assessment
recently
proclaimedin this country that South Africa is “a
country that, strategically,is essentialto the free
world”. Surely,the racistsof SouthAfrica musthave
drawnthe logicalconclusions
fromthat-and they did
so-seeingit ail as direct encouragement
for their
brutalpplicy with respectto African countries.

69, The true purposes of Pretoria’s action. whatever
hypocritical oi fallacious pretext is resortbd to, -are
crystal clear. Those actions are directed towards
undermining the revolutionary achievements of the
Ai@%i people. They are directed towards destabiiizing the progressive rtgime set up in that country,
They are directed at turning back the course of history
in southern Africa.
70. It is an open secret why the leaders in Pretoria
dared to launch such an outright military adventure,
The answer lies in the fact that they were relying on
support for their aggressive plans from imperialist and
racist forces.

74. Confirmation
of thatencouragement
of theSouth
African racistsby the UnitedStatesisalsoprovidedin
statements
madeyesterdayandtodayin Washington.
Thosostatementscannotbe explainedas anything
other thanthe logicof connivancewith the racistsin
SouthAfrica-and badly distortedlogicat that. That
positionof Washington
hasarouseddeepindignation
on the part of the entireinternationalcommunity.In
particular,thefinal communiqu6
of the Extraordinary
MinisterialMeetingof the Co-ordinatinp.
Bureauof the
Non-AlignedCountrieson the Questi& of Namibia,
heldat Algiersfrom 16to 18April 1981,states:

71. We have more than sufficient evidence of a
responsive attitude in certain circles in the West. Here

“The Bureau denouncesthe stepstaken by
the RtaganAdministrationaimedat destabilizing
8

Angola and strengthening its ties with South Africa
at the very time when the apartheid regime is
not only committing systematic acts of agBression
against the independent African States, but ie also
training and equipping bands of traitors from the
front-line States with a view to destabilizing their
lawful aovemments and jeopardizing the freedom
qf the African continent,” [S/M@?,,,- u~ex,
para,

2&l

75. The acts of aggressionundertaken by the racists
and neo-colonialists constitute a serious threat to
international oeace and securitv. not only in Angola
but in all independent African &untries.?‘%is reient
raid bv South Africa, if not repulsed. may becomevet
another link in a ch& of f&her l&ge&ale acts-of
aggresslonagainst independent African States.

In it8 reBOhItiOnB,
the COUnCil
has d80 called on
South Africa to respect scrupulously Angola’s savereignty and territorial integrity. The Council should be
guided by those considerationsof principle in today’s
situation as well, in the face of this new unprovoked
act of aggressionby South Africa. Furthermore, in its
resolution 475 (MO), the Security Council decided:
,b* * I to meet agaln in the event of further acts of
violation of the sovereignty and territorlal integrity
of the People’s Republic of Angola by the South
African racist regime, in ordei to ionsider the
adoption of more effective measuresin accordance
with the appropriate provisionsof the Charter of the
United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof.”
80.

The time has now come for the Security Council to
adopt such measures. We support the demands of
Angola in this regard also.

76. The Soviet Union’s position on that scoreis c!lear
and understandable,Our sympathiesareon the side of
free and independent Africa; our sympathies are on
the side of the African peoples still strugglingfor their
freedom and independence-and we are proud of that.

81. Angola and the other African countriesMembers
of the United Nations are entitled to expect the
Security Council to halt the aggressor,and Africa as a
whole is entitled to expect an end to the aggression
carried out by the racist r6gime of South Africa which
constitutes a threat -to. the security of all African
countries,

77. The following appeared in a TASS statement
dated-~26 August
.~ 1981:
b‘ the Soviet Union resolutely condemns the
&e&a racist regime’s armed Invasion of the
People‘s Republic of Angola, to which the Soviet
Union is bound by a treaty of friendship and cooperation, , . . rearms its solidarity with Angola
and . . . demands an immediate end to the aggreesion and the withdrawalof the interventionist troops
from Aqgolan territory” [see S/14658, annex],

82. Mr. LlNC3 Qing (China) (Interpretation
from
The Chinese delegation has listened attentively to the statementsmadeby the representativesof
Angola and other countries. We support Security
Council consideration of the situation created by the
inversionof Angola by-ScmthAfrican troops.

Chinese):

83. On 23 August 1981,the South African authorities
brazenly sent contingents of mechanizedarmed units
to invade and occupy large tractsof Angolan territory,
sacking cities and townshipsas far as IS0 kilometres
from the border and causing heavy lossesof life and
property. The Angolan people are fighting heroically
to throw out the invaders in extremely difficult
conditions. This invasion is an act of aggression
seriously violating Angola’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is a new crime
committed by the Pretoria rCgimeagainst the African
nations. It is also a deliberate act of trampling on the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms of
international relations, International peaceand secur!ty are gravely thre@lred as a result.

78. The Security Council must do its duty in this
situation aswell. The courseof action in this respectis
clear. The delegation of the Soviet Union speaksout in
support of Angola’s demand, as clearly stated by the
representativeof Angola, Mr. de Figueiredo, that the
Couricil firmly condemn the racist @ime of South
Africa, call for the immediate cessationof its acts of
aggressionagainst the People’s Republic of Angola
and the withdrawal of its troops from Angolan
territorv forthwith. and that it compel the South
African racists to .respect the sovereigpty and territorial integrity of Angola.
79. The membersof the Council are well awareof the
fact that front the moment of the attainment of
independenceby the Angolan people, opening the way
to progressivesocial transformations in that country,
Angola has been a target for constant acts of aggression by South Africa. The Council
has repeatedly

84. South Africa’s aggressionagainst Angola demonstratesonce again that the South African racist regime
is the root cause of instability in southern Africa, For a
long time Pretoria
has pursued an inhuman policy of
apurtheid
and stubbornly
persisted in its colonial rule
over Namibia.
It has made frequent
incursions
into
front-line
States such as Mozambique,
Zambia
and

-five
times-firmly
and vigorously
condemned
the
racist regime of South Africa for its deliberate and
continued
armed incursions
into the People’s Republic of Angola,
describing
them as a serious threat
to international
peace and security
[resolutiorts
387
(1976, I ‘28 (I978),
447 (I979),
454 (1979) and 475
(1980)].

Angola. And now, on the eve of an emergencyspecial

session of the General
Assembly
on Namibia,
this
racist regime has Egain invaded Angola with massive
armed forces. All this is by no means accidental.
It is
9

Africa has taken by sending Its troops deep into the
territory of Angola. In the viewof my delegation, such
activities on the part of South Africa, whatevergood
reasons they may have, cannot but be strongly
condemned.

apparently designedto thwart international effortsfor
-a solution to the question of Namibia and to deter
African nations from supporting the Namlbian people
:in their struggle for national independence, thus
-perpetuating the illegal occupation of Namibia. The
South African r6gime is so reckless in its attack on
neighbouring countries only because of the con.
--nivanceand support of a super-Powerwhichhassided
--with it. Nevertheless, the outrageousconductof this
~_rdgimecan only strengthenthe unity and the resolveof
the people of Namibia and the rest of Africa to
continue the struggle. In the end, the villain will be
uftlng a rock only to drop it on his own toes.

90. My delegation joins those other delegations
which have condemned the abominable action of
South Africa in Angola and urges South Africa to
withdraw its troops immediately and unconditionally.
91. Needless to say,the useor threat of force never
leads to the solution of a problem but merely aggra.
vales an already explosive situation. The States Members of the United Nations have long been striving
towardsa settlement of the Namibian problem which
would bring that Territory to independenceand peace.
The military actions taken by South Africa in Angola
go against all of those efforts and further exacerbate
the problem. The leadersof South Africa should understand the grave concern of the international community in this regard and comply with the Council’s call
to,ceasehostilities and refrain from using armed force
against its neighbour.

-85. The Chinese delegation wishesto reaffirm here
that the Chinese Government and people resolutely
-support the heroic struggle of the Angolan people
wainst the aggressors.We support thejust struggleof
the peoples of Azania and Namibia and strongly
condemn the racist Pretoria regime for its criminal
aggression against Angola. We denouncethe same
regime for its barbarous and reactionary policies of
apartheid and racial oppression. We supportthe just
demand and reasonable proposals made by the rep
resentatives of African States in this regard. In the
.view of the Chinese delegation, the Council must
strongly condemn the racist regime of South Africafor
its armed aggressionand take effectivemeasuresto
securethe immediate and unconditional withdrawalof
all South_Africanaggressorsfrom Angola.

92. The PRESIDENT finterpretationfrotn Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Brazil.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
93. Mr. BUENO (Brazil): Mr. President, it is especially gratifying for me to addressa Security Council
presided over by the Minister for External Relations of
Panama, a sister American nation with which Brazil
has the closest relations. Your talent and welLknown
expertise are the best guaranteesfor the successof the
Council’s deliberations in the month of August.

86. Mr. NISIBORI (Japan): My delegation has listened with keen attention and deep sympathyto the
representative of Angola, who has described in a
moving manner the tragic situation his country is now
faced with.
87. As Mr. de Figueiredo has so elo uently stated,
the casebeforethe Security Council toil ay is certainly
not without precedent.None of us herecouldfail to be
moved by his statement describing the bloodshed,
destruction and misery which his countrymen have
et@eredin the latest South African action.

94. The question beforethe Council derives from an
illegal act committed in defence of an illeaalitv. It
coIicerns an act of aggression perpetratedzsd the
aggressors themselves say-to defend their illegal
occupation of Namibia. With the information available
at present, we cannot say whether this second
invasion of Angola will reveal itself as a large-scale
raid or develop into a mJor war. Whatever its
purpose, it constitutes a clear violation of Angolan
sovereignty and territorial integrity, a negation of the
Charter, an act of warthat not only haseffectsfor the
victim but endangers the peace and security of the
region with repercussions that may become much
wider and which cannot at present be easily foreseen.

88, We profoundly regret the lossof life and property
in Angola. My delegation cannot in any waycondone
the action of South AMcan armed forcesinvading the
tetitory of Angola in violation of the Charter of the
United -Nations and in defiance of the relevant
m.$utioas adopted in the past by the Council,
89. My delegation shares the feeling of indignation
which has been expressed by previous speakers
regarding

attacks

upon

the

independent

State

It is also typical
of South
Africa’s
attitude:
its
disregard
for human beings of races other than the
dominant
one in Pretoria,
its indifference
to world
opinion,
its disrespect
for the General Assembly
and
its resolutions.
its defiance of the International
Court
of Justice and its contempt
for the Council over which
you, Sir, now preside.

of

Angola. Japan totally disapproves of the military’
actions undertaken by South Africa against its neighbour. In particular,
as representatives
of a country
which upholds the firm and steadfast foreign policy of
settling
ali international
disputes
by peaceful means
only and of refraining
from any use or threat of force in
international
relations,
we cannot help deploring
most
deeply
the military
action
the Republic
of South

YS. The
foremost.
10

victims
of this aggression
the people of Angola. They

arc, first and
deserve, and arc

receiving, solidarity as well as political support from
the world community, and the Government and people
of Brazil join in that movement, To this theme I will
return in a moment,

that are at the root of the sufferingin southernAfrica.
The United Nations must deal with the questionof the
invasion of Angola at once becauseof its gravity and
urgency, Once it has arrived at a solution of the matter
now before the Council, however,and dealt with this
%. However, one should not forget, even when brutal invasion, the questions of Namibia and of the
condemning this armoured invasion whichreminds us racist policies of South Africa will remain and roqulre
of the blitzkriegs of the past, that this is a question of all the renewed efforts of our institutions for the
one evil leading to another. As I stated at the outset, fulfilment of the purposesand principles to which we
Namibia and its freedom lie at the very root of this are pledged through the Charter. The South African
conflict. South Africa has been given every opportu- Government regards the majority of the world’s
nity to solve this problem, It hasbeen given time, that peoples asnot being quite as human asthe membersof
most precious of commodities, time that could be the South African minority. We have, of course, a
bought only at the expense of the freedom of the different view. We think that even the membersof the
inhabitants of Namibia. All the opportunities offered South African minority are human beings. In the name
to South Africa were used for one purpose only: to of that common humanity, we demandthat they desist
find excusesfor delay.
from all the practices that led to the invasion of
Angola, the subjugation of Namibia-practices that
97. In January of this year, having usedall the time continue to deprive the majority in South Africa of
and chances given to it and facing proposals that their right to be citizens and equals with those who
representeda-position of considerable re&aint and now rule over them.
moderation on the part of the South West Africa
People’s Organixation (SWAPO), South Africa turned 101. The PRESIDENT (fnferprelatlon from Spanits back on previous understandings, scuttled the ish): The next speaker is the representativeof Viet
negotiations and createda newsetof pretextsto delay Nam, whom 1invite to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
the inevitable.
Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Naml (inrerpretatiorl
98. Striking now against Angola, the Pretoria Oov- 102. French):
Mr. President, on behalf of the delegaernment is again trying to transfer the cost of its from
of the Socialist Renublic of Viet Nam, I wish to
occupationof Namibia to other people and to make the tion
Angolanspay, as the Namibians have beenpaying, for thank the SecurityCot&it for havingauthorizedmeto
the illegal occupation of what wasonce called South participate~in this debate. 1 should like to congratulate
warmly on your accessionto the
West Africa. Nor should we forget that, betweenthe you, Sir, most
of the Council for the month of August in
two invasions, Angola knewno real peace,security or presidency
capacity as Minister for External Relarespectfor its territorial integrity or the inviolability of your exalted
of Panama, a country with which Viet Nam
its borders. Between independence and the present tions
maintains friendly relations. I should like to express
day, there wasnever a time whenthe people of that my
conviction that you will guide the work of the
country were free from air strikes, commando-style Council
towards a just and effective decision on a
raids, helicopter forays and so4led punitive expe. burning issue,
namely, the odious war of aggression
d&lly5
unleashed by the racist South African regime against
99. I must of necessity be brief. Other countries. the People’s Republic of Angola. My delegation also
through their representatives, want to give voice ~td wishesto pay a well.deservedtribute to your predetheir indignant repudiation of theseacts.When I spoke cessor,Mr. Id6 Oumarou of Niger, for his competence
of solidarity and political support, I had in mlnd not and political skill in guiding the work of the Council
only this almost unanimous world desire to seajustice during the month of July.
dotio to Angola and peacerestoredto its land, but also 103. Together with the whole international cornmu.
the f\lnctjons with which tho Council ia invested. It is nity, my country, the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam,
our view that tho least that the Council can do is to is
profoundly concernedover the disquieting situation,
condemn South Africa for its aggression,demand the which
been deteriorating for months, in southern
immediate withdrawal of all its forces from Angolan Angola,has
a
situation
that is aswell knownto all Council
territory and ensurethat it will pay full compensation members.
for the human and material losses caused by th,e
present invasion. If these conditions are not promptly
met, the Council will have no other resort but to
enforce the provisions contained in Chapter VII of the
Charter.

100. These immediate steps would help in the solution of the crisis we face, even if they do not give back

to Angola the lives of its sons. They would not,
however, remove or even touch upon the problems

104. Morespecifically,for four andahalfyearssince
the first days of its independence,
the People’s
Republicof Angolahasconstantlybeenreportingto
the Council countlessacts of military aggression,
armedinvasions,kidnappings,
massacres
anddestruction carried out by the minority fascistregimeof
Pretoriaagainstits peopleand territory in flagrant
violationof the rulesand principlesof theCharterof
the UnitedNationsandof internationallaw.

105. To mention only acts perpetratedbetween1978
and 1agO,the Qovernment of the People’s Republic of
Angola has recorded290 wavesof artillery poundings,
-aerial bombiws ovor urban centres and densely
puiated villages, 50 aerial attacks and 70 infantry
Ynvasion operations in border areasof Angola. Those
-operations cost the lives of thousands of lnnoccnt
Angolans and causedimmense mater&l damagecsti.mated at more than SUS 7 billion,
-106. In his letter of 25 August 1981addressedto the
Socretary-Oeneral [see S/14643],the Presidentof the
People’s Republic of Angola, Mr, Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, pointed out that moro than 45,000 South
African troops, together with mercenariesand troops
from puppet rCglmes, wore concentrated on the
Angolan.Namibian border for the purpose of occumpyingpart of the sovereign territory of Angola. The
President of Angola emphasizedthat the situation was
grave and could develop into a war with unpredictable
consequences-which is what did happenin southern
Angola on 23 and 24 August. A true warof aggression
unleashedby the racist South African rCglmefrom the
territory of Namibia, which it continues to occupy
illegally, Is now sowingdeath and destruction in the
People’s Republic of Angola, in severallocalities and
areareo,undredsof ldiomotrcs awayfrom the Namiblan

aggression perpetrated against Angola by the racist
rdglmc of South Africa. We similarly condemn the
forcesof lmperlaiism and international reaction.which
shareresponsibility for these crimes of aggressionas
the protectors of the South African regime and as
suppliers of weaponsand other logistic or technical
means.
110. At this time, when large-scale armed aggression
is raging on Angolan soil, we find further confirmation
of tlie f&t that the Pretoria regime is preparing not
only to carry out a destabilizing incursion, but also to
occupy a part of the territory of Angola so as to make
it a spring-board for attacks against and constant
harassmentof the People’s Republic of Angola, aswell
as against the national indeuendencc movement in
soutficm Africa in general-aid this in order to serve
the avowedly hostile policy of the United States
towards free-Africa. - 111, In this conncxion, my delegation expressesits
profound concern over the declared intent of the
United States Administration to have Congressrescind the Clark amendment soas to give direct military
assistanceto traitor Angolan groups in the pay of the
racist Pretoria X&gime.

112. My delegation considersthat this newphaseof
aggression
the racist South African forces against
107. Those crlmlnai acts of undeclared war by the the People’sbyRepublic
of Angola constitutes not only a
Pretoria racists have been unanimously and most
violation of the sovereignty and territorial
severely condemned by world public opinion and by grave
integrity of that country, but also flagrant defianceof
ail Governments that love peace andjustice through- and
provocation to the entire African continent and
out the world.
the whole international community; it showsinsolent
10% For several years, international opinion of all scorn for Security Council resolutions condemning
political persuasions and on all continents has vig- earlier armed attacks against Angola by the Pretoria
orously condemned the colonialist and aggressive rCglmo. lt also constitutes one of the most serious
policy of the racist Pretoria r&lime, which is an threats to international peaceand security.
incarnation of the inhuman and diabolical system of
apartheld designedto perpetuatethe illegal occupation 113. The delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet
of-Namibia, bring about an explosive situation and Nam most sincerely hopes that the Council will take
destabilizo the front.lino Statos-in particular, the prompt and decisive action, including energetic sanctions against the South African aggressors, fkdiy
People’s Republic of Angola, It has also been con.
firmed that tho minority South African rCgimocould exercising its responsibilities under the Charter to put
not implement sucha policy of colonialism, aggression an immediate end to the deliberate acts of aggression
and-dostabilization against the Namibian people and by the racist Pretoria rtgime.
indopendont and sovereignneighbouring Statosunless
114. In that spirit, my delegation firmly supports the
it had strottg support and active collaboration from the
Utiited States 6f America and other Western Powora, urgent roquost of the People’s Republic of Angola,
mctibers, furthermore, of the Sccurlty Council. Quito made through its representativein the Council, Mr. de
recently, the United Nations Council for Namibia, at Flgueiredo, for a severecondemnation of these new
its extraordinary plenary meetingsheld at Panama City actsof aggressionby the racist Pretoria regime sgainst
the People’s Republic of Angola, for an immediateand
from 2 to 5 June 1981,quite rightly expressed:
unconditional withdrawal of all South African forces
1.
of aggression from the territory of Angola, and for the
payment of compensation for the damages caused to
the people of Angola.

grave concern at the reported attempts by the
Gbiernment of the United States to destabilk the
legitimate Government of Angola by, inter oh,
providing assistance to Angolan traitor groups in the
service of the Pretoria regime”.*

1IS. The people and Government of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam reaffirm their unreserved
support for and their complete militant solidarity with
the indomitable and eventually victorious struggle of

109. The delegation of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam vigorously condemns this flagrant act of armed
12

the brother people of Angola. We pay tribute to those’
heroic people and to their brave leaders for the
enormous sacrifice they have made for the common
cause of the liberation of the peoples of southern
Africa and for the preservation of peace in Africa and
throughout the world.

undoubtedlyenableus to bringthesedeliberations
to
anappropriateconclusion.
121. It is not the first time that this body, whose
primary responsibilityis the maintenance
of internationalpeaceand security,is meetingto considera
complaintby the People’sRepublicof Angolaabout
further actsof military aggression
by the racistSouth
Africansagainstits territory, In June1980,theCouncil
alreadyexpressedits graveconcernat the escalation
of unprovokedhostile acts and at the repeated
aaaressions
and armed invasionsof the Pretoria
f&ists in violationof the sovereignty,airspaceand
territorial integrity of that country [resolurion475
(/9&l)]. Onpreviousoccasions,
we haveheardsimilar
complalntsfromthe Republicof Zambiaandfrom the
People’sRepublicof Mozambique.

116. In the opinion of my delegation, all forces, all
States and all Covemments that stdve for peace and
selfadetermination of peoples have a solemn duty to
seek appropriate means to assist the struggle of the
Angolan people and the peoples of southern Africa,

117. My country firmly supportsthe right of the
People’sRepublicof Angola to invoke, if needbe,
Article 51of theCharterto defendits sovereigntyand
territorialintegrity.In thisregard,wearepleased
with
the PoliticalDeclarationof the Sixth Conferenceof
Headsof Stateor Governmentof Non-AlignedCoun- 122. Actually whatisat issueis a persistent
policyof
triesheldat Havanafrom 3 to 9 September1979’and the opprobriousapartheid regimeto underminethe
with the resolutionsadoptedat the thirty-seventh independence
of the neighbouring
Statesandpromote
session
of theCouncilof Ministersof theOrganisation its ownhegemony
in that regionof southern
Africa, in
of African Unity heldat Nairobifrom 15to 26 June connivancewith the mostbastardimperialist
interests.
1981.4
which. in substance.
expressthe solemncom- That policy hasbeenfirmly condemned
by the nonm!tmentof theheadsof Stateor Clovemment
of non- alignedcountrlas.
alignedcountriesandof the Ministersof theOrganization of African Unity to assistthe front-lineStatesto
123. On 25 August 1981,the Presidentof the Peoincrease
theirdefensivecapacitysoasto repeltheacts ple’sRepublicof Angola,JoseEduardodosSantos,
of armedaggression
of the Pretoriaracistregimeand reportedto the Secretary-General
that
to create propitiousconditionsfor promotingtheir
socialandeconomicdevelopment
in anatmosphere
of
“once morethe People’sRepublicof Angolais a
peaceand stability.
victim of militaryattacksandviolationsof airspace
and land territory by the racist military forcesof
118. In conclusion,my delegationventuresto hope
Pretoria”,
that all the membersof the Councilwill take due
account of the exceptionalgravity of the events andthat
in Angola and of the demandof the international
community,expressedthrough the indignantand
“Concentratedin the border of Angola with
unequivocalvoicesof the representatives
who have
Namibiaare morethan 45,000SouthAfrican solspokenat this meeting,that peacebe restoredimmediers, betweenmercenariesand puppets,whose
diately to the territory of the People’sRepublicof
objectiveis the occupationof part of the sovereign
Angolasoasto enablethosevaliantpeopleto builda
territory of Angola” [seeS/14643].
new life for themselves
in completesecurityalong
their-ownfreely chosencourse.
124. In a letter addressed
to the CubanPresident,
ComradeFidelCastro,in hiscapacityasChairman
of
119, The PRESIDENT(interpreration from ~Spanthe Movementof Non-AlignedCountries,the headof
is/r):The nextspeakeron my list isthe representative Stateof Angolastated:
of Cuba.I invitehimto takea seatat theCout&iltablc
and-tomakehisstatement.
“On 23 August 1981,around 1445hours, the
racist SouthAfrican air force madeseVeral recon120.-Mr. ROA KOURl (Cuba)(inferpretaflon jlvm
naissance
flightsover theareasof OndjivaandPort0
Spanish): Mr. President,
I ammostgratefulto youand
Alexandre.Simultaneously,
six Mirage-typeaircraft
to themembers
of the SecurityCouncilfor givingme
and two Buccaneer-typeaircraft attackedand dean opportunityto participatein the consideration
of
stroyedthe city hall of Cahama,morethan200kithe complaintof the People’sRepublicof Angola
lometresinside our borders, and the village of
regarding
the militaryaggression
perpetratedagainstit
Tchibemba,which is situatedmorethan 300kiloon 23August IY81by the armedforcesof the South
metresalsoinsideour nationalterritory. Yesterday,
African racist regime.Likewise,may I saythat my
24 August, around 1000hours, there were new
delegationfeels-confident at seeingthis meeting
violationsof our nationalairspace,as well asthe
presided
overby theMinisterfor ExternalRelations
of
infiltration of SouthAfrican forcesdistributedinto
the sisterRepublicof Panama.Mr. JorgeIllueca,
two mobilecolumns,oneof whichwasmadeup of
whoserecognizedtalentsanddiplomaticacumenwill
32tanksand82armouredcarssupported
by theirah
13

and that the new Administration has called on the
Congressto repeal the so-calledClark Amendment so
as to be able to supply the counter-revolutionary and
mercenary anti-Angolan bands; that is to say, with a
clear and unmasked intent to intervene in the internal
affairs of a State Member of the United Nations, a
sovereignand independent country, and t9 subvert its
legitimate Government.

force, proceeding towardsthe villages of XaWongo
and Cahama,”
125. The aggressive forces encountered tenacious
resistance from the ForGas Armadas Populares de
Liberta@o de Angola (FAPLA) who are heroically
defending the sovereignty of their country and halting
the &gressor. The first column clashed with the
Angola forces in Xangongo and the secondnear the
villag of Catequero. Violent fighting has‘been rePorted by the Angolan Government aJd._.;by.the
international press.

130, That undeniable fact has to be linked with the
repeated refusal of the United States Government to
allow the imposition of mandatory sanctions, in
accordancewith Chapter VII of the Charter, against
the South African racist aggressors, through the
exercise of Its right of veto in the Security Council.
Does not this refusal on the part of the United States
mean a manifest decision to protect the aggressors,to
prevent action by the international community against
those whoare guilty of a crime againstmankind, not to
mention their being common international criminals,
as t&y uphold the odious regime of apartheid?

126. There is no doubt, therefore, about the large
scale of this new military aggressionby the Pretoria
fascists and the grave threat that it representsfor
peace in the region and for international security.
The President of Angola has already warned of
the unpredictable consequenceswhich may follow a
broadening of the conflict and of his decision to have
recourse to what is provided for in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, should that prove
necessary, in defence of national sovereignty and
independence Wd.1,

131. Whatever the objectives of the Pretoria r&me
in committing an aggressionagainst the Republic of
Angola-and one could not seriously accept its unbelievable explanation that these were punitive raids
against SWAP0 patriots, without thereby admitting
the right of the South African racists to occupy
Namibia illegally, in violation of resolutions and
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council-their barbarous and cri&nal acts must bk
condemned unreservedly,

127.;The racist attack on Angola has been unanimously condemned by world public opinion and States
Members of the Organization, including the members
of the Council, with the exception of the Government
of the United States.The timid attitude of “depiorina”
such a flagrant violation of the Charter becomes
suspect since that attitude is made conditional on a
strange “consideration of the situation in its context”
by those who have proclaimed themselvesto be allied
with a regime whoseleaders were imprisoned during
the Second World War because of their declared
sympathy for Adolf Hitler and the Nazi ideology,
Today, they brazenly encouragethe band of Angolan
traitors who are operating from Namibia, which is
occupied by South Africa.

132. The South African fascistsseek to belittle the
importance of the military oppression perpetrated
against Angola so as to accustom public opinion to
their attacks on SWAP0 patriots and to conceal their
design to establish their troops permanently on the
territory of Angola. Angola is a free and sovereign
country whichhas the right to live in peaceand whose
territorial integrity and independencemust
~. b&strictly
.=
respected.

128.- Above all, we recall that the imperialist strategy, since 1974,has beento prevent&t, the~victory
of the patriotic forces of Angola, headed by the
MPLA, and then to promote the destabiliqtion of its
legitimate Government later by sponsoringthe criminal activities and banditry of its pu pet Savimbi, in
close ‘collusion with the Pretoria I$gime, That was
bwnly cotifesaedby John Stockwell,former head of
the Yn@d~ States Central Intelligence Agency in
Angola, ‘in. his book published in 1978 entitled In
Seat& of Enemies, in which he explained the plans of
sinister Yankee dependantsto establisha beach-head
in southern Angola to assisttheir prot0g6, the traitol
Savimbi.

133. In the statement made by the Revolutionary
Oovernment of Cuba on this subject, it is stated:
*‘NO one can doubt that these deedsmust be seen
in the context of United States plans to destabilize
Angola and other front-line States and to support
internal counter-revolutionary bands.-The Oovamment of the United States is the mastermind and the
only begetter of the cowardly aggression against
&gola.

129. Indetd, the Council does have to consider the
true context in which the presentact of aggressionby
South Africa is being perpetratedagainstthe People’s
Republic of Angola. In this respect,it is fitting to recall
that United States leaders gave red-carpettrp?tmo*n+
not long ago to their friend, the Nazi Roelof Botha,
14

“The brutality of these criminal South African
acts has as a precedent the daily practices against
the oppressedSouth African people who suffer at
first hand the pitiless and inhuman policy of apartheid, and the anachronistic domination of the
Territory of Namibia, whose people, under the
IcTdership of SWAPO, their sole legitimate representative,are striving to put an end to the colonial

occupation of their country, a cause which has the
widestsupport in the international community. Thi9
hasoccurred, moreover, whenthere are only a few
days to go before we hold an emergency special
sessionof the United Nations General Assembly on
Namibia.

magnitude and that the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of all South African army units from the
People’s Republic of Angola be demanded.Indeed, in
resolution 475 (19801, it was determined that the
Security Council should meet again in the event of
further acts of violation of Angola’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. For that reason, my Government
has supported without reservation Angola’s request
that the Council take up this question as a matter of
urgency.

“The world observes with admiration that the
people of Angola and FAPLA, headed by the
MPLA-PT and by President Jose Eduardo dos
Santos, are defending with extraordinary bravery
the borders of their country against South African
aggression. The racist in<ad&s must halt their
aggression and withdraw from the territory of
Angola. Their cowardlyactions are alreadyreaching
an extreme beyond which they cannot go. If the
invading South African columns come close to the
lines being defended by the Cuban internationalist

138. As membersof the Council are aware,this is not
the first occasion in which Angola has sufferedat the
hands of South Africa. Indeed, the records of the
Security Council provide many remindersof violations
of Angoolansovereignty and territorial integrity, the
loss o? many innocent Angolan lives and de havoc
wrought upon the economic infrastructureof a young,
independent developing country.

combatants, our troops, in tWdment of the duty of
solidarity nf ?ur country with the sister Republic of
Angola, wnl~3 into action with all their means,

139. The Government of Ireland condemns without
reservation the actions which have been aemetrated
against Angola in recent days. It condeinni South
Africa’s violation of the sovereigntyof an independent
country. It condemns this blatant violation by South
Africa of the Charter of the United Nations. Not least.
it condemns the tragic loss of innocent lives and thi
extensivematerial damagecausedbv South Africa. All
of these are seriouscon&equencesdf the recentaction
bv South Africa. action which South Africa has
c&ously attempted to excuseas a pre-emptive strike,

“The Government and people of Cuba, with

absolutely no hesitation, will once again stand

shoulder to shoulder with the people of Angola to
counter the racist and fascist aggression and in
defence of Angola’s independence and national

integrity.”

134, My delegation, together with all the non-allgned

countries and the progressiveand peace-lovingforces
of the world, expects the Council unequivocally to

140. More generally, we are deeply disturbed by the
implications which the latest South African aggression
will have for the efforts which have been made and
continue to be made to bring Namibia wacefullv to
early independence, in accordance iith- Se&ity
Council resolutions 385 (19761and 435 11978). Mv
delegation had an opportunity io set out iis &ws L
detail on this issue in the course of the consideration
by the Council of the question of Namibia in April
of this year. As the representative of Ireland &id
on that occasion, fkn%herdelay in bringing freedom
and independence to Namibia would be intolerable
12275th meerlng, para. 991. However, instead of
witnessingprogresstowardsNamibian independence,
what we see is South Africa utilizing its illegal
occupation of Namibia to launch attacks against
Angola on the pretext of a pre-emptive strike. This, in
our view, doesnot do anything to allay our suspicions
as to South Africa’s ultimate intentions for Namibia,

condemn South African aggression, to demand that it
be brought to an end and to call for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the racist troops from the
territory of Angola. It is our hope that the members of

the Security Council will act firmly and without delay.

135, Mr. O’CONNOR (Ireland): In his statement
before the Security Council today, the representative
of the People’s Republic of Angola presentedto us an
accountof the details of the invasion of his country by
units of the Sollth African army. My delegation was
moved by his report of the latest aggressionby South
Africa against his country, as indeed we wereby the
information which he has provided in written form in
recent days. His remarks and the gravity of the
situation have prompted me to speak briefly at this
early stageof the debate.
136, First of all, 1 wish to extend to the representative of Angola the deepestsympathy of my Govemment on the suffering which South Africa’s attacks

141. Furthermore. we fully share the concern

expressed by the Piesident of ihe People’s Republic of
Arlgola in his letter of 25 Aueust 1981to the SecretaryGeneral in which he pointedlout that the South African
attacks launched against his country seriously jeopardized peace in the region [ibid.]. Indeed, my delegation wonders whether these and other similar South
African actions may not have as their ultimate
objective the promotion of instability in the whole
region of southern Africa. If that is so, then such

have caused to so many of his countrymen.

137. My Government has beengravely concerned by
the reports of South Africa’s violation and infringement of the territorial integrity of Angola and its
military actions in that country. We consider it entirely
appropriate, therefore, for the Angolan Government to
approach the Council with a request that the necessary
steps be taken to avoid a confrontation of even greater

IS

throughout the continent of Africa, and I at&n the
fact stated by the representativeof the Soviet Union,
that Dr. Cheater Cracker doe8 now servethe United
state,a8 it8 Assistant Secretary of State for African

actions by South Africa increase the likelihood of a
wider conflict in sub.Saharan Africa, a bloody and
destructive confiict with the possibility of the direct
ipvolvement of foreign forces.
142,” The Council must now uraentiy respond to the
grave situation. In our view, the responsefrom the
Council, in the form of either a resolution or a
presidential statement, should be a unanimousoneand
should include a condemnation of the South African
aggressionagainst Angola,a demandfor the immediate cessation of South African military activities
within Angola and a demand for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawsI of all South African military
personnel from Angoian territory, togetherwith a
demand that South Africa show respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of-the People’8
Republic of Angola.

147. During the cour8e of hi8 remarks, the Soviet
representativealso referred to what he alleged to be
the support of my Government for violence and the
use of force. 1 find that ironic and worsethan ironic,
coming a8 it doe8 from the spokesman of a country
that ha8 invaded and continues to occupy Afghanistan
and Whosearm& advisersand client8 presently plague
the continent of Africa.

148. My Government believe8 firmly and strongly
that the Security Council can and should make a
constructive contribution to the resolution of the
situation we now find in 8outheriI Africa. We believe
143. My delegation would hope that sucha statement that the Council should call urgently and immediately
by the Security Council would be heeded without for the cessationof recourseto violence from all and
delay, If that hope remain8unfulfilled,mydelegation every quarter and by all parties and that it should
will be ready to give the most seriousconsiderationto demand the immediate withdrawal of South African
forces from the territory of Angola,
how,best this Council can dischargeit8 obligations.

144. Mr. LICHENSTEIN (United State8 of America): The representative of Cuba is quite right. My
Government doe8 deplore violence, It deplore8 violence and the use of force from any quarter in settling
affairs among sovereign nations. It deplore8 the
escalation of violence, which is presently a fact in
southern Africa. We deplore violence and the u8e of
force and the escalation thereof in mJor part because
they make more difticult the peaceproce88,which is
the great and overriding objective of our effort8 and
the effort8 of many nation8 with whichwe areworking
to facilitate the search for early independence for
Namibia on the basis of Security Council resolution
$35(19781,

149. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation ‘from Russian): The rep
rosentative~ofthe United States who .iust Spoke and
other high officials of the United States, for 8ome
reason, have in recent day8 begun to present a88ome
kind of novelty the assistanceprovided by the Soviet
Union to Angola, the assistance provided by the
Soviet Union to SWAP0 and the assistanceprovided
bv the Soviet Union to a number of African countries.
This~is no novelty; it is well known to everyone that
indeed we do hela them. If the United State8 has
begun to talk abouithat a8a novelty, it mean8that it is
trying to cover up something, it is trying to concealit8
own action8 in thqt area of the world.

‘145. The current eituation is, in our view, made the
more difficult by the surrounding context of that
situation, 1 note, for example, the fact that in Angola,
fully six years after that nation achieved independence, there remain large contingent8 of foreign
military adVi8et’fJ.I note as Weti that 8Ub8tallti~
supplies of foreign arm8 have been shipped into
Angola to supply and rosuppiy oiomonts of SWAP0
that have-engaged iu ViOlOnCOacro88 the Angoian

150. Confrontation in southern Africa does not follow the line8 indicated by the United State8 representative. Confrontation occur8 along entirely different
lines in Africa. Confrontation is indeed taking place in
8OUthet’ttAfrica. For eXampi0, there i8 COnfrOntatiOn
between South Africa and an independent African
country. Angola. a confrontation in which the South
Africati~raci~t r&me is trying to destabilixe Angola
‘and undermine that CoUntry’8systemin its intention to
recoiohizo Angola. In that confrontation, our sympathies are on the side of indopendont Angola, on the
aid0 Of that Afkhn COunl whereasthe eympathiee
of the United State8lie on tX’e side of the racist r6gime.
Why doe8not the United Statesrepresentativesaythis
openly?

f$Jl¶uer,=*--~.I,~

146. ‘: I must make noto as woh of the long statement
that has been made this evoning by the reprosontativo
of the Soviet Union, a statementof views that he
alleges to be influential in the policy councils of the
administration of the United State8 Government.

151. In Africa, anotherconfrontationistakingplace,
“Constructive Engagement” by Dr. ChesterCracker. a confrontationbetweenthe peopleof Namibiaand
That article is an expositionof Dr. Cracker’srecom- South Africa. There, our sympathies lie with the
mendedconstructive policy changes
that he then felt
people of Namibiawho, under the leadershipof
and still feels may lead moreeffectively to peace SWAPO, are fighting for their independence,whereas
Promhi8 descriptionI scarcelyrecognizedthe article

and preservationof independence
and racialjustice

16

the representative
of the UnitedStatescallsfighters

for national liberation “terrorists”. That is what he
calls them. In Africa, there is also a confrontation
between the people of South Africa and the racist
rdglme, Our synipathies lie with the overwhelming
majority of the peoplein that country. The svmnathies
of the United Siat& representative are with-the whit.?
minority. We state our position quite openly, but the
United States representative presents his country’s in
a concealed fashion,

157. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (inlertwtution
from Russian):
Thus, the
representative of the United States is not prepared to
condemn the aggression by the South African racist
regime against Angola,
158, The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from Spanish): Before 1 adjourn the meeting, may 1 place the
following on record, As President of the Council and
having heard the statements made in today’s debate,
all of which concur on the gravity of the situation,
I believe it fitting to recall that in resolution 475 (1980)
the Security Council decided to remain seized of the
matter of the armed invasion of the People’s Republic
of Angola by the South African armed forces,

152. I think that the intention of the exercise undertaken today by the United Slates representative in the
Security Council was to divert the attention of the
Council and of the world from the real confrontation
that is being created in South Africa by the South
African racist regime, and the United States is thereby
helping the South African racists.

159. Accordingly, I note that in the present case the
following provisions of that resolution are in force:

153. Mr. LICHENSTEIN (United States of America): I should simply like to reiterate that the sympathies and support of the United States are given to all
the people of Africa and that 1 have specifically
characterized the policy of my Government as being
one which makes every conceivable effort to achieve
the objective of a genuine,universally recognized and
accepted independencefor all the people of Namibia,
on the basis of Security Council resolution 435 (1978).

**T/it

Sacrtrity

Council,

“I.
Strongly
condemns
the racist regime of
South Africa for its premeditated, persistent and
sustained armed invasions of the People’s Republic
of Angola, which constitute a flagrant violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that
country as well as a serious threat to international
peace and security;
“2.
Strongly
condemns
also South Afric?‘s utilization of the international Territory of Namibia as
a spring-board for armed invasions and destabilizp
tion of the People’s Republic of Angola;

154. I would also note that, alas, we do not find the
levels and types of involvement of the Soviet Union in
any way novel. They have been going on for far too
long,
155. Mr. OVINNIKDV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation.~onl
Russian):
I should like
-adhering strictly to the agendabefore us today-to
pose one very short question to the representative of
the United States that will show the essence of his
country’s policy on the issue we are discussing. The
question is: Is the representative of the United States
prepared to vote for a strong condemnationof the acts
of aggression committed by the racist regime of South
Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola? There
are other questions 1could ask him. but I will only ask
him this one-whether he is prepared to support such
a condemnation or not.

“3.
Demands
that South Africa should with.
draw forthwith all its military forces from the
territory of the People’s Republic of Angola, cease
all violations of Angola’s airspace and, henceforth,
scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola.”
The meeting

156. Mr. LICHENSTEIN (United States of America): 1 reiterate what 1 said before: my Government is
prepared, at the proper time and in the proper
framework, to support the call-indeed, the demand-for the prompt withdrawal of the forces of
South Africa from the territory of Angola.

rose at 8.30 p.m.

NOTES
’ O~flclrrl Records of r/w Gerwrul Assembly,
Thlr~y@?lt Serrl,un.
Phurry
Mwrlnys.
4th meeting,
para.133.
’ lb/d., Thlrfy-slxrk
Stsslon,
Supplement
No. 14. para.222.
’ SeeA/34/542, Politlc~lDeclaration.
para.93.

‘See A/36/534,
annexI.

17

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout the
world, Conrul~ your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairieset
monde entier. Inrormez-vous aupr&de votre libraire ou adresset-vour
&es ventes, New York ou Get&e.

Icsagancesdepositairesdu
a : Nations Unies. Section

COMO

UNIDAS

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicacioncs
de Ias Nacioner Unidas cstan en venta an librcrlas y casa6 distribuidoras
an
rodas parted del mundo. Cons&e a IU librcro o dirljasa a: Nacionas Unidaa, Scccidn de Vcntaa.
Nttcva York o Ginabra.

Litho

in United Nations,

New York

on400

tifFhI I03-seplelnLw

IY8x4.050
