United Nations

S/PV.5805

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5805th meeting
Monday, 17 December 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Spatafora . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Italy)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Okio
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Christian
Mr. Kleib
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Voto-Bernales
Mr. Al-Nasser
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Burian
Mr. Sangqu
Sir John Sawers
Ms. Wolcott

Agenda
The situation in Somalia

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-64634 (E)

*0764634*

S/PV.5805

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Minute of silence for the victims of the bombings in
Algiers
The President: At the outset of this meeting, I
would like to invite all members of the Council to
observe a minute of silence for all of the victims of the
bombings in Algiers on 11 December 2007. The
victims of the bombings included 17 United Nations
staff members and a large number of Algerian nationals
and nationals of other countries. On behalf of the Council,
I would like to express profound sympathy and sincere
condolences to all of the victims of this devastating
tragedy, to their families and to the Government of
Algeria, as well as to the victims of all terrorist attacks.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Norway, Portugal and Somalia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dhakkar
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia.

2

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: I would like to thank all
Member States and organizations for the support I have
been receiving from them in my functions, and thank
them for the attention they have been giving to Somalia
and the Somali people for the past 17 years.
In this connection, the United Nations and all
international partner institutions and countries have
made and are still making extraordinary efforts to
assist Somalia under extremely harsh conditions.
Many, including journalists and aid workers, have
sacrificed their lives in the course of their work with
little or no recognition. I would also like to thank the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). It is
doing excellent work with limited resources and
manpower. In addition, protecting shipments of food
against high-seas piracy is new, most welcome and
should be continued.
The conflict in Somalia is not, in my opinion, an
African Union or a League of Arab States or an
Organization of the Islamic Conference issue. It is
neither a liberation struggle, nor an ethnic or religious
war. It is also not just a struggle for power among the
clans, as many believe. The frequently shifting
allegiances between and within clans demonstrate that
other factors are also responsible for the continued
instability of the country.
The conflict in Somalia, which began in 1991, is
a threat to peace and security. The situation is
dangerous and is becoming more so each day.
Somalia’s youth, who make up about two thirds of the
population, has only one employment opportunity —
participation in a conflict that has blighted their lives.
This situation has continued over the past 17 years,
despite 17 agreements.

07-64634

S/PV.5805

I see three possible approaches to international
involvement in Somalia.
The first course of action is simply continuing the
current status quo, or “business as usual”. The second
approach would be an organized withdrawal of the
international community from Somalia, in effect
accepting our inability to protect the population or to
bring about a lasting peace. A third possible solution
would be immediate and effective action on the
political and security fronts.
The first approach is to maintain the status quo.
Policies tried and implemented over the past 17 years
have clearly failed to restore stability. Even worse, they
may have fuelled the conflict owing to some side
effects of international assistance. Aid may give the
impression that it addresses the root causes of the
crisis, but it does not. An increase in humanitarian
assistance and improved access for agencies would be
helpful but it will not put a stop to the violence. The
suffering might be mitigated, but it will not be ended,
as long as instability prevails. Despite millions of
dollars, efforts and resources, national reconciliation
continues to be elusive. The Somalis and their
neighbours are frustrated by this continued war, which
is generating deep resentment and cynicism.
The current military situation cannot last forever.
In addition, it should not be used as an excuse for
continuing business as usual. A “wait and see” attitude
would only postpone the day of reckoning and would
not facilitate meaningful progress towards a lasting
peace. That is why we really have only two choices —
either withdrawal or looking at other forms of action.
For those who believe that Somalia is one of the
world’s unsolvable problems, withdrawal is the only
course of action. A withdrawal would provide an
alternative to the costly, continued engagement in
Somalia that has so far failed to bring about stability,
and it may not be difficult as an operation, because
there are only a very limited number of international
staff in Somalia and none is based in Mogadishu.
The decision to intervene in some conflict situations
while ignoring others of similar gravity would, however,
have a far-reaching effect, especially in relation to public
opinion, and not necessarily only in Africa. That is why I
recommend the third option — taking effective action.
Taking effective action would entail new political
and security initiatives. The Transitional Federal

07-64634

Government (TFG) would have to be more active and
make greater room for neutral personalities and
competent members of the opposition. I take this
opportunity to appeal to the Parliament to support this
orientation. The objective is to form a Government that
can support itself and administer the country
effectively and peacefully. The Cabinet should be as
representative as possible; we will never have
unanimity — if we have 60 or 70 per cent in the first
phase, that will be good. That Government should be
capable of defending itself and maintaining good
relations with all its neighbours.
With regard to the conditions for success, as I see
them, the Somalia crisis is an international problem.
The United Nations should launch diplomatic action to
mobilize a consensus aimed at stabilizing the country. I
recommend two simultaneous actions — one on the
political front, the other on the security front.
On the political front, the Government should
help by taking concrete steps to unite and strengthen its
own ranks as well as its relationship with the
opposition. The establishment of a Government of
National Unity is one of the best ways to do so. More
meetings between selected members of the TFG and
those of the opposition should take place so as to
prepare the ground for further and higher-level
meetings. No large conference or freelance mediators
would be welcome. This “critical path to stabilization”
should include the opposition as part of the political
process and should require the opposition to assume all
of its responsibilities.
These discussions should preferably be held in a
location close to Somalia or in one where most
observers following the situation in the country are
based. Once agreement on talks is reached, the
discussions should be concluded within a fixed time
frame. Political leaders and, especially, members of the
business community and prominent Somalis of the
diaspora, should be invited to contribute. I am
preparing the agenda, identifying a possible list of
participants and the timing for this process. I am
convinced that, when left alone, Somalis are ready to
join their ranks and efforts to get their country back on
its feet in the next few months.
On the security front, concurrently with the
political action, AMISOM needs to remain operational
and its effectiveness strengthened. A new initiative
should reinforce it with the deployment of additional

3

S/PV.5805

capacity to stabilize our country. As time is pressing,
this new peace presence has become a must. In this,
Saudi Arabia — and I am mentioning Saudi Arabia
because, last Ramadan, they invited Somalia for a
meeting — Custodian of the two holiest sites in Islam
and a close neighbour, where more than 350,000
refugees are currently living, should be invited to play
a leading role. Given its successful contribution to
peace in the previous conflict, Saudi Arabia can help.
And why should support from one or two NATO
member States not be made available, if necessary?
On the practical level, the United Nations and the
Somali Government should come to a swift agreement
in close consultation with other concerned countries.
With the Secretary-General’s support, I plan to pursue
this road to peace without delay. The Security Council
may wish to support these two simultaneous actions.
With its blessing, a group of Somalia’s partners should
reinforce the security capacity and deploy a peace
presence. This would bring forward national
reconciliation, encourage the return of the international
community to Mogadishu and beyond, and reassure
neighbours with respect to their security concerns. This
arrangement, sanctioned by a major international
conference, should mark the complete return of
Somalia to the international community.
The situation in Somalia is deteriorating daily,
and it is time for the international community to
commit itself to a clear course of action. If the current
trends of internal violence and external neglect
continue, the consequences would be catastrophic for
peace in the region, for the image and reputation of the
United Nations, and, above all, for the long-suffering
Somali civilians.
A combination of many factors — support,
pressure and effective action — would help patriotic
Somalis to free themselves from the scourge of war and
the ghosts of the past and to unite for a strong,
independent and peaceful country. I have asked for
some pictures of Somalis trying to flee their country to
be circulated.
The President: I thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for his
comprehensive and very interesting briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Somalia.
Mr. Dhakkar (Somalia): On behalf of the
Permanent Representative of Somalia to the United

4

Nations, who is not currently in New York, and in my
capacity as officer-in-charge of the Mission, on behalf
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia,
and, indeed, on behalf of all the suffering people of
Somalia, I would like again to thank the Security
Council and its President for giving us an opportunity
to participate in this discussion.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the position
taken by our colleague Ahmedou Ould Abdallah. We
would like to offer him our full support in his worthy
endeavours. We wholeheartedly endorse the last
position he outlined, which is the only option. The only
option is for the Security Council and the United Nations
system to move in the right direction — not only to
move in the right direction, but to do so with speed, in
order to make up for lost time. It is no secret in
Somalian and other circles that many Somalis — inside
Somalia, in the neighbouring countries and all over the
world — wonder why it is so relatively easy for the
Security Council and the United Nations system to
move faster and in the right direction in other places in
the world where there is or has been conflict.
Basically, we endorse the idea that the Security
Council should move speedily in three directions. First,
existing measures should be implemented: first of all,
the deployment of African Union peacekeepers. I take
this opportunity to thank profusely the African Union,
the Government of Uganda and the Government of
Ethiopia for helping Somalia in its hour of need.
Secondly, it should be possible, in this day and
age, in the twenty-first century, for the Security
Council to come up with an acceptable formula to
move ahead on Somalia in the right direction in the
political and security sphere. It is not in the interest of
the United Nations system to find ways to delay real
action on Somalia.
Thirdly, of course, wherever there is conflict,
there is a humanitarian disaster, and Somalia is no
exception. It pains us to see Somalia for so long the
subject of the worst possible headlines. The Somali
people would like to move out of this situation. Those
us who know us know us as proud people.
Unfortunately, since the civil war, and since 1991,
when the central Government collapsed, our pride has
been crudely dented, but we have faith that we will
come back and regain our strength.
After all, we have one language, we have one
history, we have one ethnic group and we have one

07-64634

S/PV.5805

religion. In many situations where I have been in my
capacity as a former senior United Nations official for
23 years and as a part-time lecturer at New York
University, I have been asked, “if you have all this
homogeneity, what is the problem? What are you
fighting about?” In many situations, I was able to
explain, in two minutes rather than in two hours, what
the problem was.
So my third point, talking about directions for the
Security Council, was to emphasize humanitarian
assistance.
I will be brief. We fully support the position
taken by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia. We fully endorse the need for the
Security Council to move fast, and in the right
direction — and now. We have faith in the United
Nations system and in the Security Council. After all,
part of Somalia was a United Nations Trust Territory,
and the southern part gained independence with the
help of the United Nations. There are many Somalis in
the diaspora. There are many Somalis who have been
in the United Nations system.
We all have faith in the United Nations system.
We hope that five or ten years down the road we will
still have faith in the United Nations system.
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Council.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his briefing. We would also like to
welcome the statement made by the representative of
Somalia.
China has always believed that the key to the
settlement of the current crisis in Somalia is for its
various factions to carry out national reconciliation,
engage in constructive dialogue, reach a political
understanding and commit themselves to national
reconstruction. We appreciate the large amount of work
done by the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia in that regard. We encourage it to continue its
broad-based dialogue with various factions.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Nur Hassan
Hussein as Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal
Government. We have noticed his expressed
willingness to continue dialogue with various factions
in Somalia. We believe that he is able to lead the

07-64634

Somali people in overcoming the current difficulties.
At the same time, we are worried about the health
situation of President Yusuf Ahmed. We hope he will
be well soon.
The efforts by the Transitional Federal
Government alone are far from enough for the
settlement of the Somali question. We once again call
on the factions of Somalia, both inside and outside the
country, to take seriously the aspiration of the Somali
people for peace, to put the interest of the country and
nation above everything else, not to set any
preconditions for dialogue, and to work constructively
for national reconciliation.
The future of Somalia as a State fundamentally
depends on the efforts of the Somali people
themselves; however, the assistance of the international
community is also indispensable. We would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ould Abdullah for his good-offices efforts
since he took office. We hope that the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia will be further
strengthened, and we call on the international
community to support Mr. Ould Abdallah and
cooperate with his work.
China is deeply concerned at the security
situation in Somalia. We highly appreciate the
important role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) under extremely difficult conditions for
the improvement of the security situation of the
country. There is an urgent need to improve
AMISOM’s current difficult situation. It is a top
priority for the international community to provide it
with financial, logistical and technical support so that it
can be fully deployed as soon as possible. That is
essential for the stabilization of the internal security
situation in Somalia, as well as for prompting Ethiopia
to withdraw from Somalia.
China consistently supports the United Nations
taking over for AMISOM. We understand that the
Secretariat is faced with many practical difficulties in
deploying a United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia. However, the international community should
bear in mind the urgent need of the people of Somalia.
We look forward to the stepped-up efforts made by the
Secretariat in formulating a contingency plan and in
regular briefings of the Council in that regard.
China is seriously concerned at the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. The Somali humanitarian crisis

5

S/PV.5805

has evolved into one of the most serious humanitarian
disasters on the African continent, even exceeding the
crisis in Darfur. However, compared with the great
attention paid to Darfur, there has been too little input
to Somalia and insufficient attention on the part of the
international community. We call on the international
community to donate generously to the United Nations
and other humanitarian agencies, and we encourage
various factions in Somalia to fully cooperate with the
international relief agencies and their personnel. We
also hope that the humanitarian agencies respect the
sovereignty of Somalia and maintain smooth
communication with the Transitional Federal
Government.
Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I begin by
thanking the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his briefing and also
the representative of Somalia for his contribution.
Somalia remains a challenge for the Security
Council and for the United Nations and the African
Union as a whole. Making progress there, as today’s
briefing makes clear, is a long-term task and a vital
one. The United Nations is uniquely placed to help
address all the range of needs in Somalia:
humanitarian, political, security and developmental.
We warmly support Mr. Ould Abdallah’s efforts to
address those complex problems and to coordinate and
lead an effective United Nations response. We
welcome in particular his discussions with the
Transitional Federal Government leadership, with the
regional and international players and with a wide
range of Somali stake-holders, who will have a part to
play in Somalia’s future.
My delegation welcomes the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator’s recent visit to Somalia.
Easing the humanitarian crisis should be our immediate
priority. That will require continuing efforts from the
United Nations, and it will take action and cooperation
also by Somali actors on the ground, both Government
and rebels, to ensure humanitarian access. In particular,
the Transitional Federal Government should ensure that
humanitarian relief can be delivered freely throughout
all the areas it controls, and it should also protect those
in receipt of humanitarian relief and the displaced
persons who are trying to return to their homes.
On the political process, we welcome the
appointment of the new Prime Minister, Mr. Nur
Hassan Hussein. His appointment provides an

6

opportunity to revitalize the political process. We look
forward to him beginning work in earnest, once he has
finalized the new Government cabinet. Full
implementation of the conclusions of the National
Reconciliation Congress will be crucial, in particular
launching a constitutional process, establishing a clear,
timetabled road map to elections at the end of the
transitional period and advancing a full and meaningful
dialogue with all actors in Somalia’s political process:
clan leaders and elders, religious groups, opposition
groups, civil society and business. We will need to
support the Special Representative’s new initiatives to
get this process moving forward.
On security, we welcome the Special
Representative’s new thinking. We support the
proposal for a technical assessment mission to Somalia
to help advance the contingency planning of the United
Nations.
On the role of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), we believe that the United
Nations should continue to support that force. The
Ugandan contingent is doing a demanding job in
difficult conditions. We welcome the news that
Burundi hopes to deploy troops very soon, and we call
on Ghana and Nigeria to honour as soon as possible
their commitments to AMISOM. The United Kingdom
has extended financial support to the force, including
support for Burundi’s deployment, and we are ready to
consider further support for other countries to deploy.
We hope our partners will also consider similar such
backing.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, and thank him for the sobering
briefing. We also welcome the statement made by the
representative of Somalia.
Clearly, the situation in Somalia is not getting
any better. It is still characterized by a grave
humanitarian crisis, major political divisions, including
within the Transitional Federal Government, and
general insecurity in the country. We have been told
that some 200,000 people have fled their homes
recently as a result of increasing fighting, with the
country being plunged into an unfolding disaster. The
humanitarian situation remains fragile precisely
because of insecurity and political divisions.
We acknowledge the necessity of humanitarian
assistance so as to alleviate the suffering of the people

07-64634

S/PV.5805

of Somalia. However, as the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs warned in his briefing earlier
this month, “a robust humanitarian response cannot
make up for the absence of desperately needed political
and security progress” (S/PV.5792, p. 6). It is important
that we continue to promote an inclusive political
process and reconciliation in Somalia and seriously
look into a contingency plan for possible deployment
of a peacekeeping force in Somalia.
Despite the often-cited admirable work that the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has
been doing, we all know that this has gone beyond
sustainability and effectiveness. The problem is not
just that of resources, but also the nature of the
mandate. AMISOM was deployed as a stop-gap until
the United Nations can deploy.
Once again South Africa expresses the hope that
the Security Council will revisit the request of the
African Union for an expedited deployment to
Somalia. Unfortunately, there seems to be a subtle
reluctance, if not resistance, to this request. The reality
is that the international community has the
responsibility not to abandon the people of Somali
again. The way forward, it seems to us, if we are to
stop Somalia from being a constant threat to
international peace and security, is to encourage and
support the political process as well as to deploy a
peacekeeping operation. A conducive security
environment has to be created to allow the political
process to proceed. We hope that the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will accelerate
the deployment of an assessment mission to Somalia so
as to facilitate further United Nations engagement.
Given the seriousness of the situation,
maintaining the status quo and withdrawal are not
options. There can be only one option — a more
focused United Nations approach to bring about
security in Somalia.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mr. Ould
Abdallah, and thanking him for his update on the
situation in Somalia. We also thank the representative
of Somalia for his statement. My delegation
appreciates this opportunity to receive an in-depth
update about Somalia, given that the Council must
contribute to managing and resolving the 17-year-old
conflict in that country — not only due to increasing

07-64634

humanitarian suffering but also because of the
Council’s responsibilities under the Charter to address
threats to international peace and security.
We welcome Mr. Ould Abdallah’s efforts to
promote dialogue, consultations and reconciliation in
the country, as well as his leading role in fostering
greater unity of action by the international community.
We urge him to continue with his commendable efforts
for greater international awareness of the Somali issue.
We note the idea of a new agenda for peace and
stability in Somalia and wish to be continually updated
on the development of a harmonized approach among
all partners under the leadership of the United Nations.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Nur Hassan
Hussein as the new Prime Minister of Somalia. We
believe that the continued divisions in Somalia, both
within the transitional federal institutions and between
the Transitional Federal Government and the
opposition, are the main obstacles to any possible
progress on the political front. It is therefore crucial
that Mr. Hussein’s Government strengthen all-inclusive
dialogue and consultations with all Somali
stakeholders, with a view to achieving unity of purpose
and political direction.
Indonesia supports the two-track approach of a
political track and a security or peacekeeping track as
the main thrust of the Security Council’s efforts. On
the political track, we are of the view that the primary
task for Somalis should be the completion of the tasks
set in the Transitional Federal Charter. In particular,
efforts should be focused on the constitutional process,
preparation for the national population census and the
holding of the elections scheduled for 2009. We look to
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
(UNPOS) to support this effort and to play a leading
role in channelling and coordinating all international
assistance for Somalia.
On the peacekeeping track, Indonesia favours the
deployment of a United Nations multidimensional
peacekeeping force. At the moment, when United
Nations deployment is still under thorough assessment
and consideration, a greater technical, logistical and
financial support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) is absolutely essential and
urgently needed. We commend Ugandan troops on the
ground for their efforts and wish to express our
appreciation to Member States that have provided
naval protection for shipments of humanitarian aid

7

S/PV.5805

against piracy and armed robbery along the coast of
Somalia. We believe that a United Nations force should
in time be deployed to Somalia, and we encourage the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to continue
to work on contingency planning.
Indonesia is in favour of the Secretary-General’s
intention, as stated in his report (S/2007/658), to
elaborate a two-track approach for Somalia. A
strengthened UNPOS should be able to support such an
approach. Contingency planning for a possible United
Nations peacekeeping component will need to be
developed in coordination with and with the support of
UNPOS and in keeping with the overall political track.
Moreover, the establishment in the Secretariat of an
interdepartmental and inter-agency integrated task
force on Somalia is welcomed, in particular to develop
a coherent peacebuilding strategy for Somalia.
The continued presence of foreign troops in
Somalia has been reflected in part in the hardening
stance of the opposition and the intensification of the
insurgency, making any resolution even more difficult.
The international community therefore must contribute
to a conducive situation for the withdrawal of all
foreign forces that are not part of AMISOM.
Finally, we call on all parties to respect
international humanitarian law. It is unacceptable that
innocent civilians continue to become the victims of
this protracted conflict. We appeal once again to all
those with weapons, whether Government, insurgent,
or Ethiopian troops, to cease indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks affecting civilians. Ultimately,
Somalia needs a political and security resolution, but in
the meantime, humanitarian assistance and access must
be enhanced. We call on the international community
to increase their assistance to Somalia, including to the
consolidated appeal for Somalia, and we call on the
Somali authorities to facilitate and widen access for
humanitarian assistance.
Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We too are grateful to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, for his timely briefing and
complete recommendations for action by the
international community in Somalia to achieve a longlasting solution to this protracted conflict.
We are concerned about the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
especially in Mogadishu, and the increasing suffering
of civilians caught in the fight between the insurgents

8

and Government forces. We believe the international
community must do everything possible to ease their
suffering and to provide humanitarian assistance to all
those in need. The need for an international response is
urgent, and all parties in Somalia must do whatever
they can to ensure secure access to international
humanitarian assistance.
At the same time, all parties in Somalia should be
reminded that the key priority is the protection of
civilians and that the abuse of international
humanitarian law and human rights law is totally
unacceptable. We deplore the abductions and killings
of independent journalists and human rights activists in
Somalia over the last year. We hope that the French
journalist who was abducted just last weekend in
Puntland will be freed as soon as possible.
We are also worried about reported restrictions
placed by the Transitional Federal Government on the
independent media, which have been reporting on the
unfolding situation in the country. At the same time, we
believe the humanitarian disaster in Somalia can be
avoided only through national reconciliation and
stabilization in the country. Slovakia believes that the
National Reconciliation Congress held in Somalia
earlier this year was an encouraging step in the
political process, and we hope that its outcomes will be
implemented expeditiously.
We welcome the recent appointment of the new
Government of Somalia under the leadership of Prime
Minister Nur Hassan Hussein. We share the view of
Special Representative Ould Abdallah that the
President and Prime Minister need to be more active in
addressing the crisis through political dialogue
involving all parties, including opposition and
independent personalities, in deciding the future of
their country. We hope that the transitional federal
institutions will now seize the momentum and move
expeditiously to establish inclusive democratic
institutions in Somalia, including in the area of
preparing for the census and elections due in 2009.
We note the recommendations of Mr. Ould
Abdallah on simultaneous actions on the political and
security fronts. We hope that the international
community, including the United Nations, will play a
more instrumental role in assisting Somalia in its
efforts to achieve peace, stability and prosperity.
Finally, we would like to reiterate the necessity of
addressing the ongoing arms embargo violations that

07-64634

S/PV.5805

contribute to increasing tensions and hostilities
between the parties, and we call on all States — in
particular those in the region — to fully comply with
the arms embargo and prevent any actions and
activities by non-State actors to supply arms into
Somalia.
In conclusion, we would like to commend the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for the
positive role it continues to play in Somalia, since
there are very few options other than more support for
AMISOM at the moment. We therefore look forward to
the deployment of Burundian troops, which we hope
will contribute to improving the security situation on
the ground. Finally, we support the call of Mr. Ould
Abdallah to strengthen the operational capacities and
capabilities of AMISOM.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): The
situation in Somalia is grave. It poses a real threat to
peace and security in the Horn of Africa and is causing
terrible suffering among the Somali population. The
situation requires an integrated approach on the part of
the international community to address all the various
aspects of the crisis. In that context, I thank Special
Representative Mr. Ould Abdallah for his detailed
report on the latest developments in that country and
for his recommendations for strengthening the action
of the international community. I also thank the
representative of Somalia for his contribution to the
debate.
At the political level, the appointment of the new
Prime Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein, has opened a
new window of opportunity for progress in the
transition process. We encourage the Prime Minister to
invite all political forces, inside Somalia or out, that
renounce violence and accept the Transitional Federal
Charter as the framework for the restoration of peace in
Somalia to participate in an inclusive political process.
The Transitional Federal Government is primarily
responsible for implementing the conclusions of the
National Reconciliation Congress and for establishing
a road map for completing the transitional period. That
includes preparations for a constitutional referendum
and for elections by 2009, in accordance with the
Transitional Federal Charter.
The humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate, as the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Holmes, recently reminded
the Council. There is no indication that this trend will

07-64634

reverse itself. The urgency of the crisis has even
prompted dozens of non-governmental organizations to
appeal to the international community. A growing
portion of the population is dependent on assistance,
which, however, is facing serious problems of access.
All parties, and the Transitional Federal Institutions in
particular, are duty-bound to protect the population,
respect international humanitarian law, facilitate access
to those in need, and promote the return of displaced
persons to their areas of origin.
Incidents similar to that of 4 December, when the
closure of land and maritime access points to
humanitarian
assistance
was
announced
and
subsequently retracted, must absolutely be avoided. We
must also find a speedy solution, together with the
Somali authorities, to the thorny problem of people
being made to pay for the right to cross checkpoints.
We expect the new Prime Minister to reaffirm his
Government’s commitment to the facilitation of
humanitarian assistance and to do all in his power to
end impunity in the country.
The
essential
prerequisite
for
lasting
improvement, however, remains the stabilization of
security. All parties are duty-bound to put an
immediate end to acts of violence and to implement a
ceasefire that will allow the launching of a genuine
political process. Belgium endorses the SecretaryGeneral’s analysis that the dispatch of a peacekeeping
force cannot be envisaged in the current circumstances.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
remains the sole available option for facilitating the
withdrawal of foreign forces from that country.
Belgium expresses its support for AMISOM and for the
countries that contribute to it. We reiterate the need to
strengthen AMISOM, particularly in financial terms,
and encourage the United Nations, in cooperation with
the African Union, to consider new forms of support
for that force, be it in technical assistance or the design
of operations, and to implement them post-haste.
Belgium is also committed to that approach.
We are well aware that the United Nations has a
responsibility to protect with respect to the people of
Somalia and has to maintain its credibility in the eyes
of international public opinion. Belgium therefore fully
supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and
Mr. Ould Abdallah to increase the coordination of
international activities in Somalia by developing a
comprehensive plan of action, in particular in support
of the transition process and the security sector in

9

S/PV.5805

Somalia. We especially support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia be strengthened. We are also willing
to listen to those who propose feasible and appropriate
solutions to halting the cycle of violence and to
stemming the crisis in Somalia, convinced that the
international community must pursue and increase its
commitment to that course.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): My delegation thanks
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his update, as well as for
his efforts towards resolving the Somali crisis.
Ghana is concerned that the continuing political
stalemate characterized by differences within the
Transitional Federal Institutions and divisions between
the Government and opposition forces, coupled with
the escalation of the insurgency in Somalia, has
delayed the adoption of a road map for the
implementation of crucial benchmarks in the
Transitional Federal Charter.
My delegation calls on the parties in Somalia,
both Government and opposition, to respect the
outcome of the National Reconciliation Congress held
in Mogadishu and to endeavour to work together in
good faith to implement its outcomes, including the
urgent need to disarm, complete the constitutional
process, and conduct free and fair elections by the end
of the five-year transitional period. To that end, we call
on the opposition parties that boycotted the
reconciliation Congress to come on board. The
Transitional Federal Government should equally reach
out to the opposition for the sake of the unity and
peace of the people of Somalia and their country’s
territorial integrity.

deployment of pledged contingents. We share the
observation of the Secretary-General that a
strengthened AMISOM will expedite the withdrawal of
foreign forces. Nonetheless, the Security Council and
the Secretariat should continue to accord priority
attention to the question of developing a contingency
plan for the deployment of a robust United Nations
peacekeeping force to replace AMISOM, given the
scale and magnitude of the security challenges
confronting Somalia now.
We commend the humanitarian work of the
United Nations and other international humanitarian
agencies, intergovernmental and non-governmental
alike, for their valuable services in helping the
displaced and other victims of the dire humanitarian
crisis in Somalia. We urge all parties to facilitate
access through humanitarian corridors and to respect
the rules of international humanitarian law.
We condemn the catalogue of human rights
abuses and urge the Transitional Federal Government
openly to condemn such abuses to demonstrate its
commitment to the rule of law. Finally, we welcome
the re-establishment of the Monitoring Group, which
helps to check violations of the arms embargo, and
urge all States to continue to cooperate with the Group
towards the attainment of its desired objectives.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing. I should also like to thank the representative
of Somalia for his statement. I would like to reiterate to
Mr. Ould Abdallah that he has the full support of
France in carrying out his difficult task.

In keeping with the understanding reached at the
conference of key international donors held in
Stockholm in September 2007, Ghana would wish to
stress the desirability of adopting a coordinated and
harmonized approach to providing support and
assistance in addressing the volatile political and
security crisis and the attendant socio-economic
conditions and humanitarian catastrophe in Somalia.

We welcome in particular that Mr. Ould Abdallah
has made proposals to the Security Council for an
integrated strategy. We believe that the Somali crisis is
an overarching crisis — a political, security and, of
course, humanitarian crisis. And as Mr. Ould Abdallah
has pointed out, the crisis poses a threat to the security
of the entire region. My delegation would like to
emphasize what we believe to be three areas for action
that must be addressed simultaneously.

We condemn the attacks on the Ugandan
contingents of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and commend them for their sacrifices. My
delegation reiterates its appeal to the international
community to support AMISOM with the necessary
financial and logistical resources to facilitate the

The first is the humanitarian situation. There is
today an urgent need to respond to the humanitarian
tragedy in Somalia. As described to us by Mr. Ould
Abdallah, and as Mr. Holmes pointed out 10 days ago
(see S/PV.5792), the situation is continuing to
deteriorate. More than 600,000 people fled their homes

10

07-64634

S/PV.5805

in 2007, and at least half of the inhabitants of
Mogadishu have left the city for shelter in improvised
camps along the roads. Fighting in the capital
continues. Attacks and killings by insurgents are
sometimes answered with artillery fire by Ethiopian
forces and forces of the Transitional Federal
Government. We recall that the Transitional Federal
Government has a responsibility to protect the civilian
population and that all combatants must respect
humanitarian law.
France hopes that humanitarian aid will be
increased, that access to people in need will be
guaranteed and that working conditions for
humanitarian staff will improve. That goes also for
other international personnel working in Somalia. In
that regard, I am thinking in particular of journalists
and, especially today, of our fellow citizen Mr. Gwen
Le Gouil, who was kidnapped on Sunday in the
Puntland region. France demands his immediate release.
France is continuing to provide military
protection for vessels of the World Food Programme,
which is providing essential food aid for Somalis. Two
rotations have already taken place, with a third rotation
under way. France’s commitment will continue until 16
January. These operations have made it possible to
significantly improve the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We are in contact with several of our
partners to ensure that these operations can continue
beyond 16 January.
Secondly, France has, however, not lost sight of
the fact that the crisis will not be resolved without
political dialogue. Once he has established his new
governing team, the first task of the new Prime
Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein, will be to launch a
dialogue between the Transitional Federal Government
and the opposition in Somalia and elsewhere. That
dialogue must be as inclusive as possible and include
those who have taken up arms, with the exception, of
course, of some extremists with an international
agenda. The Security Council must lend its unreserved
support for Mr. Ould Abdallah’s efforts to bring on
board all parties to the conflict. After 16 years of chaos
and conflict, France supports in particular the idea of
bringing together small groups of decision makers to
address specific issues in order to establish an
environment conducive to a genuine political process.
The third area is security. The question is how
best to respond given the situation that I have outlined.

07-64634

Mr. Ould Abdallah has referred to an ad hoc force to
supplement the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). The idea of such a force under a United
Nations mandate deserves to be considered. There are
also other options that could be envisaged. Whatever
the case, the situation is such that, in our view, the
Security Council cannot rule out any option, whether it
be to provide support for AMISOM or to consider
mandating an ad hoc force or a possible peacekeeping
force. We therefore ask that the Secretariat address all
those options, including the speedy deployment of a
technical assessment mission, and provide regular
updates to the Council on its work.
For the short term, my delegation notes that all
credible scenarios call for greater political dialogue
and the speedy deployment of AMISOM. France pays
tribute to the African Union and to the Ugandan
contingent on the ground. We have participated
actively in the training of the Burundian contingent.
We welcome the announcement made Friday by the
Special Envoy of the African Union that the first
Burundian battalion would be deployed very soon,
namely, in the second half of December.
In the light of what I have said, it will come as no
surprise that France supports the idea that there is a
need to change course. Given the humanitarian
catastrophe taking place before our very eyes, complete
disengagement by the international community is
clearly out of the question. Nor is the status quo an
option.
I would like to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for the
suggestions he made this morning. We hope that the
Security Council will be able to quickly consider those
options by working together substantively with all the
relevant services of the Secretariat.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to thank Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
the representative of Somalia for their statements. They
have once again depicted one of the direst situations
we face. Unfortunately, seemingly unlike other organs
of the United Nations, the Security Council appears
unable to find an effective way to improve this thorny
situation.
The Security Council has received many reports
in which the humanitarian and human rights situation
merited particular attention. They include the briefing
presented to the Human Rights Council on 11 December

11

S/PV.5805

by Ms. Louise Arbour, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and the briefing to
the Security Council on 6 December 2007 by Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. Ms. Arbour
reiterated her concerns with regard to the human rights
of Somalis caught in the crossfire of the conflict,
especially in Mogadishu. For his part, Mr. Holmes
briefed the Council on the terrible humanitarian
situation in the improvised refugee camps surrounding
that city, which house some 600,000 people. According
to Mr. Holmes, that may be the largest group of
internally displaced persons in the world today.
In addition, recent political events serve to
highlight the deterioration of the Transitional Federal
Institutions.
The
endemic
and
progressive
fragmentation of Somali politics should spur the
international community and the people of Somalia
themselves to show greater support. In the short and
medium terms, there is a risk that the new Government
of Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein will collapse,
and along with it our efforts to stabilize Somalia.
Reports indicate that the international community
and relief organizations have made significant progress
in humanitarian coverage, but that a great deal remains
to be done. As a matter of priority, the Government and
the opposition must both address the critical political
situation and undertake specific measures to ensure the
implementation of the outcome of the National
Reconciliation Congress.
On a more strategic level, the Security Council
can no longer sit back with arms folded. The mandate
of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
will again expire in February 2008, and the Council
has yet to find a way to strengthen or replace that
operation. In the coming weeks we must therefore take
fundamental decisions with regard to that operation
and the possible alternatives to replace it: either the
deployment of a multinational force or the dispatch of
a peacekeeping force. As a prelude to whatever
decision is taken, it will be necessary to dispatch a
technical assessment mission.
Finally, the Government must have zero tolerance
with soldiers and civilians leading illegal groups
throughout the length and breadth of the region. It must
reduce excessive border controls, prevent the
harassment of relief workers and dedicate greater
resources to dealing with piracy.

12

Our lack of action could jeopardize the credibility
of this Council. Consequently, it is crucial that we act
energetically and rapidly, given these challenges.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We, too, are grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould
Abdallah, for his detailed briefing and to the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
evaluation.
The Russian Federation is seriously concerned by
the development of the situation in Somalia,
particularly in the area of security and also in the
humanitarian sphere. Despite the efforts of the
Transitional Federal Government and the Ethiopian
troops and the Uganda contingent of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) supporting it, the
situation in the country remains extremely serious. We
welcome the appointment of Nur Hassan Hussein as
Prime Minister of Somalia. This is a very important
step. We now need to enhance the effectiveness of the
work of the Government so as to have effective
solutions to the cumulative complex problems facing
Somalia. Responsibility for overcoming the lengthy
crisis lies with the Somalis themselves. All parties,
including, of course, the Transitional Federal
Government, must take decisive steps for a speedy
normalization of the situation and to assist the
peacebuilding process and to strengthen State
institutions.
Real progress in ensuring a broad political
dialogue and the implementation of a comprehensive
process of national reconciliation will create conditions
for preventing a further slide of the country into a
humanitarian disaster. There is still a threat of the
conflict in Somalia growing into a regional one. Such a
scenario is likely to destabilize an already complex
situation in the Horn of Africa. In these conditions, we
feel it is extremely important to continue to observe
strictly the regime of the arms embargo against
Somalia. Neighbouring countries can and must play a
constructive role in assisting and promoting a
settlement, and above all, as regards normalization of
the situation in the area of security.
In such conditions, of course, maintaining the
status quo in the area of security in Somalia is
unacceptable, and here we agree absolutely with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We
support the activities of AMISOM, and we are

07-64634

S/PV.5805

convinced that a full deployment of the Mission will
greatly help to create conditions for effective progress
in the process of national reconciliation. We note the
plans for a further strengthening of AMISOM that are
being worked on at this time, and we hope that they
will be implemented appropriately.
We also agree that it is essential to continue work
on the modalities and the preliminary planning for a
possible United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Somalia. However, it is clear that, in the present
circumstances, the prospect of transforming AMISOM
into a United Nations peacekeeping operation still
depends directly on a substantial improvement in the
area of security and on achieving serious progress in a
political settlement.
We have taken note of the recommendation by the
Secretary-General, confirmed today by his Special
Representative, on sending a multinational force to
Somalia. This idea deserves careful work with the
involvement of all interested sides, including, of
course, Somalia.
Mr. Voto-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for
the information given to us concerning the grave
situation in Somalia. We commend the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia for its work, along with the
United Nations team working on the development of a
comprehensive peacebuilding strategy for Somalia. We
encourage further efforts in this direction in order to
find a solution to the protracted crisis besetting the
country.

Government should show the political will and must
adopt a stance of openness when dealing with the
opposition groups. In turn, the Government must also
implement the recommendations adopted by the
Congress, including the development of a road map, in
order to accomplish those tasks that are enshrined in
the Transitional Federal Charter, in particular the
constitutional process, as well as the preparations for
the national census, the elections to be held in 2009
and the implementation of the national security plan
and the national stabilization plan. On the other hand,
the opposition groups must renounce violence and must
agree to the Transitional Federal Charter in order to
create the necessary conditions for reconciliation. All
parties must understand that it is only through an
inclusive dialogue and through a genuine political
process that a sustainable peace will be achieved.
Considering the humanitarian situation, we are
disturbed to hear about the lack of security and how
this has increased the vulnerability of the population.
The humanitarian situation has worsened, given the
rise in violence. Access to humanitarian assistance is
limited; it has been impeded because of the increasing
lack of security, because of the roadblocks that have
been created that block access to overland
consignments of the World Food Programme (WFP),
and pirate activities on the coast of Somalia that are
preventing aid and assistance from reaching areas that
require it.

We have taken note of all of the efforts that have
been deployed by the Transitional Federal Government
aimed at implementing the transitional political process
and national reconciliation. Taking account of the
situation in the field and the difficult security and
humanitarian situation in Somalia, I would like to
outline a number of points concerning the political
dialogue process, the humanitarian situation and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).

According to the last report of the SecretaryGeneral, there are currently in Somalia some 750,000
internally displaced persons, of which 350,000 have
only recently become displaced. In the light of this
dramatic situation, we must urge all parties to
guarantee strict compliance with the principles of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Moreover, the situation must be tackled, as the
humanitarian crisis persists and the ongoing violence
could dissipate all political efforts. To that end, we
welcome the fact that the planning of a unified appeal
for 2008 has begun, and we welcome the pledges for
contributions that have been received.

In spite of its weaknesses, the convening of a
national reconciliation congress is an important
milestone in the process of national reconciliation. In
this regard, it is crucial that dialogue between the
parties continue, including the opposition groups, both
within and outside of the country. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the Transitional Federal

With regard to AMISOM and its financing — and
these are my concluding comments — we commend
AMISOM’s troops for their professionalism in
fulfilling their duties, working in a highly difficult and
risky environment. We agree with the report of the
Under-Secretary-General concerning the need to
maintain AMISOM, to ensure that it remains operative,

07-64634

13

S/PV.5805

and to strengthen its capacities through new deployments
of troops in order to provide more effective and urgent
assistance for the stabilization of the country.
Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): We
thank United Nations Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his briefing this morning.
The United States welcomes the appointment of
Nur Hassan Hussein as the new Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government. We hope that that
Government can now focus on renewing its efforts
towards inclusive political dialogue and resuming the
comprehensive political process outlined by the
Transitional Federal Government Charter.
We hope Prime Minister Hussein will draw on his
humanitarian background to address the needs of
Somalia’s nearly one million displaced persons, and in
working to alleviate current impediments to effective
delivery of United States and other international
humanitarian aid.
We urge the Transitional Federal Government to
move quickly to facilitate the drafting of a new
Constitution and formation of key commissions, such
as a national electoral commission, that will allow
national elections to take place on schedule in 2009.
We also continue to call on Somali stakeholders across
the political spectrum to rejoin the political dialogue
process and to discuss key elements of the transitional
political process leading towards national elections in
2009.
In fiscal year 2007, the United States was the
largest bilateral donor of humanitarian assistance to
Somalia, with approximately $90 million in such aid
provided, in addition to $25 million in development
and democracy assistance. And we continue to be the
largest bilateral donor in support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), with nearly $59.6
million provided to date in support of that effort.
We call on all Somali and regional actors to
prevent extremist elements from using Somalia as a
safe haven for continued attacks against civilians, the
Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM. The
United States has repeatedly urged the leadership of the
Transitional Federal Government to reach out to key
stakeholders, particularly in Mogadishu, to resume the
transitional political process and work towards an
effective ceasefire arrangement as the best means of

14

isolating extremist elements seeking to prevent further
political dialogue.
The United States commends AMISOM, in
particular the Ugandan forces, for their efforts in
Somalia, operating under difficult and dangerous
circumstances. We welcome the commitment by
Burundi, Ghana and Nigeria to deploy forces in
support of AMISOM. We urge all members of the
African Union (AU) that have pledged to send troops
to Somalia to do so without delay, and we urge the
international community to assist the AU with the
necessary logistical and financial resources, so that
AMISOM may be fully deployed. We continue to
support the full and timely deployment of AMISOM as
a critical component in restoring stability and creating
the space for continued dialogue and reconciliation.
The United States would like once again to stress
the need for contingency planning for a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia. We ask that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations send a
technical assessment mission to Somalia as soon as
conditions allow. As we all know, the dynamics in
Somalia are fluid and can change at any time. We must
begin the contingency planning now, so that the United
Nations will be prepared to deploy if and when
conditions on the ground permit.
The United States remains concerned about the
increase in piracy off the coast of Somalia. We commend
our partners in the Combined Task Force 150 that
continue to patrol the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean
to ensure the safe passage of merchant ships, especially
ships carrying humanitarian cargo. The United States
supports the 5 July letter from Mr. Efthimios Mitropoulos,
Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization, to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the
need for a new Security Council resolution to address the
problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia. The United
States looks forward to working with other members of
the Council on this issue next year.
Finally, the United States is gravely concerned
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
particularly in south-central Somalia. We will continue
monitoring the humanitarian situation, and we
welcome continued close coordination and cooperation
with the United Nations country team and our donor
partners in Nairobi to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches those most in need within Somalia.

07-64634

S/PV.5805

Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I wish
to welcome Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I
thank him for his briefing and urge him to continue the
efforts he has undertaken since he took office to
promote a comprehensive political process in Somalia
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1772
(2007).
It is unfortunate that, as the Secretary-General
stated in his most recent report to the Security Council
under this item (S/2007/658), the security situation in
Somalia is making it difficult to deploy United Nations
peacekeepers. However, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recent statement that, despite that situation,
work is under way to develop a strategic assessment
for a United Nations intervention in Somalia in order to
provide an integrated approach and a framework for
United Nations peacebuilding efforts in that country. In
addition, the Organization can play a greater role in
mobilizing and providing support for the efforts of the
African Union (AU) to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), including completion
of the deployment of Burundian troops this month.
We agree that ensuring stability in Somalia
requires parallel efforts on the political and security
tracks. We have always called for a national dialogue
in Somalia based on the principles of reconciliation
and inclusion, rather than on those of force and
exclusion. Therefore, we commend Mr. Ould
Abdallah’s efforts to move national reconciliation
forward, thus creating the basic conditions needed for
the country’s continued progress towards stability and
democracy. That can be achieved only through an end
to the violence, the withdrawal of foreign troops and
the building of constitutional democratic institutions.
At this juncture, it is essential that Somalia
continue to broaden the political reconciliation process,
which must include all tribes and factions. In addition
to continuing that approach, the Government must draft
a constitution for the country, develop a road map for
the remainder of the transitional period and pave the
way for conducting a census and elections by the end
of the period.
It goes without saying that the disputes in
Somalia, whether within the institutions of the
Transitional Federal Government or between the
Government and the opposition, must be settled

07-64634

through dialogue. Moreover, all parties in the country
must refrain from using violence as a way to express
political positions. They must also stop jeopardizing
the safety of civilians, impeding humanitarian access to
them and, in particular, targeting humanitarian relief
workers, journalists and AMISOM personnel.
Despite the fact that the Government formed by
newly appointed Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein
was dissolved shortly after its formation, we hope that
it will soon be succeeded by a new, broad-based
Cabinet that includes various Somali parties and that
can communicate well with the opposition. We also
hope that it will play an effective role in alleviating the
worsening humanitarian situation in the country,
particularly since Mr. Hussein has a solid background
and experience in that area.
The dire humanitarian situation facing the people
of Somalia has been described as the worst in Africa. It
is regrettable that that the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. Indeed, since the beginning of
this year, the number of civilians fleeing the capital
because of the continuing violence has risen to
approximately 600,000, making the problem of
internally displaced persons a serious crisis.
Furthermore, the social and health statistics for women
and children in Somalia are among the worst in the
world. Briefing the Council after his recent visit to
Somalia (see S/PV.5792), the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs explained that international
humanitarian agencies face great difficulties in
carrying out their tasks because of the continuing
violence, and that the international response has been
inadequate. Therefore, the flow of international aid to
Somalia must continue, together with cooperation and
coordination between international and regional parties
and the Transitional Federal Government in order to
guarantee humanitarian access to those most in need.
The question that arises here is why the
international response to the humanitarian situation in
Somalia has been different from the response to that in
Darfur. Are the two situations not the same? Are
innocent civilians not suffering as a result of both
conflicts? In addition to the extremely grave
humanitarian situation being experienced by the
Somali people, their human rights are being violated,
as the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights indicated on 11 December in her statement to
the Human Rights Council. We deplore the serious
violations that are taking place, including the targeting

15

S/PV.5805

of civilians, as well as the indifference shown by rebels,
troops of the Transitional Government and Ethiopian
troops towards civilian population centres. Just in recent
days, scores of people have been killed or injured by
artillery shells that targeted their homes and shelters in
Mogadishu. This situation should not be tolerated.
Moreover, the issue of the ever-worsening piracy
that has been taking place for almost a year now and
that has not spared even ships carrying humanitarian
aid must be addressed. Therefore, initiatives taken
recently by the French navy to escort humanitarian
assistance vessels are praiseworthy.
Finally, I would like to point out that the mandate
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
expires at the end of this month. Everyone agrees on
the need for its continued existence. Therefore we
would like to stress that the role of the Office in
supporting the participatory political process and
achieving national reconciliation is important and must
be strengthened.
Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome Mr. Ould Abdallah, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and to salute his efforts in the country in a particularly
difficult context. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
contribution to the debate.
As regards the latest developments in Somalia,
the least that can be said is that the situation remains
serious. All the main elements noted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/658) remain current,
both with respect to the security and political situation
and as regards, of course, the peace process. In this
context, the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. The number of displaced persons is
reaching record numbers, and the number of people
needing humanitarian assistance is constantly growing.
All these figures give us the scale of the disaster.
At the same time, the Monitoring Group on
Somalia notes continuing violations of the arms
embargo imposed by resolution 751 (1992). These
weapons, which come from countries in the region,
continue to arrive in Mogadishu and to supply the
extremist groups. Moreover, acts of piracy are
continuing. In that connection, we would like to
welcome once again the very courageous initiative
taken by France that has made it possible to improve
the shipment of humanitarian assistance. We regret that

16

it has not raised the expected support. Since it will be
concluding soon, pirates will have fine days ahead,
unless new initiatives are planned.
If I could compare Somalia to a sick person, I
would say that the deterioration in its state of health
requires not just shock treatment, but also the
involvement of several specialists. Neither the States of
the subregion nor the African Union, through the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), can
stem this illness alone. That is why my delegation
repeats its appeal for a ceasefire and for national
reconciliation in the context of an inter-Somali
political dialogue, without which no progress can be
achieved.
With respect to supporting the Secretary-General’s
proposal for the establishment of a multinational force,
we would like to recall that overlapping sociological,
historical and other factors among the Somali people
and those of other countries in the subregion should
lead us to taking increasingly into account regional
aspects of the Somali crisis, not only in regard to
approaches to a solution and but also to foreseeable
consequences if a political solution is not found.
In the immediate future, we feel that the Council
should support the new Government and the Prime
Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein, and invite his
Government to continue its efforts toward national
reconciliation by relying upon the progress made by
the National Reconciliation Congress held from
15 July to 30 August 2007. If the Congress decisions
referred to by the Secretary-General in paragraph 5 of
his report could be implemented, then a big step could
be taken towards stabilization of the situation in this
country.
In our view, the Security Council should also
ensure that the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia is strengthened so that it can play a leading
role in coordinating efforts made by parties, supporting
the efforts of AMISOM, seriously envisaging the
deployment of a multinational force, taking appropriate
measures to contain acts of piracy, considering the
establishment of an investigation commission with a
view to holding accountable the serious violators of
international human rights and humanitarian law.
Mr. President, my delegation knows how much
your country supports initiatives for a return of peace
in Somalia. We have counted on your continued
support to help this country.

07-64634

S/PV.5805

Congo, in conclusion, condemns the kidnapping of
the French journalist and calls for his immediate release.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of Italy.
I wish first to warmly welcome Special
Representative Ould Abdallah and to thank him for a
most focused presentation with an operational
approach. That is precisely what we need. I am glad
that we have been able to have this debate in
December, under the Italian presidency, given that
Somalia is a strong priority for Italy. I am also glad
that the public format has allowed the whole
membership to follow the meeting.
First of all, the scale of human suffering in
Somalia has become unacceptable. Effectively
addressing the humanitarian emergency dimension of
the Somali crisis has to be at the top of our agenda. The
words used by Under-Secretary-General Holmes a few
days ago still echo in this Chamber “increasingly
terrible things are now happening in Mogadishu, as it
descends into the nightmare of urban guerrilla warfare
and reciprocal atrocities” (S/PV.5792, p. 6).
I wish to acknowledge the great work being
accomplished by the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the non-governmental organizations active
in Somalia and the humanitarian community in general to
alleviate this human suffering. But I also concur with the
Special Representative that without a consistent and
strong multidimensional strategy encompassing the
political, security and human rights dimension, the
humanitarian response alone cannot solve the crisis.
Secondly, the situation in Somalia is indeed a
very serious threat to international peace and security,
which requires an appropriate response by this
Council. Like many others before me, I fully agree
with the Special Representative’s assessment of the
need to radically change our agenda for Somalia and
step up our efforts. “Business as usual”, as has been
said, is not an option any more. I am glad to see a
strong awareness of this fact among Council members.
Now we have to translate this awareness into a
coherent, multidimensional strategy and draw the
necessary operational conclusions.
Our paramount goal should remain, more than
ever, the active promotion — at the appropriate time
and under the right conditions — of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia. We note that

07-64634

today’s discussion has indicated that that is indeed the
view of many, if not all, Council members. A first step
in that direction was the technical meeting organized
by the United Kingdom in early December. We hope
that this dialogue with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) could be accelerated so that
concrete options within the contingency plan could be
presented to the Council soon. Let us remember that
the contingency plan was last requested in August in
resolution 1772 (2007). That is already four months
ago.
In particular, it is necessary — and this has been
said very clearly by other members who have spoken
before me — that the technical assessment mission that
was also requested in paragraph 16 of resolution 1772
(2007) be dispatched to the region as soon as possible
and, I would add, without delay. Keeping the United
Nations option alive will also encourage African troopcontributing countries to participate in the African
Union Military Observer Mission in Somalia
(AMISON), whose strengthening remains our first
objective in the short term, as has been stated this
morning by all members. This is the first priority: to
strengthen AMISON, because what is at stake is the
credibility of the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations.
Italy has provided €10 million to AMISON and
invited other donors to contribute. I wish to underline,
however, that our support of AMISON should not
prevent us from actively pursuing all other options and,
in particular, from responding to the African Union
request that was very strongly expressed here by the
representative of Congo for a United Nations rehatting
as soon as possible.
Thirdly, the Special Representative has heard this
morning that there is wide support for his role, which
is indeed a very challenging one. His commitment and
proposal for a re-energized agenda and political
process for Somalia are most welcome, and he has our
strong and fullest support. I wish to add the full
support of my Government to that which has already
been expressed by others. I trust that the Special
Representative’s action in the region and his position
vis-à-vis all interlocutors will be strengthened
following this debate.
We also need to strengthen the United Nations
political office in Mogadishu and provide a special
representative with the necessary means to carry on its

17

S/PV.5805

initiatives and to push the political process forward. I
also hope that the Council may soon express itself on
Somalia by means of a presidential statement, and I
look forward to receiving the proposal that the United
Kingdom will circulate in this regard. I would like to
express deep appreciation to the United Kingdom for
its efforts.
Somalia is a textbook case on the credibility of
this Organization and its ability to make a difference
on the ground. We cannot continue to pay lip service to
doing more for Somalia and then do nothing.
We need concrete — I repeat, concrete — steps
forward, and we need to move from goodwill to action
now.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Croatia, Turkey and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia, as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this declaration.
I will base my statement on the conclusions
drawn from the meeting of the Council of Ministers of
the European Union held on 10 December of this year.
The EU is deeply concerned with the situation in
Somalia. We believe that it poses a significant threat to
peace and security in the Horn of Africa and beyond. It
also causes immense suffering to the people of
Somalia. The EU therefore calls for urgent efforts by
all parties towards an inclusive political process and
reiterates its commitment to a comprehensive approach
to the Somali crisis, covering the political, security and
humanitarian facets.
The European Union welcomes the appointment
of the new Prime Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein,
and encourages him to invite all political forces, inside
and outside Somalia, that renounce violence and accept
the Transitional Federal Charter as the framework for
restoring peace and stability in the country, to an
inclusive political process.
The EU is willing to consider a significant
contribution for the transitional period, on the basis of

18

a mutual understanding between the EU and the
Transitional Federal Government on progress to be
made in the political process. Indeed, the Transitional
Federal Institutions have the primary responsibility to
implement the outcome of the National Reconciliation
Congress, as endorsed by the Transitional Federal
Parliament, and to establish a road map for actions
until the end of the transitional period. This includes
the preparation for a constitutional referendum and
elections by 2009 as set out in the Transitional Federal
Charter.
The European Union condemns all acts of
violence and calls on all parties to cease hostilities and
engage in a ceasefire, confidence-building and security
arrangements in the search for sustainable peace. The
EU urges the Transitional Federal Institutions, Ethiopia
and all other actors in Somalia to ensure humanitarian
access, to respect human rights and international
humanitarian law, to protect the civilian population and
to facilitate the secure and early return of displaced
persons to Mogadishu and other areas of origin.
The European Community Humanitarian Aid
Department has provided some €18 million to Somalia
this year, plus support to refugees in Kenya and
Yemen. The EU remains committed to enhancing
humanitarian assistance, provided there is unimpeded
humanitarian access and respect for the integrity of
humanitarian assistance.
Peace cannot be built on impunity. The EU
therefore calls on the Transitional Federal Government
to investigate all human rights abuses committed in
Somalia and bring those responsible to justice. In this
regard, we encourage the United Nations to use all
available instruments to improve monitoring of the
human rights situation in the country.
The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is at present the only available option to
facilitate the withdrawal of foreign and regional forces
from Somalia. The European Union expresses its
support for AMISOM, particularly recognizing the
contribution that Uganda has made, and reiterates the
need to strengthen AMISOM, including through
identifying substantial new financial support. The
European Commission, through the African Peace
Facility and the Instrument for Stability is channelling
€15 million for direct financing of AMISOM and €5
million for African Union planning capacities for that
Mission. Some EU member States have also provided

07-64634

S/PV.5805

financial contributions for AMISOM. The EU is
committed to make further contributions to the African
Union, on the basis of a comprehensive political and
needs assessment, as well as to provide bilateral
contributions to African Union member States
deploying to AMISOM, and we call on other donors to
contribute as well.
The EU also encourages the United Nations to
provide more support to AMISOM in accordance with
resolution 1772 (2007) of the Security Council and to
move forward with contingency planning for a possible
peacekeeping operation in Somalia.
The European Union expresses its full support for
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, and to his leadership role in
coordinating efforts of the international community.
His readiness to draw up an international action plan,
and in particular to frame international support to the
transitional process and establish a strategic framework
for security sector support to Somalia, has been greatly
appreciated. The EU is ready to support deliberation
and implementation of this plan.
The EU recognizes the increasing danger posed
by acts of piracy off the Somali coast and will study
possible ways to respond to the problem, together with
the Somali authorities and the international community.
We welcome the French initiative to provide military
accompaniment to vessels chartered by the World Food
Programme (WFP) delivering aid to Somalia, while
stressing the need for international initiatives that can
continue to provide protection to the WFP beyond
January 2008.
Finally, we believe that a successful European
Union delivery and responsiveness in the Somali peace
process remains essential to support a comprehensive
political solution, which would bring long-term
stability to Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to
Ambassador Løvald, Permanent Representative of
Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): Norway, as co-Chair of
the International Contact Group on Somalia, welcomes
this opportunity to address the Council on the situation
in Somalia, and we thank the Special Representative
for his briefing. Let me take this opportunity to
emphasize our full support for his efforts to bring about
positive change in Somalia.

07-64634

We are all deeply worried by the present state of
affairs in Somalia. The security situation is at best
volatile in Mogadishu and in several other areas of the
country. The humanitarian crisis has gone from bad to
worse, as hundreds of thousands flee the war-affected
areas.
We are now at a critical junction for Somalia and
for its Transitional Federal Institutions. We welcome
the appointment of the new Prime Minister, Mr. Nur
Hassan Hussein, and trust that he will focus on the
humanitarian crisis in the country. He has indicated
that this, along with improving security and deepening
the reconciliation process, will be the main priorities of
his Government. We support that approach. The
problems of Somalia are closely interlinked and can
only be solved through a comprehensive effort. The
international community must be ready to support this
effort.
Security and lasting stability can only be
achieved through a genuine and broad-based political
reconciliation — a reconciliation which includes all
Somali political forces that renounce violence and are
ready to take part in a political process. In order for the
Transitional Federal Institutions to secure support and
gain credibility from the Somali people, it is essential
that the Government be able to deliver a minimum of
basic services. So far, this has hardly been possible,
partly due to the insecurity and violence.
We should be more determined in dealing with
the humanitarian crisis and the suffering in Somalia. It
may be time to consider a compact between the Somali
Transitional Federal Institutions, civil society and other
institutions and the United Nations and international
agencies, to secure service delivery to the Somali
people. Such a compact could set out principles,
commitments and good practices guidelines for the
delivery of necessary services. Transitional Federal
Institutions should also reach out to all groups who are
ready to renounce violence and to join in such a
compact. The Transitional Federal Institutions should
also make a firm commitment to stick to their mandate
in the Transitional Federal Charter and the scheduled
elections in 2009.
It is imperative to improve the security situation,
which means there is an urgent need to strengthen or
substitute the present African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) force with a more substantial
peacebuilding mission. This would also relieve

19

S/PV.5805

Ethiopia of its present security burden and make it
possible for them to withdraw their troops. Due to the
prevailing security situation, the international presence
in Mogadishu and surrounding areas is at best
negligible, and this, as well as the absence of a
functioning Government, is hampering the work of
humanitarian agencies.
That is why we believe it is important for the
United Nations and international agencies to increase
their presence inside Mogadishu. Such a presence is
important for service delivery and as a signal to the
Somali people that the international community cares.
To sum up, the international community must be
ready to act to alleviate the suffering of the Somali
people and to contribute to peace. We strongly support
the work of the Special Representative, and urge
support for the new Prime Minister and his priorities.
This is a critical point in time for Somalia, and it is
time for all of us to support those who work for peace
and stability in the country and in the region.
The President: I now give the floor again to the
Special Representative, Mr. Ould Abdallah, in order to
comment on this debate.
Mr. Ould Abdallah (spoke in French): I will be
very brief. I would just like to make the following
comments. First, I am very pleased to make my first
briefing to the Council in terms of my new mandate
under your presidency, Sir, because your country has
an expertise, it is involved, and I am working very well
with the Ministry for Foreign Affairs in Rome.
I would also like to say that I wanted to draw the
attention of the Council to the need to review the
working approach we have on Somalia. I say this out
of respect for the Council. If we continue with the
working method we have been using for 17 years, not
only are we unlikely to achieve anything, but even
worse, this institution risks losing its credibility.
It is that motivation that led me to make these
new suggestions. If we maintain the status quo,
humanitarian assistance, which is useful and essential,
will continue to be shipped from Kenya to Somali
ports. But there are limits after 17 years. After so many
millions and so much energy spent, we can say that we
have not been successful. Can we give up? That is
morally and ethically difficult, so we need to act
differently. In doing so, we need to accompany the
Somalis in a political discussion, which is not easy, and

20

we need to encourage them to dialogue. They are
competent and serious. They can do this if we act in a
consistent and serious manner.
At the same time, we must provide them with a
new security, which will not only give them stability,
but will also provide jobs and reassurance. Escorting
ships on the high seas will produce more security and
reassure the population in Mogadishu.
I think that while waiting, my colleagues in the
Secretariat should send a field mission. We cannot send
it now, however, because of regulations. I have twice
been to Mogadishu and Baidoa. Everybody is going to
Mogadishu and Baidoa. I am not saying that it is like
the Mediterranean and everything is alright. We can go
to Somaliland and we can go to Puntland, but it is in
Mogadishu where there are problems, in 4 out of the
city’s 16 neighbourhoods.
We need to make an effort or admit our own
powerlessness. It is said that the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is doing work.
However, it is more accurate to compliment the
Ugandan contingent, as it is the only one there. African
public opinion is aware, because of the Internet and
radio, that there are none from AMISOM, simply a
Ugandan contingent. We must strengthen that
contingent and try to find — Council members know
how better than I do — a means to do that. Perhaps the
neighbouring countries from the Middle East could
help pending an additional AMISOM reinforcement.
That is what I wanted to say out of respect for the
Council, and particularly as regards its credibility and
the credibility of this Organization for which I work.
The President: I thank Special Representative
Ould Abdallah for the very clear explanation and very
clear message that he has given us.
We have fully understood, you can be sure, Sir,
the rationale of your statements. I also hope that you
realize that one of the main objectives of this debate
was to strengthen your hand in dealing with the crisis. I
think that the debate has shown that you have full
support and that from now on you can feel that your
hand really is strengthened.
I think that your clarification has rightly focused
on the need to strengthen AMISOM, which the Council
has highlighted. It is a question of the credibility of the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations.

07-64634

S/PV.5805

Also, I think it has to be clear that we must pay
tribute to Uganda, because, as you said, we speak of
AMISOM, but in fact that means the battalions of
Uganda — to whom all members of the Council are
grateful.

07-64634

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

21
