General Assembly--Thirty-sixth Session

184

----- -------··-•--"---------·------.

I 0. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, from the thirty-eighth session on. a biennial progress report bringing up to date the study on international conditions and human rights;
11 . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled ··Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms'·.
97th plenm:v meeting
14 December 19/il

36/134.

National institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/123 of I 6 December 1977.
33/46 of 14 December I 978 and 34/49 of 23 November
1979 concerning national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning
of national and local institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, endorsed by the General Assembly
in its resolution 33/46,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights, 115
Mindful also of the need to create conditions, at the national and international levels, for the promotion and protection of the human rights of individuals and peoples,
Emphasizing the importance of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 116 the International Covenants on Human
Rights 117 and other international human rights instruments
for promoting respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Reiterating its conviction that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and
that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given
to the implementation, promotion and protection of both
civil and political rights, and economic, social and cultural
rights,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights and the
Economic and Social Council have been giving attention
to the development of public information activities in the
field of human rights,
1. Invites all Member States to take appropriate step~
for the establishment or, where they already exist. the
strengthening of national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights;
2. Emphasizes the importance of the integrity and independence of such national institutions, in accordance with
national legislation;
3. Draws attention to the constructive role that national
non-governmental organizations can play in the work of
national institutions;
4.. Inv_ites all Member States to take appropriate steps
to d1ssemmate the texts of human rights instruments. including international covenants and conventions, in their
respective national or local languages in order to give the
widest possible publicity to these instruments;
5. Recommends that all Member States should consiue1
including material relevant to a comprehensive understanding of human rights issues in their educational curriculum:
115

6. Recommends that all Member States should take appropriate steps to encourage the exchange of experience in
the establishment of national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights; '
7. Requests the Secretary-General. in carrying out public information activities in the field of human rights, to
give due attention to the role of national institutions and
non-governmental organizations concerned with the promotion and protection of human rights;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to Member States, upon their request, in
the implementation of paragraph 4 above, high priority
being accorded to the needs of developing countries;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report providing
detailed information on the various types of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
taking into account differing social and legal systems and
the contribution that national institutions can make towards
the implementation of the international human rights
instruments:
I0. Recommends that Member States should bring the
present resolution to the attention of representatives of their
national institutions;
11 . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session a subitem entitled "National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights''.
97th plenary meeting
14 December /98/

36/135.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
in the United Nations system for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/175 of 15 December 1980, in
which it decided to consider at its thirty-sixth session the
question of the establishment of a post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights under the item entitled '' Alternative approaches and ways and means within
the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms",
Having considered the report of the Commission on Human Rights on its thirty-seventh session, 118
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights informed
the General Assembly that it had not been able to reach a
decision at its thirty-seventh session on the desirability of
the establishment of a post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Noting also that the Commission on Human Rights has
been seized of this question since its thirty-fourth session
under the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
the question of the programme and methods of work of the
Commission: alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
I . Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-eighth session to consider this question with the attention it deserves;
2. F.urther requests the Commission on Human Rights
lo ~ubm1t a report on its deliberations and their results to

A/36/440.

116

Resolution 217 A (Ill).
117
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex

'" Official Records u/ the Economic and Social Council, 19/i/, Sup11le111t'l1t No. 5 (E/1981/!'i and Corr. I).

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, through
the Economic and Social Council;
3. Decides to resume consideration of this question at
its thirty-seventh session, also taking into account the report
of the Commission on Human Rights on its thirty-eighth
session and the views expressed by Member States at the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly under the item
entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms" and
to examine what steps may be taken in this regard.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/136.

New international humanitarian order

The General Assembly,
Noting with interest the proposal for the promotion of a
new international humanitarian order, 119
Recognizing the importance of further improving a comprehensive international framework which takes fully into
account existing instruments relating to humanitarian questions as well as the need for addressing those aspects which
are not yet adequately covered,
Bearing in mind that institutional arrangements and action
of governmental and non-governmental bodies might need
to be further strengthened to respond effectively in situations
requiring humanitarian action,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Governments on the proposal for the promotion of a new
international humanitarian order;
2. Decides to consider the question at its thirty-seventh
session on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/174 of 20 December 1978, by
which it established a United Nations Trust Fund for Chile

185

Recognizing the need to provide assistance to the victims
of torture in a purely humanitarian spirit,
I. Decides:
(a) To extend the mandate of the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile, established by General Assembly resolution
33/ I 74, in order to make it capable of receiving voluntary
contributions for distribution, through established channels
of assistance, as humanitarian, legal and financial aid to
individuals whose human rights have been severely violated
as a result of torture and to relatives of such victims, priority
being given to aid to victims of violations by States in which
the human rights situation has been the subject of resolutions
or decisions adopted by either the Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council or the Commission on Human Rights;
(b) To redesignate the United Nations Trust Fund for
Chile as United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture;
(c) That the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture shall be administered in accordance with the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations by the Secretary-General, with the advice of a Board of Trustees of the
Fund, composed of a chairman and four members with wide
experience in the field of human rights, acting in their personal capacity, to be appointed by the Secretary-General
with due regard to equitable geographical distribution and
in consultation with their Governments;
(d) To adopt the arrangements for the management of
the Fund set forth in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 121
(e) To authorize the Board of Trustees of the Fund to
promote and solicit contributions and pledges;
(j) To request the Secretary-General to give the Board
of Trustees of the Fund all the assistance it may require;
2. Appeals to all Governments to respond favourably
to requests for contributions to the Fund,
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 198/

36/151.

as a voluntary fund to receive contributions and distribute
humanitarian, legal and financial aid to persons whose human rights had been violated by detention or imprisonment
in Chile,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 190 of 15 December 1980,
by which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to study the possibility of extending the mandate of the
United Nations Trust Fund for Chile,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/39 of 8 May 1981 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 35 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 120
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to respect
and promote human rights in accordance with the responsibilities they have undertaken under various international
instruments,
Noting with deep concern that acts of torture take place
in various countries,
Considering the plight of victims of torture wherever it
takes place,
119
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 138, document A/36/245.
120
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /981.
Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr. I), chap. XXVIIL sect. A.

36/152.

The right to education

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/ I 70 of 17 December 1979
and 35/191 of 15 December 1980 on the right to education,
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, adopted by its resolution 2200 A (XXI)
of 16 December I 966, which recognizes the right of everyone to education,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Convention against
Discrimination in Education, 122 adopted on 14 December
1960 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Reaffirming the paramount importance of the implementation of the right to education for the full development of
the human personality and for the enjoyment of other fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Recognizing that for the effective implementation of the
right to education the eradication of illiteracy has a particular
priority and urgency,
Convinced that the educational process could bring a substantial contribution to social progress, national development, mutual understanding and co-operation among peoples
and to strengthening peace and international security,

121
A/36/540.
"'United Nations, Trearv Series. vol. 429, No. 6193, p. 93.
