g.-ITED

F

NATIONS

ORTIETH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

13 JUNE

1985

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2588)
of the agenda

, , . . . . , . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . . , . .. . . , . . .

..,...*.....**.....*.....,..*.**.......*.......

1
1

Tl?e
(cz)

situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (W17213);

(0)

Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

(SA7222);
(c)

Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia
(W1.7242) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..L.~

S/PV.2588

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Officia1 Records of the Security Coukil. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Secwity Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operatiV< on that date.

2588th MEETING
Held
President: Mr. Errol MAHABIR

in New York

on Thursday,

(Trinidad and Tobago).

Present:
The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2588)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Lctter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (W17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent
Representative of Mozambique to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/17222);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (W17242)
The meeting was called to order at Il.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed ta the
President of the Security Council (W17213);
(b) Letter dated 23 May 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Mozambique to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(W17222);
(c)
Further report of the Secretary-General conceruing the
impiementation of Security Council resoiutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (W17242)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, I invite the representative of
Liberia to take a place at the Council table.
At thr invitation of the President, Mr. Kofa (Liberia) took
a place at the Council table.

13 June 1985, at 10 a.m.
2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, 1 invite the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other
members of the delegation to take a place at the Council
table.
At the invitation of thc President, Mr. Sinclair, Acting
President qf the United Nations Council for Nnmibia, and
the other members of the delegation took a place ut the
Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2583rd meeting, 1 invite Mr. Nujoma to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place ut the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
at the previous meetings on this item [2583rd to 2587th
meetings], 1 invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Ethiopia, the Gcrman Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Ghana, Guyana, Haiti, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Poland,
Seychelles, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, the United Republic of Tanzania, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia, Zambia and Zimbabwe to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zartf(Afghanistan),
Mr. Bessaieh (Alger&), Mr. Van-Runem (Angola), Mr.
Choudhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Tshering (Bhutan), Mr. LegwaiIa‘(Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Bruzil), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Mboumoua (Cameroon), Mr. Lewis (Canada),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprtts), Mr.
Cesar (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen),
Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German DemocraticRepublit), Mr. Lautenschlager (FederolRepublic of Germany), Mr.
Asamoah (Ghana), Mr. Karran (Guyana), Mr. Charles
(Haiti), Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Barnett
(Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Kiiu (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Vongsay (Loo People’s Democrdtic
Republid, Mr. Azzarouk (Libyan Arab Jamahiriyn), Mr. Zain
(Malaysia), Mr. Mufioz Ledo (Mexico), Mr. Nyamdoo (Mongolia), A4r. Alaoui (Morocco), Mr. Davane (Mozambique),

Mr. D’Escoto
Brockmann
(Nicaragua),
Mr. Gambari
Nigeria), Mr. Shah Nawaz (Pakistan), Mr. Cabrera Jovane
(Panama), Mr. Nowak (Polar@ Mrs. Gonthier (Seychelles),
Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Wijewardane (Sri
Lanka), Mr. Birido (Sudan), Mr. AI-Atassi (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Türkmen (Turkey), Mr. Otunnu (Uganda),
Mr. Al-Mosfir, (United Arab Emirat@, Mr. Mkapa (United
Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr.
Golob (Yugoslavia), Mr. Goma (Zambia) and Mr. Mudenge
(Zimbabwe) took the places reservedfor them at the side of
the Council chamber.

had been removed. In early 1984 Pretoria promised to the
Government of Angola that it would recall a11South Africari troops which were deployed in Angolan territory.
Regrettably, however, South Africa has at the same time
been taking measures which block a solution of the
problem.
11. First, South Africa has introduced the so-called linkage issue, while assuring the international community of its
co-operation in the implementation of resolution 435
(1978). Japan’s position is that the solution of the Namibian
question must not be obstructed by any extraneous issues
which are incompatible with resolution 435 (1978).

5. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to inform members of
the Council that 1 have received from the representatives of
Burkina Faso, Egypt and Madagascar a letter dated 12 June
[S/l7264] which reads as follows:

12. Secondly,it wasrecently revealedthat South African
military teamshad beenoperatingin northern Angola. This
revelation hasgreatly damagedthe credibility of the South
African Government with regard to its intention to implement the Lusaka Agreement.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that the Councilextend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Mfanafuthi J. Makatini, head of the International Department
and Chief Representative of the
African National Congress of South Africa, in connection with the Council’s current consideration of the item
entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’.”
If 1 hear no objection,
accedes to that request.

13. Thirdly, in defïance of international opinion, South
Africa onceagain decidedto set up what it claimsto be an
interim governmentin Namibia. But no country Will take at
face value the Government of South Africa’s assurances
that this is indeed “an interim mechanismfor the interna1
administration of the Territory pending agreement on an
in ternationally acceptable independence” [see S/I 7152,
appendix2].

1 shall take it that the Council

It was SO decided.

14. As my Government has informed the SecretaryGeneral [S/17207], Japan regards as nul1 and void any
measurestaken by the Government of South Africa which
are incompatiblewith resolution 435 (1978).

6. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Japan. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make bis statement.
7. Mr. KURODA
(Japan): Mr. President, 1 should like,
first of all, to express my appreciation for this opportunity
to participate in the discussion of the question of Namibia,
one of the most important long-standing matters ever to
corne before the United Nations. 1 should also like to extend
to you, Sir, my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency for the month of June, and to commend you on the admirabte mariner in which you have been
guiding the work.

15. The Secretary-General’s report issued last week
[Y172421 clearly reflects the frustration the international
community feelstowards what has happened in theseone
and half years. My Government wholeheartedly supports
the conclusionspresentedin that report,
16. In the light of this course of events, one cari only
conclude that the international community must for some
time to corne perseverein applying pressureupon $outh
Africa whereverand however possible.

8. The Security Council and General Assembly have
adopted a numbcr of resolutions on the question of Namibia. The front-line
States, the contact group, the
Secretary-General
and other parties have been making
scrious efforts to resolve the issue and many countries,
including my own, have applied strong pressure in a variety
of areas, on South Africa. Nevertheless, South Africa continues its illegal occupation of Namibia.

17. As is well known, Japandoesnot maintain diplomatie
relationswith South Africa. It doesnot engagein military or
nuclear co-operation of any kind with South Africa. It
prohibits direct investmentsin South Africa. It has called
upon Japaneseforeign-exchangebanks and their branches
abroad to refrain from extendingany loansto South Africa.
Moreover, Japan takesmeasuresto enforce restrictions on
cultural, educationaland sports contacts with South Africari nationals in accordancewith various United Nations
resolutions.My Government hasalso brought to the attention of all relevant organizations and corporate executives
in Japan the DecreeNo. 1for the Protection of the Natural
Resourcesof Namibia.’ Japan Will continue to enforce
those measuresuntil Namibia gains its independence. In
this connection we believe that pressureon South Africa
should be applicd in L\ concerted mariner with as broad
participation of the international community as possible.

9. The independence of Namibia should be achieved by
the Will of its inhabitants through a free election under the
supervision of the United Nations. TO this end it is imperative that the parties concerned faithfully implement Councif
resolution 435 (1978).
10. The international community was encouraged in the
summer of 1983 when, following a visit by the SecretaryGeneral, South Africa expressed the view that the technical
obstacles to the implementation of resolution 435 (1978)
2

and experience, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of a democratic and non-aligned country, with which my own feels
close affmity, is presiding over the Council’s deliberations.

18. Dialogue among a11parties concerned is still essential
to the peaceful solution of the questi0.i of Namibia. My
Government highly values the diplomatie efforts which
various corntries have been making and earnestly hopes
that they Will be intensilïed in order to overcome the present
impasse.

25. May 1 also take the liberty, Mr. President, although
Malaysia is not a member of the Council, to express my
warm admiration at the devoted and exceptionally professional and effective manner in which your immediate predecesser, the representative of Thailand, conducted theaffairs
of the Council in the month of May.

19. Those who are suffering most from this prolonged
problem are, of course, the Namibian people under the
occupation of South Africa, the Namibian refugees who
have been forced out of their native land and the neighbouring countries which are accepting those refugees. Japan has
long been extending humanitarian assistance to the Namibian people through funds and programmes administered by the United Nations. Japan Will do SOas long as the
need continues. Moreover, when the United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG) cornes into being Japan
will extend various forms of co-operation, and after Namibian independence is achieved Japan Will spare no effort
in extending bilateral economic and technical co-operation
throughout the nation-building period.

26. It is a tragic commentary on the United Nations that
the question of Namibia has been before it for as long as the
Organization itself has existed. The factsare too well known
to require repetition in the Council and my remarks, therefore, Will focus on two principal questions; first, does the
Council believe that South Africa is serious about implementing resolution 435 (1978), which it adopted nearly eight
years ago; secondly, if it does not, what does the Council
propose to do about it; what does it take for the Council to
act?

20. Finally, 1 should like to emphasize that, although the
end of what has already been a long quest for Namibian
independence is regrettably not yet in sight, if the international community continues to work in a spirit of unanimity
and co-operation we shall surely reach our common goal. In
this context Japan hopes that the current session of the
Council Will be conducted in a constructive manner and
that it Will result in a step forward in solving this tragic
question of Namibia.

27. 1 may add two related questions which the Council
should also ponder: how much longer does the Council
expect the people of Namibia to wait for their freedom?
What does the Council expect the Namibian people, led by
the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
which the United Nations itself recognizes as its sole legitimate representative, to do in the meantime?
28. 1 turn then to the first of my two principal questions: is
South Africa serious or simply playing games with resolution 435 (1978), a resolution, it Will be recalled, which
everyone in the Council has affirmed is the only basis for a
peaceful settlement? The record of South Africa, 1 suggest,
gives an entirely clear answer. It is a record of interna1
repression and regional destabilization with the objective of
promoting an interna1 political settlement to suit its own
purposes, namely, continued political control of Namibia,
continued exploitation of its rich resources, and continued
dominante in southern Africa by force of arms in ordcr to
ensure the preservation of its apartheid policies. In this
exercise, it has exploited the bait of a stra,tegic objectivewhich is not its own but which has enabled it to align itself to
its most steadfast ally and to sabotage the settlement plan
adopted in resolution 435 (1978).

21. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Malaysia. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
22. Mr. ZAIN (Malaysia): 1should like first of a11to thank
you, Mr. President, and the other members of the Council
for the courtesy accorded to my delegation in agreeing to
our request to participate in these critical meetings on the
question of Namibia.
23. My country is deeply committed to the struggle for
freedom in Namibia. It is a morally just cause. A free
Namibia is also essential for long-term peace and stability in
southern Africa. In addition, Malaysia sees in recent years a
further dimension to the question of Namibian independence. We see it as a symbol of the efforts of the international community to ensure the primacy of law over naked
force and of diplomacy over national assertiveness in a
world in which malaise, cynicism;lawlessness
and assaults
on the fragile structure of internationalism are an ominously rising tide.

29. Do 1 need to elaborate? Even those who feel an affïnity
with the South African régime for economic, strategic or
emotional reasons must know that its policy in Namibia is
one of systematlc terror, harassment, intimidation, arbitrary arrest and detention and, yes, torture-which
have a11
been amply documented by impartial observers, including
Church organizations. And cari anfone be unaware that
South Africa, an industrial Power, with powerful friends,
has openly embarked on a campaign of destabilization,
including invasion and occupation of neighbouring States,
commando raids and assassinations, military and logistical
support for sabotage and terrorism by dissident groups,
direct sabotage attacks and economic pressures?

24. For those reasons, Malaysia was honoured when it
was designated by the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of
the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, held
at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April1985, to attend the current
meetings of the Council. Unfortunately, because ofpressing
and unavoidable business, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of my country is unable to be present here himself, a fact
which he regrets. As a result, 1 now have the distinct privilege of participating in the debate. It gives me particular
Pleasure to do SO when you, Sir, a diplomat of distinction

30. Moreover, the situation in Namibia is unique in several ways. First, with the sole exception of South Africa
3

peoplc of Angola-I repeat Angola-t0 exercise their right
to self-determination. 1s it not clear what the next obstacle
would be?

itself, every Member State, in conformity with the position
taken by the International Court of Justice, regards South
Africa’s occupation of Namibia as illegal. 1 might add,
parenthetically, that if the finding of the Court had becn
otherwise, how fervently would South Africa and its friends
have proclaimed their adherence to the rule of law.
Secondly, despite a!1 the complexities of the situation, often
artificially manufactured, there exists a carefuily crafted
settlement plan which was adopted by resolution 435
(1978). It may also be well to remind ourselves at this
stage-or
rather to remind the apologists for South
Africa-that
the South African régime is not democratic,
that the South African régime is a dictatorship as far as the
22 million black South Africans, some 85 per cent of its
population, are concerned. It is also brutal. It is also racist
and, contrary to its claim, it is the very negation of civilized
Western values.

33. It must be obvious, therefore, that this so-called linkage is a subterfuge which is only a means to achieve South
Africa’s own objective, namely, an interna! settlement of the
question of Namibia on its own terms. The Council-every
member of the Council-must
therefore make clear what ils
own objective is. 1s it the exercise by the people of Namibia
of their right to self-determination? 1s it the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola? 1s it the continued protection
of the apartheid régime in South Africa? 1s it the emergence
of a more ideologically acceptable régime in Namibia and,
perhaps, even in Angola?
34. 1 am aware that the world is a very complicated place
and that here in this chamber sit some very sophisticated
diplomats. We all understand the realities of power, of
national inlerest and of strategic objectives. We al! understand that, often, motives are not undiluted and objectives
not unmixed. But the Council must not let sophistication
become mere sophistry. If the United Nations stands for
anything at all, it must stand for certain Princip!es. The
question which ail must answer, therefore, is this: Are the
rights of the Namibian people, who have suffered SOmuch
for SOlong, merely secondary to some other strategic objective? If SO, what value, then, should we place on avowals
about freedom, self-determination, equality and human
rights?

31. IF 1 appear to digress, it is because 1 want to demonstrate that whatever the law, whatever the opportunity for a
settlement, it is in the very nature of the South African
régime to oppose any settlement which does not preserve its
own privileged position in southern Africa. Hence it has
raised all manner of obstructions to the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978); hence it has resorted to al! manner of
provocations, of which the so-called interim government is
only the latest example, in the hope that the other parties to
the settlement plan would themselves abandon it. In the
years since 1978, many of these obstructions have been
removed by adroit diplomacy on the part of the SecretaryGeneral and some members of the Council, and also-let it
be emphasized-by
the patience and good wi!! shown by
SWAPO and the other front-line States, which have refused
to allow themselves to be provoked. But fïnally, of course,
South Africa has raised the so-called linkage issue, a truly
astounding demand. Even when that appears to be chipped
away, South Africa becomes more rigid, more demanding
and more arrogant.

35. The current meetings are therefore crucial in determining where the Council-ever member of it-stands
on this
fundamenta! issue of principle. And, in the face of South
Africa’s deliberate obstruction, its record of evasion, provocation and subterfuge, what wi!! the Council do‘? Already,
the Council has adopted some 21 resolutions on Namibia.
Among other things, the Council has declared that the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia is illegal and
that South Africa must witlldraw immediately its administration from t!?e Territory [~~lufion 264 (1969)]: that was
in 1969. It has condemned the decision ofthe South African
Government to hold elections in Namibia in December
1978 as contravening ils earlier resolutions: that was in
1978. It has reiterated its demand that South Africa should
co-operate with the Security Counci! and the SecretaryGeneral in the implementation of resolutions 385 (1976),
431 (1978) and 435 (1978) and has even warned South
Africa that “its failure to do SOwould campe! the Security
Council to meet forthwith to initiate appropriate actions
under the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter
VII thereof, SOas to ensure South Africa’s compliance with
the aforementioned rcsolutions” [redution 439 (1978)].
That, again, was in 1978. The Counci! has condemned
South Africa for its obstruction of the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) and has rejected South Africa’s insistence on linking the independence of Namibia to irrelevant
and extraneous issues [resohion 539 (1983)]: that was in
1983. And as recently as on 3 May, the President of the
Council issued a statement on behalf of the Council declaring that

32. 1 should like, if 1 may, to spend a little time on this
infamous linkage issue. In a11the years since this issue was
raised-and raised, it bears repeating, we!! after the settlement plan was negotiated and agreed upon-there
has
never been anyjustification, or even anyserious attempt at a
justification, for raising the issue at a!!. For clearly there is
none. It is simply a naked exercise in raw power. It is not
even pretended that the Cuban troops pose a threat to
South Africa. TO the contrary, it is South Africa which has
invaded Angola, Here indeed is the thug which says that its
victim should not have the means to protect itself, Here is
South Africa, a country which a!! acknowledge is in illegal
occupation of Namibia, which al! know has invaded
Angola and which, as recently as 21 May, has conducted a
mission of economic sabotage deep inside Angola. Here is
that country attempting to dictate the terms ofasettlement.
The truly extraordinary thing is that some are willing to
entertain-no,
are encouraging and abetting-this
outrageous demand. And, if linkage is to be justifïed, what next?
Perhaps it wi!! be alleged that Angola is not sufficiently
pluralistic? Or perhaps that Angola is maintaining unacceptably close relations with one country or another? In bis
statement to the Council on 10 June the representative of
the South African régime talked openly of the need for the

“Members of the Council condemn and reject any
unilateral action by South Africa leading towards an
4

interna1 settlement outside resolution 435 (1978) as unacccptable, and declare the cstablishment of the so-called
interim government in Namibia to be nul1 and void” [see
Y17151-J
36. 1 have taken the time of?he Council to review the
position it has taken over some 16 years in order to ask:
What now? What more cari the Council say? Words, after
all, must mean something, and the Council, if 1 may say SO,
has mn out of words. If the Council is merely to reaffirm
and reiterate and re-warn, and nothing more, then, with all
the respect 1 have for the Council, the present debate is little
more than an exercise in futility. Having stated its position
of principle repeatedly, having witnessed the contemptuous
and arrogant response of South Africa repeatedly, 1 ask:
What does it take for the Council to act?
37. Developments over the last seven years have served to
demonstrate beyond any equivocation that South Africa
Will not live up to the terms of resolution 435 (1978) unless
there are more effective means of pressure. It must also be
recalled that the international settlement contained in that
resolution was not the product of South African good Will
because of friendly and gentle persuasion, but rather of a
combination of strong diplomatie pressureand the relentless struggle of the brave freedom fighters of Namibia,
under the leadershipof SWAPO. Good intentions, pious
hopes,even strong words of condemnation Will not move
South Afi-ica. Will the Council at last senda signalthat it
meanswhat it says?Will the Council at last take decisive
action, including sanctionsunder Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations?
38. If it doesnot, what doesthe Council expect SWAPO
and the people of Namibia to do? 1 hope that membersof
the Council Will not resort to the simpleexpedientof deploring violence, treating victim and aggressoralike, of pious
referencesto the spirit of the Charter, which seeksa peaceful
settlementof disputes.We a11want peace,but it ill becomes
us, sitting here in the comfort of this elegantchamber, to
speakto SWAPO and the Namibian pcopleabout a peaceful settlement after all the years of suffering and hardship
they have endured, after a11the good will and patience they
have shown, unlesswe cari show that a peacefulsolution is
indeed possibleand that we are prepared to take decisive
action to make it possible.
39. Member States reserveto themselvesthe right ofselfdefence-an inherent right, asit iscalled-and, indeed,they
exercisethat right with or without thesanction oithe Council. The struggle of the Namibian people, led by SWAPO,
for independenceand self-determination is recognized as
legitimate by the United Nations itself. Why, then, should
SWAPO be denied the right to conduct its struggle by ull
meanspossible,unlessthe Council cari show that it basthe
Will and the meansto carry out the plan for a peaceful
settlementembodied in resolution 435 (1978)?The people
of Namibia are denied their most fundamental right to
freedom and independence;they are terrorized, brutalized
and marginalized, tortured and killed. What doesthe Council expect them to do unlessit cari give them real hope?11
was a United States President who said that those who
make peacefulchangeimpossiblemake violent changeinev-

itable. It is precisely those who make peaceful change
impossible in southern Africa who must be held
responsible.
40. My dekgation hasapproachedthis debatein aserious
spirit, even, 1 may say, in a hopeful spirit that the Council
Will at last go beyond merewords of affirmation and condemnation.The Council, 1 submit,hasgone asfar asit cari
on that road. The questionof Namibia, in fact, providesthe
Council with an opportunity to correct an injusticeto the
Namibian people,to contribute to lastingpeacein southern
Africa, and to reversethe ominoustrend away from multilateralismwhich we are at presentwitnessing.The causeis
just. The situation is urgent. A practical settlementplan
exists.Successon the part of the Security Council Will have
global dimensions.My delegationprays that, by deciding
now to take decisiveaction, the CouncilWill embarkon that
road.
41. Mr. HOGUE (Australia): It iswith particular pleasure
that Australia welcomesa fellow Commonwealthmember
to the presidency.You represent,Sir, a peoplewith whom
we sharea common devotion to freedom,democracyand
cricket.
42. 1 should also like to expressour appreciation of the
fine job done last month by our friend and neighbour,
Thailand, both by its Ministcr for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Siddhi Savetsila,and its reprcscntative.Mr. Birabhongse
Rasemsri.
43. The Autralian delegationbelievesthat it isboth timely
and appropriate that the Councilshouldmeetat tbis time to
discussthe situation in Namibia. Nineteen months have
elapsedsincethe Security Council consideredthe failure to
implement resolution 435 (1978) and adopted resolution
539(1983).That fact alonewould havewarranteda meeting
to considerfurther the situation in Namibia.
44. NO~, South Africa’s decision to install an interim
government in Namibia gives the matter added urgency.
This decision,which was adopted in the face of universai
condemnationhy the international communitv, represents
a direct challengeto the United Nations and provides a
sombrebackdrop to our meetings.
45. Australia remainsfully committedto the implementation of the United Nations plan, as adopted in resolution
435 (1978).We remain convinced that the plan represents
the only effective meansof bringing Namibia peacefully to
independence.When it wasadopted the plan was accepted
by aIl parties to the dispute, includingSouth Africa; yet it
remainsunimplemented.The blamefor this liessquarely at
the feet of the South African Government, which has
repeatedlyfound excusesto prevaricateand to retreat from
its commitments.
46. South Africa’s record to date hasnot beensuch asto
inspire confidencein its bona fides.On the onehand, it has
signalled willingnessto negotiate; on the other, it has
pursued policies of regional destabilization, which have
causedconsiderablesuffering and hardshipto the popula-

54. The Council and the international community at large
are agreed on their commitment to Security Counci] rcsolutien 435 (1978); they condemn unilatcral action by South
Africa leading towards an interna1 settlement outside resolution 435 (1978); and they urge South Africa to live up to its
professions
of adherence to the United Nations plan and to
take the necessary steps for its implementation at the earliest possible time.

tions of the front-line States. It moved close to acceptance of
the final arrangements for the putting into placeoftheplan,
only then to link Namibian independence to the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from Angola. It gave the impression of
flexibility in agreeing to participate in the Lusaka negotiations in 1984, yet once again stymied progress because of
linkage. It entered into an agreement with Angola for the
withdrawal of South African troops from Angola, but now,
as out’ined by the representative of South Africa in his
statement on 10 June r2583rdmeeti@j, it arrogates to itself
the right to dispatch troops into neighbouring States.

55. 1 think we would also all agree that, if South Africa
continues to obstruct the implementation of resolution 435
(1978), the Council should meet again to consider the adoption of appropriate measures under the Charter of the
United Nations.

47. The Australian Government’s position on all this is
quite clear. It rejects linkage as a precondition for the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and deplores
South Africa’s recent raid into northern Angola.

56. Given all the things which unite the whole international community, we must ensure that the South African
Government is given no reason to mistake differences of
emphasis for disagreements about South Africa’s policies
and actions. We must all send a clear, strong, unified and
unambiguous message to the South African Government
that the international community demands the early independence of Namibia in accordance with resolution 435
(1978).

48. In 1978, following the adoption of resolution 435
(1978), South Africa established a so<alled multi-party
conference administration in Namibia. That body was the
subject of universal condemnation internationally and of
rejection by the Namibian people. Having been rebuffed
once, South Africa has clearly not learned its lesson, but is
now proceeding to establish another empty shell.

57. Mr. SAFRONCHUK
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (Nlterprerationfiorn Russia,z): Allow me fïrst, Sir,
to welcome you to the presidency. The Council has in you
an expericnced leader and a highly qualified diplomat.

49. Australia’s view on this is also quite clear, and was put
by the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr.
Hayden, on 22 April 1985, when he categorically rejected
any attempt to establish an interna1 administration. Mr.
Hayden reiterated the Australian Government’s belief that
any unilateral moves to transfer power in Namibia that
were not in accordance with resolution 435 (1978) would be
nul1 and void. He expressed the Government’s serious concern at the South African Government’s determination to
proceed with the establishment of an interim government.

58. 1 should also like to take this opportunity to express
gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand for their able guidance of the Council’s work last month.
59. The resumed discussion in the Council of the question
of the speedy elimination of colonialism and racism in
Namibia is taking place at a time when tke United Nations is
commemorating events of great moment: the fortieth anniversary of the victory over Hitlerite fascism at the end of the
Second World War-to the attainment of which the Soviet
Union made a decisive contribution-the
fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the twentyfïfth anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countrics and Peoples and the Day of Liberation of Africa.

50. My delegation welcomed the fact that the Council,
through its President, was able on 3 May 1985 [S/17151] to
express its condemnation and rejection of unilateral action
by South Africa leading towards an interna] settlement
outside resolution 435 (1978) and to declare that the socalled interim government in Namibia was nu]1 and void.
51. We should also like to pay tribute to the SecretaryGeneral for his intercession with the South African Government in an attempt to dissuade South Africa from
proceeding with any actions which could contravene resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978).
52. 1 should also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report [S/I72421 and for his dedicated commitment to
the implementation of the United Nations plan.

60. Almost two decades ago the United Nations terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia [Gene&
Assembly resolution 2145 (XX4 of 27 Ocrober 1966J and
called for the unconditional granting of independence to the
people of that country. However, the problem of Namibia is
still before the United Nations as the most acute problem in
the elimination of colonialism in Africa.

53. My delegation has listened with considerable interest
to the statements made thus far in the debate. As a member
of the United Nations Counci] for Namibia, we also participated in the Extraordinary Plenary Meetings held at Vienna
from 3 June to 7 June. We are fully conscious of the depth
of feeling within the international community over South
Africa’s policies. There may be differences ofapproach, but
there is basic agreement on fundamentals.

61. It is no mere chance that the Extraordinary Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi
from 19 to 21 April 1985, called for an urgent meetingofthe
Security Council to resume its consideration of the question
of Namibia and to give effect to its own resolutions in this
regard, in particular its resolution 435,(1978). The same
request was made by the Group of African States.
6

62. High-ranking representatives of many non-aligned
countries have corne to participate in the work of the Council, Speaking in the Council, the President of SWAPO, Mr.
Sam Nujoma, and ministers for foreign affairs of African
States have very graphically spoken of the resolve of the
people of Namibia and other peoples of Africa to attain
complete liberation and genuine independence for Namibia. There cari be no doubt that that goal Will beattained,
whatever obstacles are placed in the way by the colonialists
of Pretoria and those that support them.
63. Almost seven years have passed since the Council
adopted resolution 435 (1978), setting forth a plan for the
peaceful transition of Namibia to independence.
64. The report submitted to the Security Council by the
Secretary-General quite rightly states that South Africa’s
position continues to make it impossible to start implementing the United Nations plan [S/I7242, para. 4.?J.Furthermore, as a result of the recent decision by South Africa to
establish a so-called interim government in Namibia, the
existing diffîculties have been compounded further and
acquired a new character.
65. It would be naive to assume that South Africa has
been able alone to sabotage, for many dccades now, the
process of decolonization in Namibia and to resist the Will
and the demands of the entire international community and
conduct itself SO aggressively, cynically and defïantly
against the African countries, the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. Pretoria could not continue that
policy a single day if it did not rely on support from its
Western protectors, primarily the United States.
66. The recent bandit-like raid by the South Africans
against Angola in the Cabinda regioti again very graphically highlighted the aggressive, adventuristic nature of the
actions of the Pretoria régime against its African
neighbours.
67. It is precisely the United States-and South Africa
along with it-that in violation of the clear decisions of the
Council continues to persist in establishing linkage between
Namibia independence and the question of the withdrawal
of the Cuban internationalirts from Angola. Almost a11
speakers in the Council have indicated the complete inconsistency, untenability and falsity of this linkage.
68. But, as is clear from the statement b; the Secretary of
State of the United States of 16 Apiil of this year, the United
States Administration continues to predicate the granting
of independence to Namibia on the withdrawal of Cuban
internationalists from Angola. That is, it is still blocking
implementation of United Nations decisions on the granting of independence to Namibia. This obstructionist position of the United States was reaffirmed yesterday in the
statement of the United States representative in the Council.
69. This notorious linkage is simply a plot by the Pretoria
racists and tbe United States aimed at not merely creating
additional obstructions to implementation, of resolution
435 (1978) on Namibia but also dçaling a bl.ow to Angola to
hamper its sovereign rights, including the right to self-

defence embodied in the Charter of the United Nations. The
ultimate goal of this sinister plot by the colonialists and
racists and of this unsavoury policy is to eliminate the
independence of Angola and, together with South Africa, to
impose neo-colonialist decisions on Namibia and the whole
of southern Africa.
70. In an attempt to concoct from puppet parties a socalled interim government, Pretoria is trying to sabotage
United Nations decisions and to hold up for decades the
granting of independence to Namibia to prevent the transition of power in that country to SWAPO, which is recognized by the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity as the sole, authentic representative of the
Namibian people.
71. Those are the real facts of the policies of South Africa
and the United States in Namibia and in southern Africa.
The hypocritical assurances of Washington regarding its
so-called disagreement with Pretoria? plans to create an
interim government is quite simply a smoke-screen. In fact
the United States and its Western allies continue to hamper
the adoption by the Council of comprehensive, binding
sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter and continue to expand their ties with the racist
régime of that country in very different spheres-political,
economic, lïnancial and military. Of particuiar danger is the
extension of assistance to the South African racists by certain NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Orgunization] countries
and Israel in creating and developingsouth Africa’s nuclear
capability.
72. The international community is quite rightly calling
on the Western countries to halt their policy ofplacating the
racist South African régime. It is the duty of the United
Nations to bend every effort to put an end to the latest
manoeuvres by the United States and racist South Africa to
further hamper Namibia’s attainment of genuine independence. The entire process of the Namibian settlement
should be under the permanent and effective control of the
Council.
73. The position of the Soviet Union on the question of
Namibia is one of principle, and is consistent. We have
stated it many times. The Soviet Union decisively condemns
the racist Pretoria régime’s new actions to sabotage the
Namibian settlement and its measures to implant a puppet
régime in Namibia to subvert the basis for a political settlement established in the appropriate United Nations decisions, primarily those of the Security Council.
74. The message from the Central Committee ofthe Communist Party of the Soviet Union, the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the Council ofMinisters of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to the peoples, parliaments and Governments of
a11countries on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of
the end of the Second World War states: “Together with all
peoples, the Soviet people decisively calls for the granting of
independence to Namibia and the elimination of racism
from South Africa.”
7.5. The Soviet Union expresses solidarity with the decisions adopted on the question of Namibia at the Extraodi-

nary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in April. It also
supports thc decisions taken at the Extraordinary Plenary
Meetings of the United Nations Council for Namibia held at
Vienna in June and at the extraordinary session of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, held at
Tunis in May.

mentswith it. Soviet organizations and authorities comply
strictly with the resolutionsof thc Security Council in the
matter of the arms embargo against South Africa.

76. Our delegation fully shares the view of previous speakers and African and other non-aligned countries concerning
the actions of the racist Pretoria régime against Namibia
and southern Africa as a whole in imposing colonial slavery
by means of ongoing massive repression against the longsuffering Namibian people. South Africa’s constant acts of
aggression against independent African States create a
serious threat to international peace and security.

8.1. We also feel solidarity with the front-line Statesthat
are opposingthe neo-colonialistdesignsof the racistsand
imperialists.We support the appeal that the international
community give support and assistanceto the front-line
States in their defenceof their sovereignty and territorial
integrity in the face of the constant acts of aggression,
oppressionand threat on the part of South Africa, whereby
it is trying to intimidate the peoplesof thosecountriesand
force them to cesseassistingthe national liberation movement in southern Africa.

82. My country hasgiven and Will continue to give every
support to the just strugglethe people of Namibia, under
the leadership of its sole, legitimate representative,
SWAPO, is waging by every meansat its disposa!for its
liberation.

77. We wish to emphasize however the allegation that the
problem of Namibia is only an example of East-Wcst confrontation and is simply a propaganda ploy designed to
caver up a fact clear to everyone: that this is an acute
conflict betwecn colonialism and the national liberation
movement of southern Africa, between the sinister alliance
of the Pretoria racists, the United States and other Western
countries on the one hand and the people of Namibia and
independent countries of Africa on the other.

84. TO quote a recent statementby the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union, Mr. Gorbachev:
“The Soviet Union has alwayssupported the struggle
of peoples for liberation from colonial oppression.
Today once again our sympathiesare with the countries
of Asia, Africa and Latin America that are seekingto
strengther their independenceand social regeneration.
They are our friends and partners in the struggle for
stablepeaceand for just relations among peoples.”

78. We fully support the appeal of the non-aligned countries that the Council adopt immediate effective measures
against the racist régime of South Africa as provided under
the Charter, including the imposition of sanctions under
Chapter VII, to ensure that Pretoria implements the Council’s resolutions regarding the immediate granting of
genuine independence to Namibia.

85. Mr. BIERRING (Denmark): It is indeeda tribute to
the Council and a recognition of the importance of the

questionbefore us that you yourself, Sir, have chosento
presideover our deliberationson Namibia. We are confïdent that this Will ensure the successfuloutcome of the
debate.

79. The Soviet Union supports the early attainment by thc
Namibian people of its inalienable right to genuine selfdetermination and independence on the basis of maintaining the unity and territorial integrity of Namibia, including
Walvis Bay ancl the offshore islands, the immediate and
complete withdrawal
from Namibia of South African
troops and administration and the transfer ofall powers to
the people of Namibia as represented by SWAPO, recognized as the sole, authcntic representative of the Namibian
people.

86. 1would avail myselfof this opportunity alsoto express
our admiration for the extremely efficient and skilful way in
which last month the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
representativeof Thailand handled the Council’s affairs.
87. We have listenedwith great attention to the present
debateon Namibia. We fully understandand sharethe deep
frustrations which have permeatedthe interventions.

80. The Soviet Union decisively condemns the continuing
plundering of the natural resources of Namibia by the
transnational corporations of Western States and views that
illegal exploitation of Namibia’s resources as a gross violation of the Charter and the decisions of the relevant United
Nations bodies.
81.

88. Few issueshave been on the agenda of the United
Nations as long as the question of Namibia. In 1969the
Security Council recognizedthht the General Assemblyhad
terminated South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and
assumeddirect responsibility over the Territory until its
independence[resolutian 264 (1969)]. Considerableefforts
have sincebeenmadeto securethe exerciseby the Namibian
people of their inalienableright to self-determination and
independence.

We support the proposais of the African countries

that the Security Council should adopt further sanctions

against South Africa, including an embargoon the delivery
of petroleum and petroleumproductsto the racistrégimeof
South Africa, Complying with the recommendationsof the
General Assemblyand the decisionsof the Security Counci!, the Soviet Union hasno relationswith the racist régime
of South Africa, nor does it have any contractual agree-

89. The adoption by the Council of resolution 435 (1978)
added new impetusto the endeavoursto reach an internationally acceptablesolution. The Secretary-General,whose
8

tireless efforts we have always held in high esteem, the
front-line States and the contact group of the Western five
made invaluable contributions
during the subsequent
negotiations.

tions on the question of Cuban troop withdrawal
Angola.

from

97. Finally, while being engaged in negotiations aimed at
creating conditions for the implementation of the United
Nations plan for Namibia, the South African Government
recently consented to further steps to prepare an interna1
settlement in the Territory.

90. At an early stage SWAPO-whose
President we are
glad to see in our midst- committed itseff to Namibian
independence through free and fair elections under the
supervision and control of the United Nations in conformity with resolution 435 (1978). South Africa’s acceptance
came late but eventually emerged. Yet South Africa continues its illegal occupation of Namibia in flagrant defiance
of the resolutions of the Council.

98. Thus the international community has once more
been witnessing what appears to be a consistent pattern of
action by the South African Government which cannot but
raise the most serious and rapidly increasing doubt about its
real intentions.

91. The process of consultations and negotiations aimed
at Namibiab independence in an internationally acceptable
way has been long and arduous. Repeatedly the international community has been led to believe that the objective
was just around the corner. However, time and again optimism quickly faded and gave way to renewed scepticism.

99. Actually it became clear from the statement made by
the South African representative in this debate [2583rd
meetmg] that, while professing adherence to resolution 435
(1978), and allegedly out of concern for the Namibian
people, South Africa continues to prepare for what it
believes could be another form of internationally acceptable
settlement in case Cuban troop withdrawal
is not
forthcoming.

92. A close look at the record leaves little doubt that, each
and every time, the responsibility could be placed with
South Africa. Whenever momentum seemed to be gaining,
South Africa raised new issues and objections. Thus, South
Africa has consistently frustrated the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978). the Word “deception” cornes ail too
easily to mind in this connection.

100. Over the years Denmark has unequivocally
expressedthe conviction that the peopleof Namibia must,
without delay, be given the opportunity to decideupon their
own future through freeandfair elec:ionsunclerthe supervision and control of the United Nations in conformity with
resolution435(1978).Denmark hasoffered to participate in
UNTAG and supportsthe efforts to prepareNamibiansfor
independenceby contributing to, amongothers,the United
Nations Fund for Namibia.

93. In his report of 29 August 1983 [S/I59431 to the
Council, the Secretary-General concluded that al! outstanding issues were virtually resolved and that we had never
before been SO close to finality on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978). However, the report also
confirmed unequivocally that South Africa had once more
raised new obstacles, this time linking final acceptance of
the implementation of the United Nations plan to the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola.

101. We have maintainedthat the settlementof extraneous issuescannot bea preconditionfor the implementation
of the United Nations plan for the independenceof Namibia, and Denmark wi!! never acceptattemptsto circumvent the plan by any kind of interna1settlementin Namibia.
The state’mentby the Presidenton behalf of the Council on
3 May this year [S/I71511 bearswitnessto the fact that this
position is shared by al! Council members, without
exception.

94. In December 1983 South Africa undertook to begin
disengagement of its forces in Angola on 31 January 1984.
The completion of the withdrawal was not announced until
April this year, but at least the announcement raised hopes
that South Africa had finally decided to stop its military
destabilization of Angola. Once more the optimism proved
unfounded.

102. ,Not least in the light of recentdevelopmentsit is in
our view of paramount importancethat the Council once
more reaffirms its direct responsibilityfor Namibia and its
obligation to securethe implementationof resolution 435
(1978).

95. A month later South African soldiers were apprehended in the northern part of Angola. A prisoner-captain
in South Africa’s Special Forces-at a press conference held
at Luanda on 28 May opénly admitted that he had participated in a commando raid directed against American oil
installations in Cabinda.

103. We should also like the Council to warn the South
African Government againstharbouringany illusionsasto
the possibilityof finding any other solutionto the Namibian
question which Will command international support than
the one contained in rcsolution 435 (1978).The Council
must condemnand reject an interim administrationin Namibia and declareits establishmentto be nul1and void.

96. The South African Government made no attempt to
excuse this renewed, blatant and arrogant violation of
Angola’s stivereignty and territorial integrity, an operation
which by no stretch of the imagination could be viewed in
the context of bona fïde efforts towards Namibian independence. On top, of that, a few days later the Minister for
Foreign Affairs tif South Africa suddenly expressed doubt
about the possibility of reaching agreement in the’negotia-

104. Furthermore, the Counci! should senda clear and
unanimoussignalto South Afkica that it intendsto consider
adoption of appropriate measures
underthe Charter of thc
United Nations if South Africa continuesto obstruct the
implementationof resolution435 (1978).
9

105. TO avoid any misinterpretation on the part of South
Africa as to the resolve of the international community to
see this longstaliding issue brought to its fruitful conclusion
it is important that the Council act in unanimity. This takes
not only flexibility but also courage and foresight on the
part of its members. The credibility and prestige of the
Council are at stake; what is more, the patience of the
Namibian people as well as the worldcommunity
as a whole
is running out.

inconsistent with the proposa1 which the five Western
Governments submitted to the Council on 10 April 1978
[S/12636]. SO, seven years later, we are faced yet again with
measures which are unacceptable to the international community, which ,hallenge thc: TJnited Nations plan, and
,which cannot conceivably succeed.
112. But that is only the half of it. While those steps are
being taken in Namibia, we receive word that South Africa
is withdrawing its forces from Angola, a step which we and
this Council have long called for, a step we would warmly
welcome, as we would welcome a total South African disengagement from Angola. However, the appearance was
masked in duplicity. We now have sad and vivid evidence
that South Africa still seeks what it Will never achieve,
namely, the reshaping of the region unilaterally, through
the ube of force and without regard for the sovereignty and
independence of neighbouring States.

106. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Canada, whom 1 invite to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement,
107. Mr. LEWIS (Canada): Mr. President, let me begin as
a11 others have begun by acknowledging the adroit and
skilful way in which you handled the affairs of the Security
Council and acknowledge as well as a11others have done the
similar role of your predecessor last month.

113. South Africa pleads as an excuse the need for security. How cari anyone give credence to that? The world
knows that the challenge to the South African State does
not stem from the situation outside its borders. The seeds of
change are sown within.

108. 1 should like to thank you and the Council for the
opportunity to participate in your deliberations today. Asa
member of the contact group, Canada has been intimately
involved in the plans for Namibia’s independence. We
therefore wish profoundly that the United Nations efforts to
end the conflict and to replace the illegal régime should soon
succeed. On that central point, there is no room for doubt:
our commitment to achieving independence for Namibia
under United Nations auspices is sacrosanct.

114. These are a11depressing developments because they
offer scant reason to believe that South Africa is close to
accepting its neighbours as they are and living in peace with
them. Worse, the developments offer scant reason to believe
that South Africa is ready to co-operate with us in bringing
Namibia to independence. through free and fair elections
under United Nations supervision.

109. Recent events in Namibia and Angola, however, give
cause for disillusion verging on despair. We have been
discussing the same plan for Namibian independence for
the better part of a decade. That is frustrating for a11of
us-for a11members of the Council-but any level of frustration which we may endure is as nothing when compared
to the plight of the Namibian people and the continued
denial of justice which they experience. Such denial is a11the
more reprehensible when it defïes both international law
and the international community. Yet, as if such contemptuous intransigence were not enough, we are now informed
that there is to be another interim government in Namibia.
Other than wilful provocation, what purpose does that
serve?

115. We are virtually back to square one. That is where we
started this debate seven years ago. This continuing impasse
for almost a decade is a great tragedy. A peaceful and
internationally acceptable settlement in Namibia would be
a huge step for Namibians. It would, on the othcr hand,
have no catastrophic effects on South Africa-quite
the
contrary. South African lives would no longer be lost for no
good reason in Namibia and Angola, and the squandered
expenses of that protracted and illegitimate conflict would
be saved. The sun would still rise and fa11on the Orange
River. There might cven be a smattering of peace in the
region.
116. In the circumstances it is difficult to see why there has
been SOmuch hesitation and delay. Even now, were South
Africa to comply, the decision would be welcomed throughout the world.

110. Canada, as others, has already stated its rejection of
the so-called interim government which is, we understand,
to be inaugurated in the coming days. On 19 April last, Mr.
Joe Clark, Secretary of State for External Affairs, made our
position clear:

117. The Sccretary-General in his report [S/I7242]-and
particularly in paragraph 31-recounts
steps that other
Governments have taken to meet South Africa’s professed
concerns. Yet South Africa continues to lay down a
condition-the
condition of so-called linkage-which
has
no warrant in international law, which is incompatible with
resolution 435 (1978) and which has been rejected by the
Council. Perhaps worst of ail, that condition, by any objective analysis, is totally unnecessary, is a deliberate obstacle
and is the cause of grievous delay.

“We regard unilateral measures taken by the South Africari Government in relation to the cstablishment of constitutional bodies and the transfer of power in Namibia
to be nul1 and void. Arrangements that may be established as a result of such measures cannot have any status
whatsoever under the United Nations settlement plan,”
111. As the Secretary-General notes in his report, Canada
strongly supported the position he took on this matter
[S/I7242, paru. 371. the evasive and dissembling response
given by thc Government of South Africa was entirely

118. We know from the Secretary-General’s report that
talks have been held and assurances given which go beyond
10

anything required by international law. TO hold Namibia
hostage to what this Council has previously described as
“irrelevant and extraneous issues” is palpably outrageous.
119. On 26 October 1983, the representative of Canada
was equaily unequivocal. He said before the Council:
“The Secretary-General has noted that South Africa
continues to make the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola a condition for its withdrawal from Namibia.
South Africa cannot . . . legitimize its illegal occupation
of Namibia by raising other issues. . , . Namibia should
have its independence regardless of what happens or
what does not happen in Angola.” [2488th meeting,para.
83.1
As they say, plus ça change . . .
120. One must not forget the negotiations on Namibia
itself. It is worthy recalling just how broad and completeare
the agreementswhich have beenreachedon the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

125. That doesnot mean, however, that we are blind to
the delaysof the past two years;we are not. The contact
group, with the best Will in the world, hasnot succeeded,
any more than have others, in bringing independenceto
Namibia. It is necessaryto admit that openly and with
candeur. Nonetheless,the contact group should not disband, becauseif still has a role to play one day under
resolution435 (1978).
126. Having saidthat, Canadaadmitsthat it isvery difficuit to know how to proceed.We shallhaveto look to other
stepsthat Member Statesmight take, stepswhich demonstrate that patienceis long goneand that the time to move
strongly is now.
127. We should perhaps consider reaffirming and reendorsing the voluntary measuresas set out in Council
resolution283(1970).Member Statesmay wishto examine
what they have done to conform with its provisions. The
provisions were strong. Such measuresmerit further
responseaswe await the settingof a date for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
128. We Will, of course,want to confirm again our readinessto lend assistance,both human and fïnancial, to an
independentNamibia. Perhapsthe Council Will want to
addressthat point.

121. In 1982,after intensiveconsultationsamongthe parties, involving bath the front-line States and the contact
group, the participants wereable ta report to the SecretaryGeneral that agreementhad beenreachedon virtually a11of
the outstanding issueswhich had apparently stood in the
way of the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). The
parties accepteda set of principles concerningthe constituent assemblyand the constitution for an independentNamibia. And all Will recall that understandingswere reached
on the questionof impartiality and on the size,composition
and deployment of UNTAG.

129. Above all, we should encourageyet again the vigorous participation of the Secretary-Generalin seekingcooperation from South Africa to establisha timetable for
independence.As the representativeof Denmark just said,
the future of Namibia is a fundamentalissuefor the United
Nations. Its right to independencederives f’rom the very
principleson which the United Nations wasfounded. The
Secretary-Generalhasshownhimselfto be-on this as on
all matters-indefatigable. Let the Council renewthe mandate previously entrustedto him, with the addedsensethat
he pursue the attainment of resolution 435 (1978) in an
unrelentingfashion.And let us.callupon South Africa, with
quintessentialclarity, to live up to its obligationsunder the
Charter of the United Nations.

122. The Secretary-General himself then resolvedcertain
points still outstanding during his visit to the region in 1983.
South Afiica gave assurancesthat the choice of electoral
system, whether proportional representation or constituency-based,would be madeand communicatedat an
early stage.

123. SOwhat remains?South Africa’s concernsregarding
the transition process having been accommodated, we
should now, in theory, look to resolution435 (1978)notas
an obstacle to be overcome but as an opportunity to be
seized. In theory, South Africa, SWAPO and rhe interna1
parties, as well as the contact group and the front-line
States, should now be joining hands to bring Namibia to
independencethrough the United Nations plan. But the
theory, alas, is shreddedby the practice. Al1 the requisite
understandingsare in place, but nothing happens.When is
resolution 435 (1978) to be applied?
124. Somehave implied that part of the responsibilityfor
the current impasseliesat the feet of the contact group. That
suggestionis unwarranted. The membersof the Council
know full well that Canada’sreason-and a11reasons,1 am
sure-for belonging to the contact group hasbeento facilitate Namibia’sindependencein accordancewith theunited
Nations plan. That is the way it began;that is the basison
which someexcellent work was done.

130. Those are just some of the considcrations which
make this debateSOimportant. Our options are narrowing.
1 have already indicated, ashaseveryone else,that there is
no basisfor delay and that further delay servesno one’s
interest.Yet unconscionabledelay ispreciselywhat we are
facedwith, and that is why Canadaand othersWill have to
considerour range of choicescarefully.
131. On several occasionsin this debate speakershave
referred to the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations. That leadsme to one final observation. 1
think everyoneagreesthat nothing would SOservethe reputation of the United Nations asa significant breakthrough
on somesignificant aspectof peaceand security. It could,
with dramatic impact, turn public perceptionsaround. The
independenceof Namibia is the logical focus.It isthe issue
on which thereisvirtual internationalunanimity. Just asthe
systemof apartheidhasonly one defender,SOfreedom for
Namibia hasonly one obstacle.The ‘prevaricationsof the
11

last seven years, the contempt for United Nations resolutions, the perpetual state of strife, the introduction of yet
another illegal interim government, the recent revelations in
Angola and, above all, the prolonged suffering and oppression of the Namibian people, must surely win from the
Council a resolution on which we cari all agree and which
Will lead to that elusive breakthrough. The timingcould net
be better. There is a rising crescendo of impatience with
South Africa throughout the world, mirrored in the statements at the Council, signalled-as in Canada and other
countries-by
reviews of Government policy and reflected
most recently by the votes in the Congress of the United
States.

continue to intensify their solidarity with the heroic struggle
for independence of the people of Namibia and assistance to
that people, under the leadership of SWAPO, its sole legitimate representative.
138. Resolution 435 (1978)-which
was adopted by the
Council unanimously and which is considered an expression of the Will of the international community on the need
to put an end to the apartheidrégime and to achieve genuine
independence for Namibia-contains
the United Nations
plan for the independence of Namibia. This plan has
encountered many setbacks. Many obstacles have been
placed in the way of its implementation and indications are
that the heinous apartheidrégime is totally unwilling to heed
the decisions of the international community on the independence of Namibia.

132. The Council is thus presented with an opportunity to
demonstrate that the nations of the world stand united in
condemning the continued illegal occupation of Namibia
and stand united in urging South Africa to proceed immediately with implementation of resolution 435 (1978). We
hope that the resolution which the Council adopts Will
reinforce such a consensus. It Will then represent the most
unmistakable, uncompromising and unambiguous message
delivered to date.

139. That régime would not have been able to defy the Will
of the international community, embodicd in Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, without the
comprehensive assistance provided by ils Western allies, in
particular the United States of America. It continues to
reinforce its heinous policy of apartheid and its illegal control over Namibia, thus defying the resolutions of the international Organisation. The policy of repression, oppression
and terrorism is characteristic of this régime, and the killing
of innocent women and children has become a daily practice. The violation of human rights in Namibia has become
its lïrst priority. There is no reason for hope; rather, the
racist régime and the white minority are persisting in their
intransigence, thus flouting the resolutions and decisions of
the international community and thwarting the aspirations
of the peoples of the world to see an end to the policy of
hegemony practised by the régime in South Africa.

133. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. 1 invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
134. M. AL-ATASSI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interprerutien @rn Arabie): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
express to you, and through you to the other members of
the Council, our thanks for giving my delegation this opportunity to speak on what is considered to be one of the most
important world issues-the heinous racist régime which, in
co-operation with a handful of Western States, fïrst and
foremost the United States of America, attempts to hamper
the implementation of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia.

140. There is every indication that the white minority
régime has no intention of implementing the United
Nations plan. This cari be clearly seen in the latest manoeuvres of the leaders of that régime to achievc a sham independence for Namibia by installing a puppet régime through
the establishment of a so-called interna] administration to
which powers are to be transferred. Indeed, this would be
tantamount to installing a puppet government to serve the
interests of South Africa.

135. 1 take this opportunity to convey to you the congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the presidency for the current month. 1 am fully confident that your
political skill and diplomatie know-how
Will guide thl
Council, under your leadership, to the desired results.
136. On this occasion 1 cannot but express to your predecessors, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Thailand, our admiration for the ideal and calm way
in which they conducted the business of the Security Council during the very busy month of May.

141. We also strongly condemn the fragmentation of the
national unity of the Namibian people, undertaken by the
racist régime through drafting Namibians in its armed forces. We further condemn its use of mercenary bands to
perpetuate its illegal occupation of the Territory. The massing of military forces and the acts of aggression perpetrated
by the South African régime against the neighbouring Africari States pose a serious threat to the security of these
independent States, as well as peace in the entire area.

137. The Council is now meeting, following urgent
requests in letters from the President of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the Chairman of the Group of
African States to consider the situation in Namibia and the
implementation of its resolutions in this context, particularly resolution 435 (1978). That, indeed, was the subject of
the Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from
19 to 21 April 1985, with a view to undertaking an evaluation of the situation in Namibia and other elevant issues and
to consider ways and means for the non-aligned countries to

142. The policy of exploitation and plunder of Namibia’s
natural resources as practised by the Pretoria régime, in
co-operation with its Western allies, with the United States
at the forefront and their transnational corporations, is a
violation of the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
12

143. Ilowever the régime in South Africa and its armed
forces escalate their acts of oppression and terrorism
against the people of Namibia, Pretoria will never be able to
subjugate the daily rcsistance of the heroic people of Namibia, under the leadership of SWAPO, its sole legitimate
representative, in its valiant struggle against the racist
minority régime. The day is not far off when Namibia will
be fully independent and the Namibian people master of
their own soil.

147. In our view, South Africa’s stubbornness and its
continuing failure to implement United Nations resolutiens, in particular Council resolution 435 (1978), cari bave
no explanation other than the encouragement of the Unit&
States. The policy of so-called constructive engagement
with South Africa pursued by the United States Administration is aimed basically at encouraging the racist régime to
continue rejecting the resolutions of the international community and at stiffening the determination of that régime to
persist in its aggressive policies and its threats against neighbouring independent States. Providing the régime with various types of weapons and co-operating with it in all fïelds,
including the nuclear field-which
is precisely what the
United States Administration is doing-are intended to
bring about the failure of the United Nations plan.

144. There are indications that the time has not yet corne
for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). Tremendous obstacles prcventing implementation are being erected
by the régime of South Africa, in co-operation with the
United States. South Africa and the United States link the
independencc of Namibia to purely extraneous issues, The
presence of Cuban forces in Angola has no relationship
whatsoever to the independence of Namibia. That presence
was requested by the legitimate authorities in Angola, on
the basis of full agreement between two independent States.
Such linkage has been categorically rejected. It may result in
delaying the independence of Namibia and ultimately
undermine the achievement of independence, thus maintaining the Territory under the hegemony of the whitc
minority régime. Its natural resources would remain under
colonial pillage and exploitation, in contravention of the
United Nations plan. Such linkage is a flagrant intervention
in the interna1 affairs of an independent country-member of
this Organization.

148. The increased co-operation between certain Western
States, including the United States, and the racist régime of
Pretoria does indeed hamper Namibia’s attainment of independence. South Africa cari be made to toe the line only by
putting an end to all types of co-operation with that régime.
Continued co-operation with the South African régime
runs counter to the Will of the international community and
to United Nations resolutions. We have only to note which
States are co-operating with theSouth African régime to see
clearly which States encourage the continued occupation of
Namibia.
149. In its report? the United Nations Council for Namibia, the Administering Authority of the Territory, shows
clearly that it is the United States, other Western States and
Israel that engage in co-operation with the Pretoria régime.
This report shows that South Africa has provided Israel
with uranium and has collaborated with Israel in extraction
and refinement of that element, and states that Israel may
be acting as the agent of the United States in weapons sales
to South Africa. The United States has indeed granted
permission to the Israeli Government to export military
equipment to South Africa.

145. The further report of the Secretary-General of 6 June
is perfectly clear, particularly in its concluding remarks
[S/I7242, parm. 45-481. In those paragraphs the SecretaryGeneral notes that it has not proved possible to fïnalize
arrangements for the implementation of the United Nations
plan for Namibia, owing to the obstacles and preconditions imposed by the racist régime in South Africa. 1
take this opportunity to convey to the Secretary-General
my delegation’s appreciation for his efforts to bring about
the implementation of United Nations resolutions on Namibia, in particular Council resolution 435 (1978).

150. The Syrian Arab Republic reaffïrms its support for
the Final Document [S/17184, annrx] adopted by the
Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of Non-Aligned Countries on the question of Namibia, held at New Delhi from 19 to 21 April, particularly
its paragraphs 36 and 37. In this connection, we wish to
reiterate our fïrm denunciation of the continuing cooperation by some Western States and Israel with the racist
régime of South Africa in the nuclear, military, economic
and political fields. We are convinced that such COoperation undermines international solidarity against the
apartheid régime and helps perpetuate the illegitimate, illegai occupation of Namibia by that régime.

146. South Africa’s continuing illegal occupation of Namibia, its large-scale militarization of that Territory, and its
use of Namibia as a springboard for acts of aggression and
sabotage against neighbouring independent States-a11
pose a major threat to peace and security. My delegation,
therefore, believes that in keeping with the legal responsibility of the United Nations over Namibia until that Territory
achieves independence, the Council must take urgent steps
to assure genuine, unconditional respect on the part of the
racist régime for Council resolutions, in particular resolution 435 (1978), in order to enable the people of Namibia to
exercise its inalienable rights to self-determination and independence, under the leadership of SWAPO, its sole legitimate representative. Those steps must include the
imposition of sanctions, in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations. Until that is done, it
would be useful for the Council to reiterate its resolutions
418 (1977), 421 (1977) and 558 (1984) with regard to strict
respect for the binding arms embargo imposed on South
Africa and to a strict prohibition on weapons imports from
South Africa.

151. The Syrian Arab Republic also condemns the
increasing co-operation between the two racist régimes, in
Tel Aviv and Pretoria. In that context, we note the similarity
between the aggressive designs of the two régimes, including
their iron-fïst policies and their empioyment of hot pursuit,
against the peoples of South Africa, Namibia, Palestine,
southern Lebanon, and a11the Arab territories occupied by
Israel. Moreover, we condemn the decision of the two
régimes to continue and increase their co-operation in the
military, economic political and nuc1ea.r lïelds, l’or such
13

co-operation
security.

poses a threat to international

peace and

158. There is no doubt that the question of Namibia,
which has been on the agenda of the United Nations for 40
years, is one of the most flagrant examples of brutal colonial
domination and predatory exploitation of human and natural resources belonging to another people.

152. The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the Urited States
Administration and on the States members of the Europran
Community to reconsider the trade concessions granted
through free-trade agreements with Isl.ael and to consider
their abrogation. Those concessions and agreements help in
selling South African products in United States and European Community markets.

159. The concern of the Member States stems primarily
from the fact that-despite the existing universal consensus
on the principles and means of solving the Namibian problem, formulated, above all, in Council resolution 385 (1976)
and 435 (1978) as well as in other important United Nations
documents-the
successful and just settlement of this
urgent problem continues to be blocked by the South Africari régime.

153. In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic declares its
total solidarity with the heroic struggle of the Namibian
people against the white minority régime and for freedom,
independence and the full exercise of its inalienable right to
seff-determination. We stress our full support for SWAPO,
the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people.
We support the legitimacy of its struggle by a11available
means, including armed struggle, against South Africa’s
occupation of Namibia. We stress our complete solidarity
with the front-fine States in responding to the acts of aggression of the racist régime. We cal1on the Council to shoulder
its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security and to take the measures necessary to force
South Africa to bend to the Will of the international community, including the imposition of sanctions in accordance
with Chapter VII of thc Charter.

160. In this connection, we fully share the general recognition that South Africa would not have ignored SOcynically
these decisions had it not relied on the political, military,
economic and financial support of certain Western States,
particular the United States and Israel. That support is of
crucial importance for strengthening the strategic potential
and the military capability of the racist régime,
161. In a news report of 6 June this year, The New York

Times informed us that neany 300 United Statcs companies
operated in South Africa and that American investments in
that country had reached $15 billion, while those firms
controlled almost 50 percent of South African pe:rochemicals, 70 per cent of computer production and 30 per cent of
the auto industry.

154. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bulgaria. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

162. The South African racists and the transnational corporations continue to exploit extensively the natural resources of Namibia, thus making enormous profits. There is no
doubt about the shared interest of Pretoria and other outside circles in the suppression of the national liberation
movement, in the colonial plunder of the peoples in that
part of the world and in the consolidation of their common
imperialist positions.

155. Mr. TSVBTKOV (Bulgaria): Mr. President, 1should
like first to express to you and to the other members of the
Council my gratitude for the opportunity to participate in
the discussion of this question. 1 should also like to congratulate you most cordially upon your election as President for
the current month. In view of your widely acknowledged
abilities as a prominent and distinguished statesman and
diplomat, we are convinced that the Council Will successfully carry out its high responsibilities.

163. It is this shared interest that is at the foundation of
the policy of construtitive engagement towards South
Africa, which in practice is tantamount to propping up the
aggressive régime. It is also at the heart of the concurrence
of the schemes of the South African racists with the strategic
plans of the imperialist forces in southern Africa. T~US, the
machinations of the racists and their mentors, which are
aimed in practice at blockingand foiling the United Nations
plan for Namibia, contained in the resolutions 1 have
already mentioned, corne as no surprise. This also explains
why, in order to prevent the realization of the plan, artificial
conditions totally extraneous to the Namibian issue,such as
its linkage with the presence of Cuban forces in Angola,are
being raised. This approach cari only be described as blatant
interference in the internai affairs of independent Angola
and as a caver-up for the continued occupation of Namibia.
It is no accident that the international community hasflatly
rejected such obviously obstructionist tactics.

156. 1 also take this opportunity, Sir, to express my gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Kasemsri, the representative
of Thailand, for his competent guidance of the Council
during the month of May.
157. The People’s Republic of Bulgaria welcomes the convening of the Council to consider the situation in Namibia,
at the request of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and the Group of African States. Bulgaria fully shares the
serious concern of the international community over the
continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by the racist Pretoria régime and the extension of the inhumane apartheid
system to it. The Territory, where considerable military
power is concentrated, is ever more frequently used as a
military base and a springboard for launching so-called
reprisa1 actions against neighbouring independent African
States, actions which have gravely destabilized thesituation
in the region. South Africa continues to occupy part of
Angola. Al1 in all, an explosive situation has been created
which is fraught with grave danger for peace and security in
Af’rica and in the whole world.

164. The latest such manoeuvre of the South African
racists-the establishment of a puppet administration in the
illegally occupied Territory of Namibia-has
generated a
tidal wave of indignation and protest. We have joined the
14

vast majority of Member States which have categorically
condemned this new attempt of the colonial Power to prevent the just settlement of the Namibian questionand to
perpetuate its rule in Namibia. On the occasionof that
a tLtempt, the Bulgarian Telegraph Agency issuedon 15Ma y
1985 a declaration which stated, inter alia:

pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the formation of SWAPO are
not only a seriousoccasion for a thoughtful analysisof the
achievementsmade SO far in strengthening world pcace
and decolonization; they also provide momentum to
mobilize the efforts of the international community for the
final elimination of the last vestigesof the shamefulsystem
of national domination. On the occasion of the anniversary of the heroic organization of the Namibian people, 1
should like to take this opportunity to congratulate most
cordially the Presidentof SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, and
once again assurehim of the sincere commitment of the
Bulgarian people, which itself endured centuriesunder the
foreign yoke,

“The people’s Republic of Bulgaria, which hasrendered its whole-hearted support to the struggle of the
Namibian people for the exercise of their inalienable
right to selfdetermination and national independence,
and which has recognizcd SWAPO as their sole,legitimate representative, reaffirms hereby that the United
Nations decisions, and in particular Security Council
resolution 435 (1978),are the only acceptablebasisupon
which the independenceof Namibia cari and must be
achieved immediately and without any preconditions.”

169. The unreservedsupport of Bulgaria for the causeof
peopiesfighting for social and national liberation was eloquently reaffirmed by Todor Zhivkov, General Secretary of
the Central Committee of the Bulgarian
Communist Party
and Presidentof the State Councit of the People’sRepublic
of Bulgaria, during the recent visit of the headofState oftbe
Republic of the Congo to my country. He emphasizedinte!
alia that socialist Bulgaria had invariably sided with the
legitimate and just struggle of the people of Namibia, with
the South African people in their struggle against racial
discrimination and apartheid, and with the front-line States
fighting to defend their independence. Bulgaria wiIl continue to abide by this principled position in thc future as
well.

165. In this connection, 1 shou!d likc to stressonceagain
th:it whatever decisions South Africa may make in this
r-c’spcct are complctely devoid of any fegal force. The organs
created by South Africa, under whatever pompousnames,
cannot be viewed asother than instrumentsof the policy of
occupation and national domination. For this reason,they
have been denounced and rejected by the international
community.
166. Expressionsof selfish interestsand strategicdesigns
al-e the attempts by well known forces to keepthe United
Nations out of the settlement of the Namibian problem.
They have tried through unilateral actions to impose a
neo-colonial solution on the peoples of the region that
would ensure the economic, political and military advantages of certain imperialist States. It is abundantly clear,
however, that the key to a just and lasting solution of the
problem is not in the handsof mediatorsand envoys. It lies
in the support the Member Statesgive to the world Organization in the dischargeof the responsiblemissionentrusted
to it under a large number of resolutions and decisions
adopted since 1966.
167. The policy of South Africa in Namibia is brazenly
defïant of the international community. That policy is
fraught with the danger of grave crisesand an openmilitary
conflict that could spill over the confines of that part of the
world. TO the Member States it is perfectly clearthat, asin
the past, South Africa Will continue arrogantly to disregard
the explicit Will of the international community. Hencemy
country supportsthe conclusionsofthe Extraordinary Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of NonAligned
Countries on the questionof Namibia, held at New
Delhi from 19 to 21 April, and those of the Extraordinary
Plenary Meetings of the United Nations Council for Namibia, held at Vienna from 3 to 7 June, and callsupon the
Council to imposethe comprehensivemandatory sanctions
envisaged under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations for the purpose of ensuring the immediate and
unconditional implementation of the resolutionscalling for
the granting of real independenceto Namibia.

170. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States, to whom the Council extended an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of prL)cedureat the 2585th
meeting. 1 invite him to take a place at thcCouncil tableand
to make his statement.
171. Mr. MAKSOUD: 1 should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumptionof tbe prcsidency of
the Council. The manner in which you have been guiding
these deliberation,
the friendship that exists between the
Arab nation and your country and the presenceof many
peoplewhoseoriginal homeland isin the Arab world allows
me to expressand articulate the feelingsof friendship and
congratulations in a very sincere and genuine manner.
172. I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
the former President. During his presidency we had many
moments of anxious co-operation, and we should like to
expressour gratitude for the wisdom with which he guided
the Council’s efforts.
173. At the outset1 should likc to read out a statementby
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Mr.
Chedli Klibi:
“On the occasion of the Security Council meetings
relating to the situation in Namibia, thc Leagueof Arab
States salutes the Namibian peoplc and re;llTirnls thc
solidarity of thc Arab nation with the strugglc ot’ thc
peopleof Namibia under the Icadership ol‘SWAP0, its
sole and legitimate representative, for its fiecdom, dignity and independence.

168. The fortieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adop
tien of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Inde15

“The League of Arab States seizes this opportunity to
reaffïrm on behalf of the Arab States its insistence on the
immediate and unconditional implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) in order to ensure the
realization of the rights of the Namibian people to selfdetermination, independence and freedom.

176. It is no wonder that the apartheid régime of South
Africa has close co-ordinating functional arrangements
with the Government of Israel in various actsofdefiance,as
if thosetwo colonial racist régimesought to reinforce each
other in contempt of the decolonizing processthat has
encompassed
the third world but hasbeenarrested,unfortunately, in both South Africa and Namibia, and particularly also in regard to the Palestinianquestion.

“The League of Arab States condemns a11attempts
and manoeuvres which endeavour to defy the Will of the
international community and the credibility of the
United Nations resolutions through the imposition of the
so-called internat settlement in Namibia with a view to
enhancing the colonialist ambitions of the racist settlers
of the Pretoria régime.

177. For that reason,our participation isnot only a question of solidarity with the peopleof Namibiaand the leadership of SWAPO, whosestruggle we salute.Not only do we
condemn the racist practices but we feel that the United
Nations should sustainits commitments,attempt to bring
its resolutionsto fruition and prove that it meanswhat it
saysby the introduction of sanctions. It is high time the
international community ceasedto be openly defied by
thosetwo racist régimes,which act asif they were trying to
set the clock back.

“In the meantime, the League of Arab States further
condemns ail attempts at introducing extraneous elements such as the linkage of the presence of Cuban
troops in Angola with the achievement of the independence of Namibia, which is a clear issue of decolonization entrusted to the United Nations and therefore
should not be juggled in the context of super-Power
considerations.

178. We in the Leagueof Arab Statesunderstandin depth
what the peopleof Namibia are going through, becausewe
are experiencing similar oppression,violation of human
rights, disenfranchisement,dispossession,
forceful eviction
and terrorism practised under the pretext of “law and
order”. The attempts to imposea so-calledinterna] settlement are similar to Israel’s attempts to impose village
leaguesin the West Bank and Gaza, or to what the so-called
Lahd group hasbeendoing in southern Lebanon. Al1 these
are attempts to deny the legitimacy of the international
commitmentand the various United Nations resolutions.It
is becausethis pattern of behaviour basto be arrestedthat
the Council, on the questionof Namibia and on the question of the Middle East, must not be satisfïedwith resolutions. These are welcome but they should be made
implementable.The organic relationships in the field of
nuclearweapons,in the fïeld of researchand in the fïeld of
geopoliticalaccessbetweenSouth Africa and Israelwarrant
not oniy closer Arab-African CO-ordination and cooperation but a United Nations investigation into the pattern of behaviour that has been introduced by those two
remainingracist and colonial régimes.

“The Council of the League of Arab States reiterated
at its last session, held at Tunis from 25 to 28 March
1985, the total support of the Arab States for the struggle
of the Namibian people for independence and the solidarity of thc Arab nation with the heightened struggle of
the oppressed majority in South Africa against the racist
apartheid policies.”
174. I wish to make a few remarks because 1 think that in
the past few days the Council has heard to what extent
South Africa is in contempt of the United Nations and
particularly of the resolutions of the Security Council. We
have seen how it has manoeuvred and made many attempts
to circumvent the Will of the international community and
cleny the rights of’ the Namibian people. This has been a
pattern that, unfortunately, cannot be restrained except by
the imposition of credible sanctions as prescribed in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
175. The League of Arab States and the Arab people in
general have a daim to participate in the deliberations
concerning Namibia becausein oneform or another what is
taking placein South Africa pertaining to the rights of the
Namibian people and self-determinationisnot only similar
but in many ways identical to the defiancethat is taking
place in the Middle East on the part of Israeland the denial
to the Palestiniansof their right to self-determinationand
thc withdrawal of the occupation forcesfrom the various
occupied Arab lands.The pattern isthesame.The language
utilined by the representativesof Pretoria and of Israel is
almost identical; the excuses,the pretextsthat are adduced
are identical. SOin many ways,when we listen here to the
statementsby the various States, it is as if the Council
Chamber were reverberating with the echoesof what has
beensaid in many instancesin the debatespertaining to the
MiddIe East.

179. Therefore we take this opportunity to expressagain
our appreciation to the people of Namibia and to reiterate
our solidarity with them in their struggle to achieve selfdetermination and in their commitment to rendering the
United Nations credibleand effective.
Xke meetingroseaf 1.20p.m.

NOI’ES
’ Decree
No. 1 for the Protection
of the Natuwl
Resources
of Namibia,
enactcd
by the United
Nations
Council
for Namibie
on 27
Septembcr
1974 (OfJeial Records of the General Assembly.
Thirty-fifrh
Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/35/24),
vol. 1, annex
11.
2 A/40/24
and Corr.1
and 3.

16
