VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session, through
the Economic and Social Council;
3. Decides to resume consideration of this question at
its thirty-seventh session, also taking into account the report
of the Commission on Human Rights on its thirty-eighth
session and the views expressed by Member States at the
thirty-sixth session of the General Assembly under the item
entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms" and
to examine what steps may be taken in this regard.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/136.

New international humanitarian order

The General Assembly,
Noting with interest the proposal for the promotion of a
new international humanitarian order, 119
Recognizing the importance of further improving a comprehensive international framework which takes fully into
account existing instruments relating to humanitarian questions as well as the need for addressing those aspects which
are not yet adequately covered,
Bearing in mind that institutional arrangements and action
of governmental and non-governmental bodies might need
to be further strengthened to respond effectively in situations
requiring humanitarian action,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Governments on the proposal for the promotion of a new
international humanitarian order;
2. Decides to consider the question at its thirty-seventh
session on the basis of the report of the Secretary-General.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 33/174 of 20 December 1978, by
which it established a United Nations Trust Fund for Chile

185

Recognizing the need to provide assistance to the victims
of torture in a purely humanitarian spirit,
I. Decides:
(a) To extend the mandate of the United Nations Trust
Fund for Chile, established by General Assembly resolution
33/ I 74, in order to make it capable of receiving voluntary
contributions for distribution, through established channels
of assistance, as humanitarian, legal and financial aid to
individuals whose human rights have been severely violated
as a result of torture and to relatives of such victims, priority
being given to aid to victims of violations by States in which
the human rights situation has been the subject of resolutions
or decisions adopted by either the Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council or the Commission on Human Rights;
(b) To redesignate the United Nations Trust Fund for
Chile as United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims of
Torture;
(c) That the United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture shall be administered in accordance with the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations by the Secretary-General, with the advice of a Board of Trustees of the
Fund, composed of a chairman and four members with wide
experience in the field of human rights, acting in their personal capacity, to be appointed by the Secretary-General
with due regard to equitable geographical distribution and
in consultation with their Governments;
(d) To adopt the arrangements for the management of
the Fund set forth in the annex to the report of the SecretaryGeneral; 121
(e) To authorize the Board of Trustees of the Fund to
promote and solicit contributions and pledges;
(j) To request the Secretary-General to give the Board
of Trustees of the Fund all the assistance it may require;
2. Appeals to all Governments to respond favourably
to requests for contributions to the Fund,
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 198/

36/151.

as a voluntary fund to receive contributions and distribute
humanitarian, legal and financial aid to persons whose human rights had been violated by detention or imprisonment
in Chile,
Recalling also its resolution 35/ 190 of 15 December 1980,
by which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to study the possibility of extending the mandate of the
United Nations Trust Fund for Chile,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/39 of 8 May 1981 and Commission on Human Rights
resolution 35 (XXXVII) of 11 March 1981, 120
Noting that all Governments have an obligation to respect
and promote human rights in accordance with the responsibilities they have undertaken under various international
instruments,
Noting with deep concern that acts of torture take place
in various countries,
Considering the plight of victims of torture wherever it
takes place,
119
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session,
Annexes, agenda item 138, document A/36/245.
120
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /981.
Supplement No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr. I), chap. XXVIIL sect. A.

36/152.

The right to education

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/ I 70 of 17 December 1979
and 35/191 of 15 December 1980 on the right to education,
Recalling the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights, adopted by its resolution 2200 A (XXI)
of 16 December I 966, which recognizes the right of everyone to education,
Bearing in mind the importance of the Convention against
Discrimination in Education, 122 adopted on 14 December
1960 by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Reaffirming the paramount importance of the implementation of the right to education for the full development of
the human personality and for the enjoyment of other fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Recognizing that for the effective implementation of the
right to education the eradication of illiteracy has a particular
priority and urgency,
Convinced that the educational process could bring a substantial contribution to social progress, national development, mutual understanding and co-operation among peoples
and to strengthening peace and international security,

121
A/36/540.
"'United Nations, Trearv Series. vol. 429, No. 6193, p. 93.
