United Nations

S/PV.6409

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6409th meeting
Friday, 22 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kategaya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lebanon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Briens
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Kodama
Mr. Salam
Mr. Puente
Mr. Ajumogobia
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations (S/2010/514)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-59826 (E)

*1059826*

S/PV.6409

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on support
to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations (S/2010/514)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Australia, Ethiopia, Finland,
Kenya, Portugal, South Africa and the Sudan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
aforementioned representatives took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 October
2010 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to
the United Nations, in which he requests that the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Ramtane Lamamra.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Lamamra to take a seat at the Council
table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
also received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, acting head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item in

2

accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency, Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.
On behalf of the Council, I also wish to recognize the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Yusuf Hasan Ibrahim,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia, at this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2010/514, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on support to African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations.
There is no doubt that peacekeeping is
increasingly becoming a shared responsibility in which
the United Nations, regional and subregional
organizations and the wider international community
have critical roles to play. Uganda therefore welcomes
the progress being made towards strengthening the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU).
The report of the Secretary-General on support to
African Union peacekeeping operations authorized by
the United Nations highlights areas of progress. This
includes increased consultation and collaboration on
matters of peace and security, support for the AU’s
10-year capacity-building programme, and assistance
in building the capacity of the AU and subregional
organizations in Africa to plan, deploy and sustain
peacekeeping operations.
The African Union, recognizing the detrimental
impact of previous conflicts in terms of retarding
socio-economic development and causing untold
suffering to populations, has shown its resolve and
commitment to preventing, managing and resolving
conflicts on the continent. It is working on the
implementation of a comprehensive peace and security

10-59826

S/PV.6409

architecture and has underscored the need for its
member States to adhere to constitutionalism,
democratic governance and the rule of law.
As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the African Union is taking critical measures to
strengthen its capacity to undertake peacekeeping
operations. The AU and subregional organizations —
including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Economic Community of West
African States, the East African Community and the
Southern Africa Development Community — continue
to develop their capacities and have invested the
resources necessary, within their capability, to respond
to conflict situations in various countries. They are
making an important contribution through their
knowledge of situations on the ground and their ability
to respond quickly.
It is important to ensure that peacekeeping, which
is an indispensable tool available to the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, is done effectively.
The Security Council, under resolution 1809 (2008),
recognized the need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of funding to regional
organizations when they undertake peacekeeping
operations under a United Nations mandate. However,
the efforts of the African Union to effectively deploy
peacekeeping operations continue to be hampered by
the lack of sustainable, predictable and flexible
financing.
The African Union Mission in Somalia is a case
in point, the provision of the United Nations logistical
support package notwithstanding. While we appreciate
the support rendered by the bilateral partners, the fact
remains that such voluntary contributions are not only
unpredictable, but also unsustainable. When the AU
deploys peacekeeping operations authorized by the
Security Council, it is doing so on behalf of the United
Nations and the international community.
In our view, extensive deliberations and debates
have been held on the need for sustainable and
predictable financing of African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations. It is now
critical that decisive action be taken on practical ways
of actualizing that support, including through assessed
contributions, as recommended almost two years by the
AU-United Nations panel chaired by former Italian
Prime Minister Romano Prodi (see S/2008/813). The

10-59826

benefits that would accrue from supporting effective
peacekeeping, coupled with conflict prevention and
peacebuilding, are immense in terms of promoting
peace, security and development.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. I also welcome the
participation of the Foreign Minister of Nigeria, His
Excellency Mr. Henry Odein Ajumogobia.
This is an important opportunity to follow up on
last year’s discussions on how to strengthen the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), and in particular to enhance the
AU’s peacekeeping capacity. The work of regional
organizations under Chapter VIII of the Charter is
indispensable. The development of the African peace
and security architecture is critical to an effective
long-term approach to conflict prevention and
resolution. It requires the sustained support of the
international community.
The African Union and Africa’s subregional
organizations have made great efforts to prevent,
mediate and resolve conflicts on the continent. Often,
its personnel have paid the highest price. This year
alone, the AU has lost 15 peacekeepers in Somalia. In
addition, 44 peacekeepers from African troop
contributors have given their lives this year to
peacekeeping around the globe.
Last year’s debate (see S/PV.6254) and the report
of the AU-United Nations panel chaired by former
Prime Minister Romano Prodi of Italy (S/2008/813)
detailed the challenges the African Union faces in
undertaking peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. The report before the Council today
(S/2010/514) provides an update on the work of the
United Nations to support the African Union in
overcoming these obstacles.
In the past few years, the United Nations and the
African Union have entered into a broad range of
partnerships, from early warning and conflict
prevention to peacekeeping and peacebuilding. These
partnerships have deepened cooperation between this
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, and between the United Nations Secretariat
and the African Union Commission.

3

S/PV.6409

In this regard, I would like to express my deep
appreciation to the President of the African Union,
President Mutharika of Malawi, and the leaders of
African States for their commitment to peace and
security and to working closely with the United
Nations. I thank, too, the Chairperson of the AU
Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, and the AU Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, for
contributing so much to developing close cooperation
between our organizations. As we all know, these
relationships have yet to reach their full potential.
In July, the United Nations established its Office
to the African Union in Addis Ababa. Assistant
Secretary-General Muburi-Muita, who is with us today,
took up his post there last month. We hope that the
Office will facilitate a consistent, coherent and
strategic approach to the United Nations work with the
African Union. In September, I inaugurated the first
meeting of the United Nations-AU Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security. The Task Force is meant to engage
our organizations at the highest levels in exploring
ways to enhance our responsiveness so that we can
prevent conflicts rather than simply respond to crises.

Let me stress again the great importance I attach
to the partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations. In the months ahead, I will submit a
report that will help to define a strategic vision for
United Nations-AU cooperation on peace and security.
Our partnership has achieved much to date and has
great potential for the future. Let us all work together
towards effective mechanisms for a long-term approach
to conflict prevention and resolution and a reliable
system for peacekeeping under the Charter. Let us find
our way towards a model that works for Africa and that
can, in turn, bring lessons and applications for our
cooperation with other regional organizations.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union.
Mr. Lamamra: I am pleased to address the
Council, for the second consecutive day, to provide an
African Union (AU) perspective on issues of common
concern.

We are also conducting a comprehensive review
of the first triennium of the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme for the African Union. I will be
reporting to the current session of the General Assembly
with recommendations for further strengthening the
programme’s management, cooperation, coordination
and monitoring.

That the Security Council agreed to hold back-toback meetings on Somalia and on United Nations
support to the African Union when it undertakes
peacekeeping operations and, more generally, on the
partnership between the world organization and the
AU, bears testimony to the commitment of this body to
the promotion of lasting peace and security in Africa.

Building capacity is only part of the picture. The
African Union continues to face difficulties in securing
the necessary resources to support its peacekeeping
undertakings. Darfur and Somalia illustrate that clearly.
We need to find a solution that will provide
predictable, sustainable and flexible resources to the
African Union when it undertakes peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Council under Chapter VIII
of the Charter.

On behalf of African Union Commission
Chairperson Jean Ping and the AU as a whole, I again
salute Uganda, which is presiding over the Council this
month. I also salute your personal presence,
Mr. President, at this important meeting. I commend
Uganda for its leadership and for the many sacrifices
that it has made in pursuit of our objective of a
conflict-free continent, especially through its
participation in the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), which is undoubtedly one of the most
challenging operations ever undertaken by our
continental organization.

AU peacekeeping operations should receive the
same support as all United Nations peacekeepers,
including reimbursement. By the same token, AU
peacekeepers should uphold the same professional
standards as United Nations personnel. That is why, for
example, the Secretariat has been working with the AU
to define guidelines and strengthen capacity on
protecting civilians and minimizing civilian casualties.

4

Yesterday, we debated the situation in Somalia
and the urgent actions needed from the international
community, and in particular from the Security
Council, to meet the challenges arising from current
developments in that country and to extend to the
Somali people the support they desperately need as

10-59826

S/PV.6409

they strive to put behind them the two-decades-long
conflict that has torn their country apart.
In fairness to the United Nations and the larger
international community, we are not starting this
journey from scratch, for the United Nations is at the
forefront of those providing the financial, logistical
and technical support required for AMISOM to fully
discharge its mandate. It is only fitting for me to
reiterate our appreciation to the United Nations for its
invaluable support package to AMISOM, which
ushered in a new era in the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations in general,
particularly the African Union.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our gratitude once again to South Africa, which
initiated the process that led to the Prodi panel report
(see S/2008/813) and has since continued to work
tirelessly towards the effective follow-up of the
recommendations contained therein. We at the African
Union are pleased that South Africa is rejoining the
Council, for its presence in this body and its
long-standing commitment to peace will inject added
momentum to efforts aimed at making the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
more relevant to the current challenges and
environment.
Yesterday’s discussions and today’s debate are
intertwined. In many respects, our joint undertaking on
Somalia offers a template of how the AU-United
Nations strategic partnership should evolve, if our
efforts at addressing the challenges of peace and
security in Africa are to succeed.
Less than two years ago, the Prodi panel, jointly
established by the African Union and the United
Nations in a spirit of renewed partnership, submitted a
forward-looking report on how best to enhance the
relationship between the African Union and the United
Nations, based on a judicious combination of their
respective comparative advantages. To buttress the
proposed approach, the Prodi panel pointed out that,
while African peacekeeping missions had demonstrated
aptitude for rapid deployment, which provided the
initial stability needed for a long-term solution, the
lack of capacity and other resources hampered their
ability to effectively implement their respective
mandates over extended periods of time.
The panel suggested a number of practical steps
towards further coordination and collaboration between

10-59826

the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, as well as between the
United Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission.
The report identified ways of developing institutional
capacity commensurate with the demands placed on the
African Union.
On the enhancement of the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of the financing of United
Nations-mandated peace operations undertaken by the
African Union, the report recommended the
establishment of new financial mechanisms based on
United Nations assessed contributions.
Beyond those specific steps, the Prodi panel
stressed the need for a shared strategic vision to enable
the United Nations and the AU to exercise their
respective advantages, but also to reduce the likelihood
of duplication of effort and of organizations working at
cross-purposes.
Since the submission of the report, significant
progress has been made towards the implementation of
the recommendations that were formulated. I would
like, at this juncture, to most sincerely thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his report (S/2010/514),
which provides an exhaustive picture of what has been
achieved and the challenges ahead.
Allow me, in particular, to highlight the
ever-closer working relationship between the AU
Commission and the United Nations Secretariat. On
many issues of mutual concern, we endeavour, at
various levels, to consult with one another and, to the
extent possible, to harmonize our positions. In that
respect, the launching, here in New York on
25 September, of the joint AU-United Nations task
force on peace and security truly marked a milestone.
The presence of both Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Chairperson Jean Ping of the African Union
Commission at the launching of the task force, which
convened its first substantive session a few days later,
was a testimony to the commitment of the leadership of
the two organizations to deepening the AU-United
Nations partnership.
It is also worth mentioning the upgrading and
streamlining of the United Nations presence in Addis
Ababa through the establishment, in July 2010, of the
United Nations Office to the AU, as well as through the
capacity-building support provided to the AU in a
number of areas and the increased coordination on the

5

S/PV.6409

ground between
organizations.

representatives

of

our

two

The convening in Cairo last August, at the
initiative of the AU Commission and within the
framework of the Year of Peace and Security in Africa,
of a retreat bringing together senior officials and
envoys or representatives of the AU and the United
Nations, as well as from other partner organizations
and countries, gave a new impetus to the ongoing
efforts to ensure more effective coordination and
harmonization at both strategic and operational levels.
In the Cairo Call for Peace, adopted at the end of the
meeting, the AU was encouraged to organize another
retreat next year and to institutionalize this forum
thereafter, while at the same time working with the
United Nations to ensure an effective follow-up to the
steps agreed upon, including the establishment of
regional forums of mediators in support of the quest for
peace, security and stability in Africa.
This partnership also involves the policymaking
organs of the AU and the United Nations. That the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council have now institutionalized their yearly
consultative meeting is a further indication of the
shared awareness that achieving lasting peace and
security in Africa requires that we pull our resources
together and harmonize our positions, building on a
creative reading and interpretation of the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter.
There has been progress even on the more
challenging issue of funding AU-led peace support
operations, though more slowly than Africa expects.
The support package provided to AMIS before its
transformation into the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and the
support given now to AMISOM are indicative of a
more innovative approach to peacekeeping and the
challenges associated with it. I could not agree more
with the observation in the Secretary-General’s report
that the logistic support package financed through
United Nations-assessed contributions has been a key
factor in the operations of AMISOM.
With UNAMID, we have gone a step further,
joining our efforts in an unprecedented hybrid
operation, funded and managed by the United Nations.
In so doing, our two organizations have demonstrated a
capacity to respond to complex political realities with
the required flexibility and pragmatism.

6

The African Union welcomes the joint AU-United
Nations lessons learned exercise, planned for
mid-November 2010 in Nairobi, to study those
experiences, as requested by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of 26 October 2009
(S/PRST/2009/26). It is critical that the lessons drawn
be applied and that they inform future decisions by our
two organizations.
As we meet today, we ought, therefore, to be
proud of what has been achieved, for it provides a
strong platform for further progress in our joint
endeavour. At the same time, we should remain
mindful of the many challenges that lie ahead, which
require a greater and more focused mobilization from
all stakeholders.
While the AU Commission and the United
Nations Secretariat have enhanced their collaboration,
as indicated earlier, there is room for significant
improvement. That requires an action-oriented
approach geared towards achieving tangible results. It
also requires that at all levels we fully embrace the
spirit of partnership we have committed ourselves to,
and that we remain relentless in our determination to
make collaboration and coordination a permanent
feature of our relationship so as to avoid duplication of
efforts and waste of scarce resources. We must
maximize our impact and be of better help to those in
need of assistance. I trust that the Joint Task Force will
provide us with the required tools to precisely see to it
that the commitments made at the highest levels are
implemented and that the conclusions of the
coordination meetings we regularly convene are
followed through.
It is also important to make sustained efforts to
enhance the effectiveness of the relationship between
the United Nations Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council. There are many steps that could
immediately be taken to that end, ranging from regular
consultations between their respective chairs in order
to harmonize their agendas and ensure a closer
coordination and better synchronization in terms of
decision-making, to joint field missions and more
substantive discussions at the yearly meetings between
the two organs, with the necessary time and attention
being allotted to the latter.
I cannot conclude my remarks without addressing
the issue of funding the AU-led peace support
operations. As members are all aware, that issue is of

10-59826

S/PV.6409

particular importance for the African Union, having
been discussed on several occasions by our highest
decision-making body, the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government.
Over the past few years, the African Union has
demonstrated renewed determination and willingness
to deploy peace support operations to help stabilize
fragile environments, where more often than not there
is no clear-cut distinction between a continuing conflict
and a situation where there exists a peace to be kept.
That is done to provide the much-needed backing to
forces of peace as they battle to keep the upper hand
over those bent on pursuing hostilities for narrow and
short-term gains, and to create conditions for
sustainable peace and long-term recovery, including
through the deployment of United Nations operations.
Significantly, AU deployments on the ground are
labelled peace support operations, and not
peacekeeping operations. In Burundi and the Sudan
yesterday and in Somalia today, the AU, we believe,
has demonstrated the validity of that approach.
At the same time, we are faced with serious
resource, logistical and capacity constraints, which
have hampered the ability of the operations deployed
to fully discharge their mandated tasks and achieve
their objectives. Yet we have no doubt that the risks
inherent in such undertakings were worth taking, not
only to seize the opportunities that presented
themselves for the advancement of peace — and we
feel vindicated by the experience in Burundi — but
also to fulfil our obligation and responsibility to
protect vulnerable populations caught in deadly
conflicts. In so doing, the AU, while fulfilling its own
mandate and promoting the goals and principles
enshrined in its Constitutive Act and other related
instruments, is also acting on behalf of the Security
Council of the United Nations.
Against that background, the importance of
finding a lasting solution for the funding of AU-led
peace support operations cannot be overemphasized.
Time and again, experience has demonstrated that
support using United Nations-assessed contributions is
the most viable response to the challenge at hand,
especially when the operations concerned, as is the
case for AMISOM, are undertaken with the consent of
the Security Council.
Therefore, I would like to reiterate the AU call to
the Security Council and the United Nations in general

10-59826

to approach that issue with the urgency and flexibility
required, building on the support packages extended to
AMIS and AMISOM and other relevant experiences, in
line with the Security Council’s primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Clearly, this responsibility should be exercised in full,
including when it comes to its financial implications.
As the Secretary-General rightly pointed out in
paragraph 54 of his report, “The complex challenges in
the world today require a revitalized and evolving
interpretation of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations”, based on the recognition that support
by the United Nations to the regional organizations in
matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security is an integral part of collective
security as provided for in the United Nations Charter.
Making peace happen in Africa — a continent that, in
spite of the significant advances made over the past
years, still accounts for the highest proportion of
conflicts worldwide — require no less from the world
body and its relevant decision-making organ on peace
and security matters.
We need an enhanced and innovative partnership
to meet today’s challenges and endow ourselves with
the required capacity to confront the uncertainties of
tomorrow. We need to demonstrate leadership and
vision in order to take the bold steps that the changing
international landscape demands. We need to guard
ourselves against the deceptive comfort that the status
quo offers, for it erodes our capacity to explore
innovative solutions and better anticipate the future. I
have no doubt that the Security Council will
successfully navigate the challenges at hand.
For its part, the AU is determined to fully play its
role, consistent with the provisions of Chapter VIII of
the United Nations Charter. We will pursue the efforts
initiated to enhance our capacity and accelerate the full
operationalization of the African peace and security
architecture. The ongoing Amani training exercise to
test African Standby Force procedures and the study
assessment of the African peace and security
architecture are clear illustrations of our determination
to press ahead in this area and to improve financial
management and transparency and raise more resources
from within the continent, including through
innovative partnerships with the private sector and
civil society, as part of the follow-up to the Year of
Peace and Security

7

S/PV.6409

We will endeavour to make conflict prevention,
in particular structural prevention, a centrepiece of our
action, making effective use of the relevant
components of the African peace and security
architecture and building on our solid normative
framework on issues relating to governance, human
rights, democracy, disarmament and arms control, and
border management, to list but a few. We will step up
our efforts to resolve existing conflicts, while
consolidating peace where it has been achieved in
order to prevent a relapse into violence.
I would like once again to express our most
sincere gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his tireless efforts and unflinching commitment to
the cause of peace and security in Africa and in the
world as a whole. His excellent report deserves credit,
for it not only eloquently articulates the challenges
facing us and the steps we need to take, but also gives
due recognition to the progress achieved by the AU in
the implementation of its reform agenda in the area of
financial and administration management, as well as to
the contribution the AU is making to the achievement
of our common goal of a continent at peace with itself
and with the rest of the world.
The President: I thank Mr. Lamamra for his
statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to read a condensed version when speaking in the
chamber.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Ajumogobia (Nigeria): I wish to commend
His Excellency Mr. Eriya Kategaya, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of East African Community
Affairs of Uganda, and the Ugandan delegation for
convening this important debate to assess the support
to African Union (AU) peacekeeping operations.
Let me also express my appreciation to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
leadership and commitment to peace and security in
Africa, in particular, and for his presence here for this
debate and his insightful remarks. I am also grateful for

8

the illuminating AU perspective so ably presented by
the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union.
This debate benefits from the contents of
resolution 1809 (2008), the landmark Prodi report of
2008 (S/2008/813), and the Secretary-General’s reports
S/2009/470 of 18 September 2009 and S/2010/514 of
14 October 2010. While the validity of the findings of
these reports is undeniable, what remains lacking is the
will to act resolutely to address the complex challenges
we face in Africa. I hope that today’s debate will lay a
strong foundation for the set of actions required to
substantially enhance the peacekeeping capacity of the
African Union and contribute to the observance of the
Year of Peace and Security declared by the African
Union.
Conflicts in Africa bear the hallmarks of the
emerging threats to international peace and security.
Their root causes are, however, multifaceted, and we
must therefore recognize the need for a comprehensive
approach to resolving them. Above all, our response
must be situated within the rubric of the quest for
collective security, responsibility for which does not
rest on any one country or region, but on the
international community acting in concert.
Going forward, we must have a shared strategic
vision of our goals, recalling that peacekeeping in
Africa is an integral part of the maintenance of
international peace and security, for which the Security
Council has primary responsibility. When the African
Union undertakes a peacekeeping operation authorized
by the United Nations, it fulfils a dual responsibility to
the people of Africa and humankind at large,
represented by the ideals of the United Nations.
Nigeria’s experience in Sierra Leone and Liberia
has taught us myriad of lessons on the challenges of
regional peacekeeping. I would subsume them into
three core areas of financing, equipping and mission
support arrangements.
Let me illustrate the quandary the African Union
all too often finds itself. I need not remind Council
members that Africa constitutes 70 per cent of the
matters on our agenda. Invariably, these matters are
also on the agenda of the African Union, which is
frequently called upon to respond. Indeed, over time,
the AU and its regional economic communities have
demonstrated an increasing ability to initiate and lead

10-59826

S/PV.6409

subregional peacekeeping operations, as Nigeria has
done in West Africa.
Yet, at best, the AU is but a part of our collective
security system facing multiple demands to deploy,
mediate or support post-conflict processes across a vast
continent. These demands placed on the AU far
outweigh its resources and capacities to effectively
respond. The consequences of this mismatch include
mission failure, increased instability, retarded
economic development and a reluctance among
potential partners to contribute to what is perceived to
be a failing system. If we are to do things differently,
we must use our political authority to ensure that,
where regional capacities exist, appropriate support
follows.
We appreciate the growing understanding of the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, including their key organs and
institutions. Without a truly strategic partnership and
relationship, vision and clear guidance, our enormous
investments in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will continue to be short term and ad hoc.
As the Secretary-General has observed, the extent
to which the administrative bodies of the United
Nations and AU can fully realize a meaningful
strategic partnership depends on the clarity of guidance
and direction of legislative mandates. The burgeoning
partnership between the United Nations Secretariat and
the AU Commission crystallized in the establishment
on 25 September 2010 of the Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security — an excellent point of departure.
Furthermore, under Nigeria’s presidency last July,
the Council reached agreement with the AU Peace and
Security Council on the format and modalities of the
annual consultative meetings of the two bodies. We
welcome the view of the Secretary-General that these
meetings will require preparatory and follow-up
mechanisms, using the Ad Hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
Financing AU peacekeeping operations remains a
daunting challenge. But, as the Prodi panel report
reminded us, “financing options are not difficult to
identify” (see S/2008/813). The problem persists
because we, the stakeholders, have failed to adopt the
far-reaching and creative alternatives required. Given
that the current financial frameworks for partnership in
peacekeeping are not conducive to building a
sustainable long-term strategy, it is imperative that the

10-59826

Council endorse a financing option that guarantees the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
for AU peacekeeping operations mandated by the
United Nations.
The AU remains an organization in transition,
whose institutions are still building their capacities. In
that respect, we appreciate the knowledge-sharing and
information exchange envisaged in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, in particular in relation to preventive
diplomacy efforts, such as mediation and early
warning. In Nigeria’s view, a hybrid mission like the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) would benefit from a collaborative
field mission to enhance synergy in monitoring, the
assessment of results and response strategies. Through
such collaboration, the AU might also benefit from best
practices within the United Nations system in
reforming its processes and institutions.
Too frequently, AU member States are able to
muster sufficient troop numbers to address crisis
situations, only to then have a lack of equipment and
logistical support let them down. In this regard, we
should stress that the capacity development of
peacekeeping personnel, though essential, is not a
substitute for adequate equipment, logistics and
training. We are thus encouraged by the range of
initiatives under consideration, particularly the
prospect of giving the African Union access to the
United Nations Logistics Base capacities and the
United Nations strategic deployment stocks and of
making a surge capacity team of experts available to
the African Union at the initiation of a peace support
operation.
If we act on the recommendations put forward,
we would undoubtedly add substance to AU’s mission
capabilities. We encourage the AU to continue with its
institutional reform process, as well as development of
a long-term capacity-building road map. We believe the
United Nations Secretariat can play a key role in
pulling this framework together in order to improve the
technical support to the African Union. There may also
be scope to support initiatives like the Nigerian Army
Peacekeeping Centre in Jaji, Kaduna, to enhance its
capacity to train and prepare AU troops for the planned
African Standby Force. Nigeria encourages the
Secretary-General to carefully analyse the scope for
and implications of these options.

9

S/PV.6409

We strongly urge the Secretary-General to
intensify his efforts to find sustainable funding to bring
the support package for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) to the level of that of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. During the
mini-summit on Somalia last month, Nigerian
President Goodluck Jonathan reminded us it is only
when all parties commit to peace and take practical
steps to consolidate it that change will endure. The
security situation in Somalia, he added, will improve
dramatically if there is a strong, coordinated
international presence.
By acting together, we would demonstrate the
shared responsibility of the international community
for the maintenance of peace and security. But in the
final analysis, the African Union can only play an
effective role in response to crises if there is sufficient
political will and commitment of both its own member
States and the international community as a whole.
Mr. Li Baodong (China): The Chinese delegation
welcomes you, Sir, to the Security Council to preside
over today’s debate. We also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his report entitled United Nations
support of African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council (S/2010/514) and
for his briefing.
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, for his briefing.
At present, peace and security in Africa continues
develop in a positive direction. However, peace and
security continue to be fragile in a number of areas,
where flashpoint issues have long eluded resolution.
Non-traditional threats to security, such as terrorism,
piracy and transnational organized crime, are also on
the rise.
The maintenance of peace and security in Africa
remains one of the most real and pressing challenges
facing the international community. This is also the
major reason for which Africa has designated 2010 as
the year for peace and security.
As the most important regional organization of
Africa, the African Union has been playing an
increasingly important role in the maintenance of peace
and security in Africa and the settlement of conflicts on
the continent. China expresses its great appreciation.

10

However, at the same time, the peacekeeping
operations of the African Union have become
increasingly constrained in terms of funding and
capacity-building. They urgently need the support of
the international community, including the United
Nations.
China supports the creation and development of
strategic cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. We are pleased to see that the
United Nations Office to the African Union was
created on 1 July. China welcomes the continuation of
regular communication between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council and
expects such cooperation to continue, so as to use the
respective advantages of the two organizations to
achieve practical results in the important fields of
mediation, conflict prevention and security sector
reform. China hopes that the recently launched United
Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security will be able to carry out its mandate and work
hard to promote the strategic partnership between the
two organizations.
China maintains that the United Nations should
help the African Union obtain reliable financial support
for its peacekeeping operations. China is pleased to see
that the package of logistical support provided by the
United Nations has markedly improved the living and
working conditions of its peacekeepers, but is
concerned about the financial constraints that African
Union missions continue to face.
We believe that, while the United Nations should
continue to provide active support, all countries
concerned should honour their commitments of
support. We believe that all parties concerned should
give positive consideration to the recommendations of
the Secretary-General contained in his report with
regard to various sources of financing and the criteria
for financial support, with a view to putting in place a
predictable and sustainable financing mechanism for
the African Union’s peacekeeping operations.
We support institutional capacity-building for the
African Union’s peacekeeping operations. The United
Nations should strengthen its cooperation with the
African Union through training and the sharing of
knowledge and lessons learned. It should also speed up
the implementation of the United Nations-African
Union Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme.

10-59826

S/PV.6409

We have also taken note of the fact that the
United Nations will view its support to and cooperation
with the African Union in the field of peacekeeping
operations from a new perspective, as pointed out by
the Secretary-General in his report. We look forward to
receiving a report from the Secretary-General in this
regard
China has always given importance and support
to having the African Union play a greater role in the
field of peace and security in Africa, and has provided
support to all AU peacekeeping operations in different
forms, through both bilateral and multilateral channels.
The second political consultation between the
Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs and his AU
counterparts was conducted on 24 September in New
York as a General Assembly side event. During the
consultations, both sides reiterated the importance of
carrying out AU peacekeeping operations under the
auspices of the United Nations and the African Union
and their readiness to strengthen training to build up
the African Union capacity in this important field.
In the future, China will continue to provide
every support within its capacity to the African Union
and African countries and will continue its efforts to
strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.
China supports the draft presidential statement
prepared by Uganda on the theme of today’s debate.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow
me to welcome you, Sir, in assuming the delicate role
in the Council chair today. I would like to thank you
for organizing this debate to discuss the important
issue of support for African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by United Nations mandate. We
are grateful to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the African Union Commissioner,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, for their comprehensive
briefings. It is also an honour to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Henry Odein Ajumogobia and thank
him for his contribution. We also welcome the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2010/514) before us,
noting the progress that has been achieved thus far.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
attaches
great
importance to enhanced cooperation between regional
and subregional organizations and the United Nations.
Strengthening cooperation and strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union

10-59826

(AU) is of key importance for conflict prevention,
crisis management and achieving lasting peace and
security on the African continent.
Further enhancement of cooperation between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council is vital for reaching those objectives. It should
result in concrete action on the modalities and means
for the development of strategic partnerships when
addressing issues of mutual interest and concern.
The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the African Union Mission in
Somalia are illustrative examples of cooperation based
on flexibility and making best use of the comparative
advantages of the African Union and United Nations in
the area of effective peacekeeping and peacebuilding
strategies.
The United Nations Secretariat and African
Union
Commission
need
to
ensure
the
complementarities of their efforts, as well as realistic
benchmarks and timelines. Strengthening the efforts of
African Union and its institutional capacity to
effectively plan, deploy and manage peacekeeping
operations is a key prerequisite for their success. It is
also of high importance that the African Union ensure
leadership and ownership of the process. Bosnia and
Herzegovina furthermore considers that closer
cooperation between the United Nations Secretariat
and African Union Commission will, in addition,
minimize duplication of efforts. The establishment of
the United Nations Office to the African Union is a
practical step in that direction.
We commend the progress made in the past years
in the area of implementing the 10-year capacitybuilding programme. We also welcome the launching
of the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force
on Peace and Security on 25 September 2010. Such
initiatives and increasing United Nations engagement
in Africa will provide adequate ways forward to make
the African peace and security architecture fully
operational as soon as possible.
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report,
focusing on developing the capacities of the peace and
security architecture, particularly in the areas of
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, is
crucial. In that regard, the operationalization of the
African Standby Force and the continental early
warning system should continue to be priority areas of
joint engagement. We welcome the idea of utilizing

11

S/PV.6409

more efficiently the Security Council’s Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa as a forum for discussing substantive issues
related to peace and security in Africa.
Despite many positive developments, the
challenge of predictable, flexible and timely financing
remains an issue of concern. Therefore, it is vital that
all parties concerned continue their engagements in
activities aimed at reaching feasible solutions to that
important element of comprehensive and effective
implementation of peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates in Africa.
We are encouraged by the fact that African Union
Commission has implemented significant reforms
targeting the areas of staffing, budgeting, financial
management and accountability, which have resulted in
improved and effective financial management,
accountability and reporting.
The decision of the African Union and its
member States to broaden the resource base and extend
resource mobilization by 12 per cent of its regular
budget to financing the African Union’s Peace Fund
reflects the political commitment to take responsibility
for peacekeeping operations. Bosnia and Herzegovina
warmly welcomes this decision.
Finally, the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations, including the
African Union, becomes more and more important in
addressing the challenges of the contemporary world.
Bosnia and Herzegovina expresses its full support for
the efforts of the African Union as the regional factor
in resolving conflicts and upholding peace and security
in the region.

responsibility for preventing conflicts and carrying out
peacekeeping activities in Africa. A telling example
here is the actions of African peacekeepers in Somalia
and Darfur, conducted in cooperation with and with the
support of the United Nations.
The African Union’s peacekeeping role
demonstrates the need for rational utilization of the
capacities of regional organizations by the Security
Council, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. The existence of robust regional
organizations that are capable of bearing a greater
share of responsibility for the situation in their regions
enables the United Nations to focus on global issues to
a greater extent, in the interests of the entire world
community.
The African Union’s peacekeeping capacities
require further strengthening, including through
support from the international community. There is
fruitful cooperation between the Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council and between the
secretariats of both organizations.
We believe that the creation of the United Nations
Office to the African Union will optimize assistance
for strengthening AU peacekeeping capacities from our
universal Organization. Furthering and enhancing the
effectiveness of efforts to strengthen regional security
and resolving cross-border problems on the African
continent will be promoted by the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, which will be
established soon. We hope that the United Nations
experience in Western Africa will be brought to bear
here.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today’s meeting again demonstrates the
special attention that the Security Council devotes to
issues of settling crisis situations on the African
continent. It is significant in that connection that the
Security Council is not the only player in this field. We
note with satisfaction that the African Union (AU) is
increasingly present in resolving the continent’s
problems.

Regarding the provision of logistical and
financial support by the United Nations for the African
Union’s peacekeeping efforts, we are wedded to a
rational approach. What is required here is a thorough
analysis of the conditions for the deployment and of
the needs of specific peacekeeping operations, and
multilateral consultations between the African Union
and the United Nations on all aspects of United
Nations support. What requires separate discussion is
the provision of further United Nations support to the
African Union Mission in Somalia, keeping in mind the
security and humanitarian situation in that country.
Yesterday’s Security Council meeting (see S/PV.6407)
was useful in this respect.

What is worthy of support is the resolve of the
African Union and its member States to bear the

In parallel to peacekeeping, we need to devote
our attention to bolstering the African Union’s

In conclusion, allow me to express our support
for the draft presidential statement prepared by the
delegation of Uganda.

12

10-59826

S/PV.6409

mediation and preventive diplomacy capacity. The
priority here remains the creation by the African Union
of a multi-tiered, collective security architecture for the
prevention of and timely response to emerging crisis
situations. The most important element of the
architecture should be the international peacekeeping
force known as the African standby force, whose
creation the international community is assisting.

important responsibility of supporting the AU’s efforts
to enhance its own capacity in this area. In this regard,
we welcome the recent progress made in strengthening
the strategic and operational partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, including
enhanced collaboration between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union.

The Russian Federation is participating in the
elaboration and implementation of international
assistance programmes for Africa, including for the
strengthening of the African Union’s peacekeeping
capacities. Russia’s specialized educational facilities
are conducting training programmes for African Union
peacekeeping personnel. We intend to continue to
develop our cooperation with African States aimed at
strengthening peace and stability in the region.

United Nations support to the African peace and
security architecture, including the African standby
force and the 10-year capacity-building programme for
the African Union, are essential elements of our
common strategy with respect to the African continent.
The establishment of the United Nations Office to the
African Union in July was also a serious step, and we
look forward to the full operationalization of the
Office. We are also pleased with the inauguration of
the Joint Task Force on Peace and Security between the
United Nations and the AU, which we believe represent
a strong platform for further efforts.

The Russian Federation supports the draft
presidential statement prepared by the Ugandan
delegation.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
extending a warm welcome to you, Sir, and by
thanking you and the delegation of Uganda for
convening today’s open debate. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive analytical report on this issue
(S/2010/514). I also wish to thank Ambassador
Lamamra for his briefings and contributions. I also
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Nigeria, and thank him for his contributions to this
important debate.
The Security Council, at its summit meeting of
23 September
(see
S/PV.6389),
reiterated
its
commitment to strengthening its strategic partnerships
with and support to regional and subregional
organizations in conflict prevention, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Today’s debate
presents a unique opportunity to follow through on our
commitments and to translate them into concrete action
in the African context, and thus contribute to the
strategic vision of partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU).
We are also pleased with the growing recognition
of the fact that the African Union has various
comparative advantages that need to be utilized in such
a way as to contribute to international peace and
security. The United Nations has recently assumed the

10-59826

We also welcome the steps taken by the African
Union to enhance its capabilities in the field of
preventive diplomacy. We are particularly pleased with
the joint efforts of the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission in the areas of conflict
prevention and peace mediation in a number of African
countries. The inclusion of assistance in developing the
African Union’s mediation strategy in the 10-year
capacity-building programme is also commendable
insofar as peace mediation is a cost-effective and
efficient method of crisis management and conflict
resolution.
However, as highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General, important challenges remain and
more needs to be done. In his report, the SecretaryGeneral points to a number of such challenges, the
notable of which pertains to financing. We note that the
Secretary-General’s conclusions on this issue are
strikingly similar to those contained in the 2008 report
of the Prodi panel (S/2008/813). Indeed, both reports
point to the need for sustainable, flexible and
predictable financing mechanisms for the AU peace
support operations mandated by the United Nations.
Voluntary contributions frequently constitute an
unstable and unpredictable funding mechanism. That is
why resolution 1809 (2008) and the presidential
statement of 26 October 2009 (S/PRST/2009/26)
acknowledged the need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing regional

13

S/PV.6409

organizations when they undertake peacekeeping under
a United Nations mandate.
As the Secretary-General also underscores in his
report, the current financial framework for partnerships
in peacekeeping operations is not conducive to
building a long-term strategy. We fully endorse the
conclusions and recommendations contained in the
report on these issues. In particular, we concur with the
Secretary-General that a more predictable, reliable and
sustainable funding mechanism must be found,
especially to ensure that the African Union will be able
to fulfil the goals set out in the African peace and
security architecture.
In the light of the experiences gained in the
context of the African Union Mission in Somalia,
where the logistical support package was financed
through United Nations assessed contributions, we
believe that the Security Council must be ready to
consider the use of assessed contributions to support
similar United Nations authorized operations on a
case-by-case basis in the future. This could help the
Council to overcome the biggest challenge standing in
the way of African peacekeeping operations, as well as
United Nations-African Union strategic cooperation.
Investing in the African Union’s peacekeeping
capacity means at the same time investing in the
security, stability, prosperity and thus the future of that
great continent. It is a long-term investment that will
surely pay off as the African continent fully develops
its own capabilities. Turkey is ready and willing to do
its fair share in this regard. With these considerations,
we support the draft presidential statement prepared by
Uganda and look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General to define the United Nations
strategic vision for United Nations-African Union
cooperation on peace and security.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to first thank
you, the Right Honourable Mr. Eriya Kategaya, Deputy
Prime Minister of Uganda, for organizing today’s
debate and to express appreciation to the leadership of
the Government of Uganda in supporting African
Union (AU) peacekeeping. I would also like to express
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia for his participation in and contribution to
this morning’s debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, for their valuable
briefings.

14

Japan highly praises the conflict-prevention and
peacekeeping efforts made in recent years by the
African Union and Africa’s subregional organizations,
as well as the tangible outcomes obtained as a result of
those efforts under African ownership. The
international community must extend further
cooperation to support this positive trend. If the
African Union fulfils its unique role and makes the best
possible use of its competencies and advantages in the
fields
of
conflict
prevention,
peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, it will be to the
benefit of the entire international community.
Japan believes that we must continue to seek an
appropriate path to expand the role of the AU and to
strengthen the partnership between the AU and the
United Nations. In this regard, Japan welcomes the
enhanced relationship between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council, and proposes
regular action-oriented follow-up meetings through the
platform provided by the Security Council’s Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa.
With respect to capacity-building, it is essential
to continue to extend our support to African
troop-contributing countries. Japan has committed
itself to assisting in the capacity-building of the
African peace and security architecture through the
African Union’s Peace Fund. Japan also contributes to
efforts in national and regional capacity-building,
including the support programme for peacekeeping
operations training centres in Africa. Japan stands
ready and committed to continuing its support in this
field. We are also engaged in security sector reform
programmes, such as those supporting the Congolese
and Somali police. The United Nations has an
important role to play in support of activities that
contribute to the protection of civilians. To that end, it
is our hope that the United Nations will cooperate
further in this area.
The international community should pay tribute
to the sacrifices that African nations have been making
and continue to extend its assistance. Japan recognizes
the importance of securing predictable, sustainable and
flexible funding. We have been taking active part in
discussions addressing the needs, and will continue to
make efforts to this end. The use of assessed
contributions was one of the requests made yesterday
in the discussion on Somalia. To help the Security
Council to produce a feasible solution, taking into

10-59826

S/PV.6409

account that request from the African Union, Japan is
committed to continuing to be involved in extensive
discussions with relevant actors and the Secretariat
concerning the questions of how the troop level of the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) can be
increased and of whether or not the current logistics
support package can be expanded, and if so, what
scope and content will be envisaged.
It is essential that international partners
strengthen their cooperation in support of African
Union peacekeeping activities. In this connection, we
welcome new partners in our efforts. We also
appreciate the current reform efforts of the AU
Commission and hope that the AU will be able to
increase its capacity by enhancing its financial
management. It is crucial to have proactive efforts at
both ends.
It is our hope that the lessons learned from the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur and AMISOM will be closely analysed in the
report of the Secretary-General to be issued within six
months. Those lessons must be wisely utilized in future
missions. Japan also hopes that the report will include
an assessment of the activities and operation of the
United Nations Office to the African Union.
To conclude my statement today, I would like to
thank Uganda again for preparing the draft presidential
statement, which Japan supports. A durable peace
cannot be achieved by peacekeepers alone. Political
and reconciliation processes are essential to
consolidating peace. The Council is counting on the
cooperation of African countries in this regard.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate on a topic of great
importance to our efforts for peace and security. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/514) and to welcome the presence and
statement of Mr. Lamamra on behalf of the African
Union. My delegation associates itself with the
statement to be made later by the representative of the
European Union.
I should like to underscore the following points.
First, we commend the efforts undertaken this past year
by the African Union, often in the most difficult
conditions. The African Union plays a significant role
in the Sudan by contributing to the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur; through

10-59826

the African Union High-level Implementation Panel led
by President Mbeki, who plays a facilitating role on the
issues of Darfur and South Sudan; and, finally, through
the role of the Joint African Union-United Nations
Chief Mediator for Darfur, Mr. Djibril Bassolé,
heading the Doha peace process. Similarly, in Somalia,
the African Union’s establishment of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) has prevented the
seizure of Mogadishu by extremists. The contingents of
Uganda and Burundi are making a significant effort to
contain the violence of Al-Shabaab and protect the
Transitional Federal Institutions.
We note that the African Union is one of the
world’s regional organizations that have most
developed their partnership and cooperation with the
United Nations. This exceptional relationship — forged
both between the Security Council of the United
Nations and the African Union’s Peace and Security
Council, and between the African Union Commission
and the United Nations Secretariat — is justified, inter
alia, by Africa’s prominent place on the peacekeeping
agenda. We welcome the growing role played by
African States within peacekeeping operations, which
are mostly deployed in Africa. We also believe that it is
important to preserve the universal nature of the
personnel of these operations.
The African Union contributes a great deal to the
United Nations. It contributes proximity to the
situation on the ground, intimate knowledge of the
regional environment, and the conviction that the
continent is taking responsibility for its own security,
pursuant to the United Nations Charter. Conversely, the
United Nations contributes to the African Union
legitimacy in the context of its Charter, skills,
resources and shared experiences that can assist the
Union in its crisis prevention and management
missions on the continent. Today, all our efforts are
aimed at ensuring that this original and mutually
beneficial partnership, imbued with the spirit of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, endures and improves.
In this respect, we believe that the official
establishment in July of the new United Nations Office
to the African Union in Addis Ababa will contribute to
strengthening this partnership by further integrating the
United Nations activities. I wish to congratulate the
Assistant Secretary-General, Mr. Zachary MuburiMuita, on his appointment to head the Office.

15

S/PV.6409

France, like its European Union partners, is
greatly committed to supporting peacekeeping by
African regional and subregional organizations,
beginning with the African Union. The President of the
Republic announced during the Africa-France summit
in Nice in May that we intend to contribute €300
million over the next three years to bolster the peace
and security architecture, in addition to our bilateral
contribution to the European Union’s African Peace
Facility. We also intend to contribute to the training of
12,000 men.
We attach a special importance to strengthening
African capacities in the field of training and
deployment. The network of regionally oriented
national schools, which we support, is an effective tool
for training the various components of the African
standby force and strengthening military, police and
civilian capacities.
France also contributes significantly to European
assistance, which surpasses €1 billion, to the
maintenance of peace and security on the African
continent. As the Secretary-General underscores in his
report, the European Union has become a key partner
of the African Union in the field of capacity-building
and support for deployed peacekeeping operations. I
recall, for example, that in Somalia the European
Union’s African Peace Facility has committed almost
€95 million to AMISOM, and a decision to provide €47
million in additional financing was adopted last July.
We must, however, abide by the operational rules of
the European Union in this commitment, which means
that, for instance, today we cannot finance lethal
equipment with the Peace Facility.
In the case of Somalia, I wish to pay tribute in
particular to the exemplary mobilization of Uganda,
which hosts the European Union Somalia Training
Mission and, with Burundi, contributes troops to
AMISOM.
United Nations support for African Union
operations calls for innovative responses on our part to
the external and internal challenges we face. From the
security perspective, the difficulty today lies in our
ability to respond to new forms of cross-cutting threats
facing the United Nations and the African Union. I
note that the range of peacekeeping and political
mediation tools is often not well adapted to this type of
situation.

16

In the Sahel and on the west coast of Africa, we
note an increase, and a growing overlap, in the factors
of instability, terrorism, trafficking and rebellion,
which undermine the security and the integrity of
States. That is why support for security sector reform
and promotion of the rule of law must, in time, become
key elements of operations deployed by African
regional and subregional organizations. How to achieve
that?
In that regard, the peacebuilding work carried out
by the Mission for the consolidation of peace in the
Central African Republic, within the framework of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and with the financial support of the
European Commission, France and ECCAS, has
opened up noteworthy paths of work. In addition, the
African mission project for assistance to security sector
reform in Guinea-Bissau, if it takes shape in suitable
conditions, would also merit our attention, like its
cooperation with the United Nations and the European
Union. In other words, all of that shows that ways of
supporting peace and security on the African continent
are far from being fixed and uniform.
Internally, it is also very clear that the current
difficult budgetary circumstances of contributing States
should force us to seek greater efficiency in
peacekeeping operations, while monitoring spending
more closely. If we have decided to pursue our work
that started in the context of the Franco-British
initiative — which seeks to strengthen the chain of
command of operations and to improve the cooperation
with troop contributors — it is also to ensure stricter
financial tracking of those operations, whose budget
has increased exponentially in recent years.
We also believe that if the United Nations is to be
committed to such a reform process, its partners cannot
stay in the background, especially when their
involvement is so great, as is the case with the African
Union. In that regard, in the Secretary-General’s report,
we note with interest the efforts undertaken by the
African Union to reform its management methods and
to diversify its peacekeeping funding sources.
However, the issue of operations follow-up remains
crucial. The United Nations must retain primary
responsibility for the operations that it funds.
For those reasons, both budgetary and
operational, we believe that resorting to United Nations
funding, through obligatory contributions, of

10-59826

S/PV.6409

operations that it does not lead poses difficulties. That
option should not serve as the cornerstone of broader
and bolder consideration, which must be undertaken
based on support for African peacekeeping capacities.
In that regard, I would like to underscore that the new
African Peace Facility of the European Union is a first
appropriate response to the African request for
predictable and sustained financing for peacekeeping
operations led by Africa. We believe that we should be
inspired by that voluntary step to support security on
the African continent.
That brings me to conclude by underscoring that
such support for African capacities concerns us all —
the United Nations, the European Union, bilateral
partners and international donors. But it is also, of
course, the concern of African States themselves,
whose willingness to take charge of their security
governs any success. Rest assured that France will
remain actively involved at their side.
Finally, I would like to voice my delegation’s
support for the draft presidential statement.
Ms. Anderson (United States): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate today. Let me also thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/514) and briefing. My thanks go
as well to the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union (AU), Ambassador Lamamra, for his
important contributions to today’s discussion.
The United States commends the African nations
that provide resources, police officers and troops to
support vital peacekeeping missions on the continent.
In particular, we applaud the major deployment of
more than 7,000 Ugandan and Burundian troops in
Somalia and the critical work being done together with
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Such contributions have improved security and
saved lives across the continent, and they are helping
to prevent threats to international peace and security
from spreading further.
The United States fully supports strengthening
the strategic relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU). We are encouraged to see
improved communication and collaboration between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council. We also welcome the increased frequency
with which African Union officials have briefed the
Security Council and United Nations Special

10-59826

Representatives have briefed the AU Peace and
Security Council.
My Government also supports the continued
United Nations assistance to the AU in the
development of the continental early-warning system,
which, once it becomes operational, will further
enhance the African Union’s ability to prevent conflict.
The United States is fully dedicated to supporting the
African Union as it grapples with the complex
challenges of illicit drug trafficking and post-conflict
reconstruction in Africa. We also strongly support
plans to enhance joint operational efforts to counter the
Lord’s Resistance Army. My Government firmly
supports the African Union’s operations in GuineaBissau, the Sudan, the Central African Republic and
Somalia.
Let me just say a few words about Somalia. The
Djibouti peace process has moved forward and parts of
Mogadishu have remained outside extremist control
because of the efforts of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). The partnership between the
United Nations and the AU has allowed both
organizations to accomplish more than they could have
on their own.
It is in our collective interest to support that
partnership, and we welcome the opportunity to review
its progress and consider way to make it more
effective. The United States will continue its strong
bilateral support to AMISOM’s troop-contributing
countries, but securing sustainable, predictable and
flexible financing remains a key challenge to the AU’s
capacity to undertake effective peacekeeping
operations.
The United States commitment to supporting the
vision of the African Standby Force contributing to AU
operations is broad and deep. Since 2005, the United
States has provided more than $940 million to support
ongoing African Union operations in Darfur and
Somalia and capacity-building through the Africa
Contingency Operations Training and Assistance
Programme. The United States support for building up
the capacity of the African Standby Force is focused at
all three levels — continental, subregional and Member
State. My Government welcomes the ongoing
simulation and evaluation exercise known as Amani
Africa, which we see as an important first step towards
that goal.

17

S/PV.6409

Going forward, we expect that the United Nations
Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa will help
make United Nations support to the AU better
coordinated and more effective, especially in the area
of financial management. That will help ensure that the
AU has the capacity to use donor support effectively,
even as we improve cooperation and coordination. We
also support making more and better use of the AU
Partners Group in Addis Ababa to help make donor
funding to the AU Commission more sustainable and
predictable.
We should also work together to further enhance
the AU secretariat’s capacity to plan, manage and
sustain peacekeeping operations. We must identify
areas that need additional support and attention from
African and other partners, including logistics,
mobility and mission management. We encourage
continued efforts to operationalize the African Standby
Force, and the United States will continue to support
capacity-building and encourage others to support
resource-intensive endeavours.
The United States would like to explore the
possibility of better links between United Nations and
African Union capabilities. We support a detailed
analysis of the operational, budgetary, human resources
and legal implications of letting AU peace support
operations authorized by this Council have access to
the United Nations logistics base in Brindisi, increased
United Nations technical expertise, United Nations
strategic deployment stocks and United Nations
strategic lift capabilities, as recommended by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We would
like to examine the preparatory reports as soon as they
are available.
We also urge all those who seek peace and
security to pay greater attention to the protection of
civilians caught up in conflict and war. We applaud
efforts to incorporate doctrine on protecting civilians
into all aspects of the AU’s peace support operations
and related activities. The United States has increased
efforts to deploy formed police units in Africa.
Protecting civilians and responding to gender-based
violence requires stronger advocacy and programme
efforts from the AU and in the preparation of
peacekeepers. We support doing more to enhance the
civilian and police dimensions of peacekeeping in
Africa.

18

Finally, the United States encourages the United
Nations to continue its work with the African Union as
it develops its peace and security architecture and the
African standby force.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, my delegation would like to welcome
you, Mr. President, and to congratulate you on taking
the initiative to hold this debate devoted to assessing
United Nations support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council. As an
African country, Gabon recognizes the importance of
this issue, which confirms the place that Africa
occupies on the Council’s agenda.
We thank the Secretary-General for the
presentation of his report (S/2010/514). I also take this
opportunity to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia, and to thank him for his contribution to
this debate. We also thank Mr. Lamamra for his
valuable contribution. We share and support the views
he so eloquently expressed.
As we take stock of the situation, we will touch
on the following three points: the positive aspects of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU), the acknowledged shortcomings,
and future prospects.
Concerning the first point, my delegation
welcomes the active cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, based primarily on the
2006 agreement setting the framework for the 10-year
capacity-building programme for the African Union.
While it is true that many of the hopes cherished by
Africa have not always been met, we must
acknowledge that in recent years we have seen positive
developments in many of the areas targeted by the
programme.
Among the initiatives attesting to the vitality of
this cooperation, we stress the joint United Nations-AU
efforts undertaken in the context of the African-Union
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). This force, whose support, command and
control structures are provided by the United Nations —
and, I recall, headed by a joint Special Representative —
has a military component under African command,
functions with financial support from the United
Nations, and is assisted by a Joint Mediator. Although
its hybrid nature was seen as potentially jeopardizing
its effectiveness, we must recognize that UNAMID has

10-59826

S/PV.6409

contributed significantly to providing greater security
in Darfur, without which the peace negotiations
currently being conducted by Mr. Djibril Bassolé, and
before him by Mr. Rodolphe Adada, would have been
impossible.
In Somalia, we welcome the logistical and
financial support provided by the United Nations to the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and its
two support offices, based in Nairobi. In fact, the
United Nations strategy for Somalia, launched in 2008,
has contributed, inter alia, to strengthening AMISOM’s
operational capacity, allowing it to carry out more
robust action under its mandate to defend the positions
of the Transitional Federal Government and to protect
the civilian population.
I should also mention the joint efforts of both
organizations in the area of mediation and
peacekeeping in the Sudan, particularly through the
coordinated action of the African Union High-level
Panel; the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral; the United Nations Mission in the Sudan; and
the Panel on the Referenda in Sudan, recently
announced by the Secretary-General. The joint efforts
of the various stakeholders have created a environment
conducive to the pursuit of the difficult peace talks
currently under way in Darfur. Today, they guarantee
the trust necessary to the positive development of the
continuing negotiations between the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, particularly with
regard to the Abyei and South Sudan referendums.
My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
increasingly close cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council. Indeed, the consultative
meetings held between those two organs since 2007
have allowed for an ongoing exchange of views and
shared decision-making on issues of common interest
in the area of peace and security. The signing of an
agreement on 25 September by the Chair of the African
Union Commission and the United Nations SecretaryGeneral creating the Joint Task Force, as well as the
opening in July in Addis Ababa of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, are also the results of this
approach, aimed at bringing the two organizations
closer together.
While it is increasingly active, the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union in
the area of international peace and security should be

10-59826

strengthened further. We have particularly in mind the
financing of African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council, as well as the logistical
support for those missions. African Union support and
peacekeeping operations require predictable and
sufficient resources if they are to be more effective on
the ground.
In this regard, we welcome the European Union
support for the African Peace Facility, a European
response to the African Union’s resolve to shoulder
responsibility for its own peace and security. Since its
establishment, the Facility has allowed the African
Union to carry out wide-ranging actions to prevent
crises and provide post-conflict stabilization.
We also welcome the United Nations assessed
contributions.
It
is,
however,
essential,
as
recommended in the Prodi report (S/2008/813), for the
United Nations to set up a more flexible, predictable
and sustainable financing mechanism for the African
Union. We therefore endorse the Secretary-General’s
recommendation in this respect by inviting the United
Nations to establish a standing trust fund to be
managed by the African Union and accountable to it
for its disbursements.
We cannot envisage the future of security in
Africa without considering the effectiveness of the
African standby force, created by the African Union to
assist it in fully shouldering its responsibilities in
carrying out its peacekeeping missions. Unfortunately,
due to a lack of sufficient financing and logistical
resources, the force is not yet operational. When it does
become so, the standby force, whose various
components will be based in the five subregions of the
continent, will have the advantage of being able to
mobilize very quickly. That will undoubtedly allow it
to contain conflicts rapidly and to undertake timely
efforts to restore peace. We therefore ask the
international community to provide support for this
force, whose action could be only extremely useful for
the United Nations, which, by relying upon it, would
necessarily avoid the all-too-frequent serious delays it
shows when deploying its peacekeeping forces in
Africa.
My delegation believes that the African Union,
which has in recent years already made considerable
efforts to be perceived as a credible partner in the
maintenance of peace and security, must now focus in
the long term on implementing its global strategic

19

S/PV.6409

framework to strengthen its capacities with the
cooperation with the United Nations and other
international partners. We welcome the fact that the
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of this
debate underscores the need for the Security Council to
assist the African Union, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter, and to shoulder its full
responsibility in maintaining peace and security
throughout the Continent. The ultimate goal is to
contribute to building an Africa free from conflict.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Mr. President, it is an
honour to have you preside over the Security Council
this morning. I also welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nigeria and recognize the presence among
us today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia.
Let me also express appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and Commissioner Lamamra for their
briefings.
Brazil concurs with the Secretary-General when
he states that
“Africa’s needs are great, but so are the
contributions that Africans have made for many
years to keeping the peace in their region and
beyond.” (S/2010/514, para. 65).
We are convinced of the urgency of increasing United
Nations support for the peacekeeping efforts of the
African Union (AU). This support is a key part of the
Organization’s primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is
also a way of recognizing the major role that Africans
have come to play in ensuring stability on their
continent.
We thank the Secretary-General for the concrete
and specific measures for enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union that
are presented in his report (S/2010/514). The
establishment of the United Nations Office to the
African Union is of special relevance. We hope that the
Office will be a valuable channel of communication
and that it will help to increase cooperation between
the two organizations.
The report indicates a number of areas in which
the United Nations is assisting AU peacekeeping. We
welcome that collaboration. We encourage the
Secretary-General to continue exploring initiatives in
the area of peacekeeping support and invite him to
include his proposals in the report to the Special

20

Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at the end of
the year.
The partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in Somalia is an example of both the
positive results it can bring and the need to further
improve and strengthen our collaboration. The logistics
support package provided by the United Nations has
significantly improved the living and operations
conditions of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) troops on the ground. The planning team,
now part of the United Nations Office to the African
Union, has provided important advice to the African
Union Commission. Its work may become even more
instrumental as we consider the African Union’s
proposal to increase the authorized strength of
AMISOM to 20,000 troops, which Brazil supports.
Nevertheless, this support has still not been
sufficient to raise AMISOM’s standards to those of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation. Elements of
the support package not covered by United Nations
assessed contributions, such as the provision of heavy
and lethal equipment and reimbursement for
contingent-owned equipment and troop allowances,
have suffered from piecemeal donor support. The
problem has been compounded by continued and
numerous caveats and earmarks that seriously
undermine the effectiveness of the support provided.
It is therefore necessary to continue to improve
AMISOM’s standards and provide the Mission with the
enablers and capabilities needed for the fulfilment of
its mandate, which is all the more important as
AMISOM operates in a conflict whose volatility is
extreme.
Beyond the specific case of AMISOM, we must
also examine, in a serious and action-oriented manner,
the question of financial support to African Union
peacekeeping missions in general. The requirement for
case-by-case authorization by the Council and
subsequent budgetary approval by the General
Assembly is a challenge that we can and should
effectively address. If there is political will, these
procedures should be sufficient to allow for adequate
support for African Union peacekeeping. Ensuring that
United Nations management regulations are duly
followed may require some creativity, but it should be
possible. Technical considerations, although important,
must not prevent us from responding positively to the
African Union to the maximum extent possible.

10-59826

S/PV.6409

Before concluding, I would like to underline that,
as we strive to improve our support for African Union
peacekeeping, we cannot neglect the areas of conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. The United
Nations has learned, sometimes painfully, that
peacekeeping by itself is often not a sufficient strategy
for dealing with conflict. The African Union has, in
some cases, been even more aware than the United
Nations of the need for an integrated approach to such
situations. We must strengthen this approach and
support the African Union’s conflict prevention and
mediation efforts.
The case for enhanced cooperation between the
African Union and the Security Council has been well
established. The cooperation has proven most valuable,
as illustrated by the examples of AMISOM and the
African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. We must continue to strengthen that
collaboration and seek to extend it to the whole gamut
of issues on our shared agenda.
Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start, Mr. President, by extending to you my
appreciation for having convened this meeting. This
initiative is extremely important in the light of the
pivotal role played by the African Union as far as
peace and security on the African continent is
concerned. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his very important introductory comments
and the report he submitted for our consideration today
(S/2010/514). Of course, I would like to thank
Mr. Lamamra for his important statement.
I would like to associate myself with my
colleagues in welcoming His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria.
The Security Council, as part of its responsibility
for maintaining peace and security, depends on close
knowledge of the region and the background of its
conflicts, as well as possessing the necessary tools to
resolve its problems. It is clear that regional
organizations possess these capacities, and that there is
a need therefore to strengthen the role of those
organizations.
The authors of the Charter of the United Nations
devoted a whole chapter, Chapter VIII, to regional
organizations, thereby enshrining their complementary
role to that of the United Nations in this field. That is
why it is important that, to achieve peace and security,
there be cooperation between the United Nations and

10-59826

the African Union and that their specific qualities be
beneficial to each other.
The African Union plays a primary role: in the
pre-conflict period, through preventive diplomacy;
during conflicts, through efforts to contain and mitigate
the impact of a conflict; and in the post-conflict period,
by contributing to peacebuilding.
Having considered the Secretary-General’s
report, we should like to focus on the following points.
With respect to the strategic relationship between
the African Union (AU) and the United Nations,
successful collective action depends on a successful
and effective strategic partnership between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council. We
therefore welcome the annual consultative meetings
between the two Councils, which have thus far focused
on the best ways to enhance the capacity-building of
the AU and to finance its missions in the fields of
peace and security, conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. The success of this partnership strategy
will depend to a great extent on close cooperation
between the United Nations Secretariat and the African
Union Commission.
In this regard, we welcome the establishment of
the United Nations Office to the African Union on
1 July. The Office pools and combines the mandates of
many agencies and support mechanisms for
peacekeeping operations in Africa, including Somalia
and the Sudan, and represents an additional framework
for joint action to prevent conflicts and promote
disarmament and elections. We also welcome the
creation of the Joint Task Force on Peace and Security
last month. The implementation of the partnership
strategy is reflected in support for the African peace
and security architecture. I would stress the importance
in that regard of the AU 10-year capacity-building
programme and the multi-year initiatives referred to by
the Secretary-General, as well as joint action within the
country framework.
With regard to peacekeeping, the deployment by
the African Union of peacekeeping operations
authorized and sanctioned by the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security is
most important. We therefore urge the United Nations
to increase its assistance to the African Union in the
deployment of and support to its peacekeeping
operations, including by enhancing the African standby
force and current operations in Somalia and the Sudan.

21

S/PV.6409

In that context, we await the outcome of the evaluation
of the African standby force, known as Amani Africa,
which should be issued this month.
Similarly, we welcome the joint work of the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission in establishing a series of basic guidelines
for the AU in the protection of civilians, as well as the
support of the United Nations for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the strengthening
of its capacities in the protection of civilians. We
anticipate greater future support through a long-term
capacity-building road map enabling the partners to
provide enhanced assistance to the African Union.
Finally, with regard to the United Nations
contribution to the success of the African Union’s
peacekeeping operations, such success will depend
largely on the provision of adequate resources for these
operations. However, securing sustainable, predictable
and flexible financing, pursuant to resolution 1809
(2008), represents a major challenge. AU peacekeeping
operations should not be financed by voluntary
contributions, which, while we appreciate them, do not
guarantee the sustainability of operations. When it
deploys peacekeeping operations, the African Union
acts on behalf and relies on the support of the Security
Council, which bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The African Union’s request for the consideration
of using assessed contributions to finance its
operations in specific cases is therefore eminently
justified. In this regard, we recall the SecretaryGeneral’s statement that the logistics support package
for AMISOM would greatly improve the living
conditions of its personnel, as was reaffirmed by the
AMISOM Force Commander in yesterday’s debate (see
S/PV.6408).
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to join previous speakers, Sir, in thanking
your country for its leadership on the issue before us
today and for having convened this very timely debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for the information
he presented to us. We again welcome Ambassador
Lamamra to the Security Council.
We welcome the positive advances that have been
made since the debate that was held on this subject in
October 2009 (see S/PV.6206) in strengthening the
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
African Union, such as the establishment of the United

22

Nations Office to the African Union, support for the
development of the African standby force, and progress
in establishing the African peace and security
architecture. The cooperation achieved between the
two organizations under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter is an important signal that should
inspire us to redouble our efforts to consolidate our
energies and common vision of objectives, regular
interaction and the coordination of areas of mutual
interest to meet the challenges to the continent.
We appreciate the United Nations efforts to
provide support and training to the African Union and
subregional organizations in their initiatives to manage
conflicts on the continent through mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in contexts that are
often difficult and dangerous and with limited
resources. These activities must be complemented by a
review process of peacekeeping operations, such as
that initiated by the United Nations last year, in
particular in the Security Council, in order to ensure
that
conflict
prevention,
the
establishment,
maintenance and strengthening of peace, and the
promotion of development have a tangible impact on
the ground.
Challenges to international peace and security
and the multidimensional nature of this century’s
conflicts have further complicated the deployment of
peacekeeping missions, in particular in Africa.
Although progress has been achieved in cooperation
between the main bodies of this Organization and the
African Union, much remains to be done given the
challenges we face in such conflicts and humanitarian
situations as those in Somalia, the Sudan, Darfur and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to name but a
few. There are also ongoing risks of destabilization in
certain regions as a result of institutional changes in
Government, political violence, human rights
violations and such transnational threats as organized
crime and the illicit traffic in weapons and drugs,
which undermine institutions and the rule of law.
Against that backdrop, it is important that the
annual meetings between the African Union Peace and
Security Council and this Security Council focus on
substantive issues of mutual interest and that they be
supplemented with joint strategies and measures to
assess results. We believe that the promotion of the
capacities of the African Union must continue to focus
on areas of cooperation with the Organization. It is
essential to continue to move forward in meeting the

10-59826

S/PV.6409

objectives of the African Union’s 10-year capacitybuilding programme, in particular by developing the
operational capacities of the African standby force and
strengthening the African peace and security
architecture.
We recognize the fact that, beyond training,
logistics and material support are key to peacekeeping,
in particular in complex conflict situations. Our
delegation believes that the successful deployment of
any peacekeeping operation requires a clear mandate
and the support and resources necessary to the effective
implementation of that mandate.
The importance of having predictable, sustainable
and flexible financing mechanisms is of the greatest
importance when it comes to peacekeeping missions in
Africa, given the material and logistical constraints of
the African Union. We therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation to find a more predictable
and sustainable mechanism, especially in order to
ensure that that regional organization can achieve the
goals set out in the African Peace and Security
Architecture. We also think it is necessary to make
progress on improving peacekeeping operations on the
ground and making them more effective.
We would also like to reiterate the importance of
promoting comprehensive and long-term regional and
local strategies and measures in such areas as
preventive diplomacy and mediation, the protection of
civilians and strengthening institutions and the rule of
law.
We urge the Secretary-General to ensure that
those elements are broadly incorporated in the
capacity-building and cooperation efforts of the United
Nations Office in Addis Ababa. We hope that his next
report, in six months’ time, will include concrete
recommendations to improve peacekeeping models in
Africa through lessons learned and the collaboration of
the African Union and the United Nations in Somalia,
Sudan and Darfur.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation’s support for the draft presidential statement
that we will adopt at the end of this debate.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s debate,
which demonstrates the commitment of the Security
Council to strengthening the links with the African
Union (AU). I would also like to thank the Secretary-

10-59826

General for briefing us on his report (S/2010/514) and
to welcome the important interventions from His
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Nigeria and from
Mr. Lamamra.
The African Union’s designated year of peace and
security is an appropriate time to take stock of the
United Nations-AU relationship. The African Union
has made constructive and significant engagements on
peace and security challenges in Somalia, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Mauritania, Niger and the
Sudan. As we discussed yesterday, the joint AU-United
Nations activity to support the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) is an example of the vital
cooperation between the two organizations. We
commend Uganda and Burundi for their continued
commitment to AMISOM.
Yesterday’s meeting showed how central the
relationship is to achieving our shared peace and
security objectives. But we should acknowledge that
we are only just starting to develop the truly strategic
relationship that we all want to see. There has been
practical progress in three areas.
The first was the launch of mechanisms to
promote a more structured relationship between the
two organizations. We welcome this. The United
Nations Office in Addis Ababa should improve the
effectiveness of United Nations engagement with the
African Union. We also welcome the launch by the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission of the Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security to review immediate and long-term
strategic and operational issues.
Secondly, work on the institutional development
of the African Union is under way. We look forward to
the November review of progress made so far in the
United Nations Ten-year Capacity-building Programme
for the AU. We welcome the African Union’s
framework to finance the recruitment of staff to work
on peace and security. We will contribute to the joint
salaries fund that will facilitate this. We encourage
others to do the same.
Thirdly, we welcome the progress made in
African Union financial management capacity over the
past 12 months. Building AU management capacity,
including resource management, is essential, not only
to manage immediate and future peacekeeping
operations but also to enable a more effective
partnership between the African Union and donors. We

23

S/PV.6409

need to build on this progress as part of a transition to
a more predictable funding process.

focusing on concrete plans for addressing specific
conflict situations.

The United Kingdom welcomes the financial
support provided by all the African Union’s current
partners. European Union assistance to the AU on
peace and security issues, which totals €1 billion, is a
major source of predictable and sustainable funding.
The African Peace Facility supports the costs of
deploying United Nations-authorized AU peacesupport operations. The United Kingdom itself remains
a key donor to African Union peace and security efforts
in its own right, including through the training of
peacekeepers and support for mediation and peacesupport operations.

Thirdly, we both need to do a better job on
conflict prevention. Again, this requires a frank
dialogue and a determination to take the difficult
decisions necessary to address emerging conflict
situations. We want to see the Security Council devote
more attention to conflict prevention, including in
Africa. The African Union’s partnership will be
essential in achieving that.

We recognize, however, as the Secretary-General
pointed out this morning, the need to work towards
longer-term and more predictable, sustainable and
flexible financing for African Union-led operations
under a United Nations mandate. Sustained
engagement and commitment from a broader base of
donors is essential. As we noted yesterday, AMISOM
in particular urgently needs more support from a wider
range of donors, and with fewer caveats.
These are all important practical steps, which are
concretizing the relationship. We are beginning to see
some practical impact. I was encouraged by the
discussion this past summer between the Council and
the African Union’s Peace and Security Council. But I
would highlight three areas that need particular
attention as we move forward.
First, we need to establish a broader strategic
framework for the African Union-United Nations
relationship. I welcome the Secretary-General’s
intention to define his strategic vision of cooperation in
his next report, which should provide a good
foundation for establishing a clearer idea of what we
want to achieve together. Without that overarching
framework, the debate over financing risks becoming
an obstacle to the future deepening of our cooperation,
which we all want to see.
Secondly, we need to be more frank with each
other about what works and what does not work. There
are many lessons to be learned — for example, from
the experience of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We have at times appeared
to be talking past each other on Somalia, particularly
with regard to military strategy. We need to do better at

24

We look forward to working closely with the
African Union on all these important issues, including
through next year’s meeting of the two Councils, and
we look forward to the Secretary-General’s next report.
I can fully support the draft presidential statement
that has been negotiated.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): We would like to thank
you, Sir, for chairing this important debate. Your
presence shows the importance that Uganda attaches to
the subject matter before us. We would also like to
welcome the Secretary-General for introducing his
report (S/2010/514) on support to African Union (AU)
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations. We also thank Commissioner Lamamra for his
statement.
Austria aligns herself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the European Union
(EU) later in this meeting.
Austria has always underlined that efficient
United Nations support for AU peacekeeping is of
great importance. The role played by the AU in
maintaining peace and security on the African
continent is essential and complementary to the work
of the United Nations and the Security Council. We
welcome the numerous positive steps taken by the
African Union and the Secretariat to further enhance
their cooperation. The first meeting of the Joint Task
Force on Peace and Security underlines the
commitment of both organizations. We look forward to
the outcome of the next meeting in January.
The annual meetings between the AU Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council are useful
opportunities to discuss substantive issues of mutual
concern. The Secretary-General’s proposal that the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa should serve as an informal
secretariat to these meetings is a valuable idea that

10-59826

S/PV.6409

should be further considered. In order to complement
such high-level meetings, we believe that workinglevel exchanges should continue to be intensified. For
such efforts to be substantial, it is necessary that the
conclusions of the meetings receive appropriate
follow-up.
The establishment of the integrated United
Nations presence in Addis Ababa is highly welcome. It
reduces duplication, enables the United Nations to
make full use of the synergies that have been created
and facilitates working in a more cost-efficient manner.
We hope that the African Union will make full use of
the benefits of the Office.
Austria fully supports efforts aimed at
intensifying cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union and its
regional economic commissions, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Southern
African Development Community. In addition, we
believe that intensified cooperation with the European
Union, which also cooperates closely with the African
Union in the framework of the Africa-EU Strategic
Partnership, would be an asset and bring about the
benefit of both organizations' comparative advantage.
The upcoming EU-AU summit will be an important
opportunity to strengthen this relationship.
Strengthening the institutional capacities of the
AU is a prerequisite for the AU to take on a more
significant role in the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa. We commend the African Union
Commission for its leadership in strengthening African
capabilities. It is important for all AU member States to
lend their full support to these efforts. We look forward
to the midterm review of the Ten-Year CapacityBuilding Programme. Capacity-building should be
aimed at strengthening national ownership and focus
on the most urgent needs, such as enhancing capacities
in the fields of security sector reform and the rule of
law. As the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo illustrates, these are crucial reforms for the
maintenance of peace and stability.
Austria concurs with the Secretary-General on the
challenge of adequate financing for AU-led
peacekeeping missions authorized by the United
Nations. We maintain that all existing options should
continue to be considered in that regard.
In order for operations such as the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the African Union-United

10-59826

Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur to be ultimately
successful, we believe that a clear division of labour
and definition of the roles and responsibilities of each
organization are paramount. The issue of accountability
lies at the core of United Nations support to AU
peacekeeping, and we very much welcome that the AU
Commission has embarked on significant management
reform over recent years. We encourage the
Commission to continue its work to that effect.
Let me stress that, in the light of the limited
human and financial resources available for
peacekeeping, preventive diplomacy and conflict
prevention need to be given more attention by the
international community in general, and the Security
Council in particular, as well as by regional and
subregional organizations. It is indisputable that, in
terms of cost effectiveness, conflict prevention and
resolution benefit from a substantial comparative
advantage over other forms of engagement, such as
large-scale conflict intervention and post-conflict
reconstruction.
Finally, let me express my full support for the
draft presidential statement and thank Uganda for its
role in drafting it and leading the negotiations to a
successful result.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Haavisto (Finland): At the outset, let me
congratulate Uganda as President of the Security
Council for taking up the important topic of peace and
security in Africa and support for African Union (AU)
peacekeeping.
I associate myself fully with the statement that
will be made on behalf of the European Union (EU).
We have to recognize that African Union
peacekeeping has already made a difference in two of
the most challenging conflicts on the continent,
namely, the conflict in Darfur, Sudan, and the conflict
in Somalia. The African Union was the first to react to
the atrocities in Darfur through its African Union
Mission in the Sudan operation, which has now been
incorporated into the joint African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. The current
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is
working under the utmost of difficult conditions on the
ground in Mogadishu and providing basic security for
the Transitional Federal Government and for the people

25

S/PV.6409

of Mogadishu. Uganda and Burundi have continued to
be the major troop-contributing countries to AMISOM,
despite the risky situation on the ground.
The AU-led AMISOM in Somalia is in many
ways one of the most demanding operations being
conducted. It is in the fundamental interest of African
countries and international partners to ensure that the
AU-led operations operate efficiently and on a sound
financial basis. Together we also need to do more to
build African capabilities. We warmly welcome closer
cooperation among the AU, EU and United Nations
towards that end.
While the AU and subregional organizations have
a key role in the management and resolution of African
crises, cooperation and support from international
partners are important. Finland is committed to support
EU and United Nations efforts in this field. Currently,
for example, we are supporting the Amani Africa
exercise as well as a United Nations pre-deployment
course for African police officers to be deployed in
Darfur and Somalia. Together with other Nordic
countries, we are examining ways to enhance our
support for the development of the East Africa standby
force.
With regard to Somalia, Finland contributes to
the fight against piracy trough the EU Operation
Atalanta and to the training of Somali security forces
through the EU training mission. However, we all
know that efforts conducted outside Somalia will have
little impact unless we are simultaneously able to
support the Somali peace process and a stronger
AMISOM presence in Somalia. Therefore, Finland is
also preparing funding to additionally support the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia in its
efforts to reach out to all stakeholders to achieve
sustainable peace in Somalia.
We look forward to the forthcoming report of the
Secretary-General on United Nations-AU cooperation
on peace and security. We hope that the report will also
be able to provide more clarity on the question of more
predictable funding for United Nations-mandated AU
operations. In that regard, we also welcome the
management reforms within the AU Commission as
well as the efforts of the Commission to strengthen the
African Union’s own resource base.
I want to take up two examples of how Finland
supports its African partners in the field of peace and
security. First, we support the AU in developing its

26

peace mediation capacity through a three-year
programme. The purpose of this programme is to
develop Africa's own capacities to prevent and resolve
conflicts, including support in the participation of
women and adequate consideration of gender issues in
peace processes. We wish to congratulate the African
Union for its work in advancing the agenda on women,
peace and security. As the Security Council prepares to
celebrate the tenth anniversary of its resolution 1325
(2000) next week, it is good to remember that the
strong call for the resolution came from African
countries, including civil society actors.
Secondly, Finland contributes to the work of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel on the
Sudan, led by former South African President Mbeki.
The aim of the Panel is to provide support for the
Sudanese parties in resolving the conflict in Darfur and
in implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Also, the role of regional organizations, such as the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
is important. Finland has supported IGAD in its
Somalia and Sudan activities since 2004.
Non-governmental
organizations
have
an
important role to play in enhancing peace and security.
Finland,
together
with
the
South
African
non-governmental organization the African Centre for
the Constructive Resolution of Disputes, established
the African Peacebuilding Coordination Programme.
We have also been a longstanding supporter of Femmes
Africa Solidarité, most recently in their work in
assisting the Governments of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi in the preparations
of their national action plans on women, peace and
security.
Despite the economic crisis, Finland has been
able to increase its official development assistance
(ODA) funding. More than 50 per cent of our ODA
goes to Africa.
The African Union and the subregional
organizations in Africa have created a political and
security architecture for the continent that deserves our
full recognition and praise. I believe it is in the interest
of everyone that the African Union develops further
into an even stronger actor. The crisis prevention,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development efforts
of African organizations deserve all possible support
from international partners.

10-59826

S/PV.6409

Also to this end, the United Nations Security
Council must be enlarged to better correspond to the
current realities in the world. I think it would be in the
interest of all of us if Africa were more strongly
represented in the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for your accession to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and for
having convened this debate on the issue of peace and
security in Africa and support for peacekeeping
operations of the African Union (AU), to which our
two countries attach particular importance. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
honoured us at this important meeting with your
presence.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his exhaustive presentation and to pay tribute to
him for his commitment to the service of strengthening
the capacity of the AU to meet the challenges facing
the African continent in the areas of maintaining peace
and security.
I would like to recognize the presence of
Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, and thank him for his edifying
statement.
I would also like to welcome the presence at this
important meeting of His Excellency Mr. Henry Odein
Ajumogobia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria,
and Mr. Yusuf Hasan Ibrahim, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia.
My delegation has looked with great interest at
the report introduced by the Secretary-General
(S/2010/514) on supporting peacekeeping operations of
the African Union authorized by the United Nations
and we welcome the development of cooperation
between the AU and the Organization, which reflects
our wish to have a strategic relationship between these
two organizations that can develop on an equal and
harmonized footing.
We also note with satisfaction the concrete
measures taken to strengthen cooperation between
these two organizations, be it between the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council or

10-59826

between the United Nations Secretariat and the AU
Commission.
In that regard, we also welcome the fourth joint
consultative meeting between the members of the
Security Council and the members of the AU Peace and
Security Council held this past June and the creation on
1 July of the United Nations Office to the AU in Addis
Ababa, as well as the much welcomed appointment of
Ambassador Muburi-Muita to head that body.
Often seen as the main theatre for peacekeeping
operations, Africa is now becoming a stakeholder in its
own operations. The African Peace and Security
Architecture has now made progress and is
experiencing an increase in influence, thanks to further
AU efforts to develop a strategic vision and military
capacity to meet the challenges of peacekeeping.
These efforts are clear proof of the commitment
and determination of African leaders to back-up
decisions taken at African meetings and summits with
operational actions that will accelerate their
implementation on the ground. An important example
of this is the special African Union Summit, held in
Tripoli on 31 August 2009, at which, among others
things, a courageous decision was taken to double the
part of the AU budget devoted to peacekeeping
operations from 6 to 12 per cent.
Far from being sufficient to justify full autonomy,
the actions of the AU are still facing a lack of resources
and capacity weaknesses, while the demands for urgent
response are increasingly great. It is in that spirit that,
in January 2010, the Assembly of the AU requested the
United Nations to consider, under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter, the possibility of financing
through mandatory assessments to the peacekeeping
operations led by the AU or those under its authority
with the consent of the United Nations.
The AU Peace and Security Council reiterated
that request at a recent meeting. The adoption of such
measures would guarantee the AU the capacity it needs
to carry out its activities and to ensure success of its
missions under a Security Council mandate.
The outstanding work done by the joint task force
of the AU and the United Nations, including the
recommendations in the report, have identified actions
that need to be undertaken. For, despite numerous
positive signs in the area of cooperation between the
organizations, much remains to be done in terms of

27

S/PV.6409

role-sharing
intervention.

and

defining

the

modalities

for

As a point of fact, the Secretary-General clearly
stated in his report that
“without a truly strategic relationship and clear
guidance, our efforts to work together will
continue to be short-term, ad hoc, more
complicated and often more costly” (S/2010/514,
para. 55).
In this context, the report that the SecretaryGeneral intends to submit soon and which will, among
other things, further define a strategy for cooperation
between the Organization and the AU in the area of
peacekeeping, could provide us with guidelines for a
better partnership between our two organizations.
Before concluding, allow me to reiterate the
commitment of Algeria to cooperate with the
international community to establish lasting peace and
security at the regional and international levels and, at
the same time, to pay a powerful tribute to those
working on the ground, who courageously work for
peace and the achievement of the principles and
purposes of the Organization, often at the cost of their
own lives.
The President: I thank the representative of
Algeria for his statement. I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to convey its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to participate in this debate, which
is of strategic importance to my country, our region
and the international community at large. This debate
is also of strategic importance to the strengthening of
the relationship between Africa and the United
Nations.
Your personal presence in presiding over this
meeting, Mr. Minister, as well as that of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, provides clear testimony
to the importance Africa extends to this relationship.
We thank the Secretary-General for introducing
his report on this matter (S/2010/514). We view his
presence here today as a clear expression of the
importance that he too attaches to the issue. In the
same vein, we welcome the presence and participation
of Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security
of the African Union (AU).

28

In her statement to the General Assembly on 25
September 2010, our Minister of International
Relations and Cooperation, Her Excellency Ms. Maite
Nkoana-Mashabane, stated that,
“The United Nations should see Africa as a
partner in the maintenance of international peace
and the management of conflicts, and accordingly
do more to strengthen the working relationship
between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council.” (A/65/PV.17)
That statement is consistent with the Charter of
the United Nations, which endows the Security Council
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In Chapter VIII, the
Charter also empowers regional organizations to
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that regard, the AU has developed a
comprehensive
African
Peace
and
Security
Architecture, an institutional response designed to
effectively prevent, mitigate and resolve conflict within
the region.
The political will, commitment and resolve of the
AU to address issues of security have found practical
expression in the myriad of preventative and
diplomatic missions the organization has undertaken
over the years. That commitment has also been
evidenced by AU initiatives aimed at peacebuilding,
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and
development on the continent. In cases where the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, was unwilling or unable to act, the AU,
despite its own limitations, has sent troops to maintain
peace and provide security in conflict areas in Africa.
This was the case in the recent past with the
deployment of the African Union Missions in Burundi,
Sudan and Somalia.
In the eyes of ordinary people on the African
continent, it seems that so many innocent people have
to die, so much innocent blood shed, before the
Security Council assumes its responsibility to protect
and maintain stability on the continent. Some have
even quipped that the Security Council moves with a
speed of a cheetah in responding to crises elsewhere,
and moves with a speed of an elephant to respond to
conflicts in Africa. We must continue to reaffirm
through our actions that the United Nations stands for
all of us.

10-59826

S/PV.6409

These examples illustrate clearly that the AU
should and must be seen as a partner to the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, especially in Africa. My delegation, however,
takes note of the ongoing efforts by the United Nations
in supporting the AU in carrying out peace support and
peacekeeping missions authorized by the United
Nations. However, this does not absolve the Security
Council of its primary responsibility in relation to the
maintenance of international peace and security.
It remains the AU’s priority to enhance
institutionalized cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council. We believe that this cooperation is
essential in establishing sustainable peace throughout
our continent. My delegation notes with satisfaction
the efforts by the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council to collaborate and articulate a
coherent and effective strategic partnership. In this
regard, we welcome the annual consultative meetings
between the two Councils since 2007 and the
commitment expressed during the fourth joint
consultative meeting to further strengthening this
cooperation. My delegation also encourages more
regular and intensified interaction between the two
Councils.
While the report provides an excellent overview
of the tremendous progress made by both organizations
in strengthening and operationalizing the AU
machinery for peacemaking and peacekeeping, it also
raises a number of challenges at the strategic level. In
this regard, we shall limit ourselves to commenting on
the following areas.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s report
and encourage the Security Council to move away from
the current ad hoc, short-term arrangements to a more
strategic vision of the partnership it wishes to have
with the AU, one that would better serve its mandate to
maintain international peace and security. Such a
vision, according the Secretary-General, would
empower and enable both the United Nations
Secretariat and United Nations legislative bodies to
align their actions with this broader strategic vision.
The critical challenge of funding, which was
highlighted in the Prodi panel report (S/2008/813), is
again raised in the report of the Secretary-General,
where he states that “the current financial frameworks
for partnerships in peacekeeping operations are not

10-59826

conducive to building a sustainable long-term strategy”
(S/2010/514, para. 61). This therefore warrants that the
United Nations urgently review and seek ways of
ensuring predictable, flexible and sustainable financing
for peacekeeping operations undertaken by the AU on
behalf of the international community.
South Africa also welcomes the commitment by
the Secretary-General to submit a report within six
months that will define and outline the Secretariat’s
strategic vision for United Nations-AU cooperation in
peace and security and examine the increased variety
of models for peacekeeping in Africa. The annual
Security Council and AU Peace and Security Council
meetings should seize the opportunity to jointly and
closely consider that report, with a view to identifying
and adopting concrete recommendations for immediate
implementation.
Regarding the current African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), my delegation wishes to reiterate
the call by the AU for the Security Council to, among
other things, endorse the newly authorized strength of
AMISOM; authorize an enhanced support package for
AMISOM funded through United Nations assessed
contributions; impose a naval blockade and a no-fly
zone over Somalia; approach the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia in a holistic manner; and commit to
recast AMISOM as a United Nations peacekeeping
operation.
Finally, paragraph 16 of Security Council
resolution 1809 (2008) resonates in recognizing “the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing of regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping under a United Nations
mandate”. We therefore call on the Security Council to
implement its own resolutions in that regard. We are
convinced the results of the implementation of that
resolution can only contribute positively to the
maintenance of international peace and security. Then
the ordinary people of the African continent could say
that “the United Nations does indeed stand for all of
us”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): At the outset, I
should like to thank you, Sir, for having invited the
European Union (EU) to participate in this debate. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the

29

S/PV.6409

Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro, Serbia; as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report on
support to Africa Union peacekeeping and today’s
debate (S/2010/514), which shows the continued
attention that the Security Council is paying to the role
of African regional institutions in peacekeeping, as
well as to the role and responsibilities of regional
organizations on the whole. At the same time, I would
like to thank the Ugandan presidency of the Security
Council for its efforts in this field as demonstrated by
the presence of the First Deputy Prime Minster of
Uganda here today.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, Commissioner Lamamra and Mr. Ajumogobia
for their important statements.
The United Nations relations with regional,
subregional and other international organizations
should become truly strategic partnerships. Progress in
this direction could result in a qualitative leap of the
overall United Nations system’s capacity to prevent,
respond and stabilize. The EU strongly believes in such
partnerships and fully supports any effective, focused
and well coordinated effort to further develop and
operationalize them.
The European Union welcomes the SecretaryGeneral proposals aimed at widening and strengthening
United Nations cooperation with the African Union
(AU). In practical terms, we consider that close
cooperation among the African Union, United Nations
institutions and other relevant bodies has improved in
recent years. We are encouraged that the modalities and
parameters for such cooperation have been well
established thus far, including thanks to the Prodi panel
report (see S/2008/813) and the subsequent reports by
the Secretary-General.
The European Union warmly welcomes the
launch of the AU-UN Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security as an important mechanism to enhance
strategic cooperation between the two organizations in
preventing and resolving conflicts.
We also welcome the consolidation of the United
Nations offices in Addis Ababa into a single composite
office capable of a playing a stronger role, both in its
relations with the AU as well as with the local EU

30

delegation. I wish to congratulate United Nations
Assistant Secretary-General Zachary Muburi-Muita for
his appointment as head of the United Nations Office
to the African Union, and we look forward to work
with him and his staff.
The European Union welcomes the commendable
efforts of the African Union in the area of peace and
security and we are pleased to see that the SecretaryGeneral’s report recognizes the relevant role played by
the European Union in that regard. We have directly
supported the deployment of AU peace support
operations but also the progressive build-up of the
policies and pillars of the African Peace and Security
Architecture. These efforts are articulated in detail
within the Joint Africa-European Union Partnership for
Peace and Security and its three-year action plans. This
Partnership is, in turn, underpinned by a financing
architecture of more than €1 billion, which makes
possible long-term programming and ensures the
sustainability of efforts.
The European Union instrument known as the
African Peace Facility represents a major source of
predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
African-led peace-support operations. With a total
allocation of €740 million since 2004, the Facility has
provided a major part of the funding for the
strengthening of the capacities of relevant institutions
and structures and for the strengthening of interactions
between the African Union and African subregional
organizations. It has also financed a number of
African-led peace operations, such as the former
African Union Mission in the Sudan, the African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Multinational Force of the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
and the Mission for the consolidation of peace in the
Central African Republic, and two African Union
operations in the Comoros.
The upcoming third Africa-EU Summit, to take
place in Libya on 29-30 November 2010, will therefore
be an opportunity to take stock of our first three-year
action plan of the Peace and Security Partnership and
of the activities carried out so far. As for the future, the
summit will lay the foundations of a comprehensive
road map based on a joint assessment of the African
peace and security architecture pillars and on the
results of the Amani Africa exercise, both just
completed.

10-59826

S/PV.6409

In cooperation with the African Union, we are
ready to step up our contribution to the work of the
United Nations as presented in the Secretary-General’s
report, and to share the lessons learned from our
political, technical and financial support to the African
peace and security architecture and to African peace
operations.
In conclusion, let me emphasize that the
European Union is strongly committed to further
developing its own strategic partnerships with the
African Union and with the United Nations. The
Secretary-General's report highlights the extent of
United Nations and African Union cooperation, the
scope of which is strikingly similar to the ongoing
African Union-European Union cooperation. It is clear
that our organizations are driven by common agendas
and face common challenges. I therefore fully support
the encouragement of the Secretary-General to work
more in this direction.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I join previous
speakers in commending you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's debate on peace and security in
Africa and support to African Union peacekeeping. The
importance of this debate is further underlined by your
presidency and the presence here of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria and Somalia, whom I greet
very especially. I also wish to express my thanks for
the useful statement by the Secretary-General, and to
welcome his comprehensive and valuable report on
support to African Union peacekeeping operations
authorized by the United Nations (S/2010/514). Let me
also thank Ambassador Lamamra for his briefing and
his important contribution to today’s debate.
Portugal naturally shares the views contained in
the statement just made by the representative of the
European Union, so let me only mention some specific
points that we think should be stressed.
The history of the United Nations shows that
peacekeeping operations are not a short-term activity.
In this regard, partnerships with regional organizations
are playing an increasingly important role in our
collective peace and security, under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations and always with respect
for the primary role of the Security Council.

10-59826

There are several examples of this collaboration,
including with the European Union in Chad or Kosovo
and with the African Union in the Sudan and Somalia.
Today, we are analysing that last situation: the African
Union peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. It has become more and more clear
that, if they are to be successful, it is necessary that we
develop an effective and strategic partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union that not only
envisages the direct support of the United Nations to
the African Union when the latter is conducting
operations authorized by the United Nations, but also
helps the African Union to develop its own capacities
in this area. This is a partnership that will have to work
in two directions by also reinforcing the United
Nations political capacities and increasing its
preventive diplomacy capacities. Both organizations
and their member States agree on that, but to achieve
it, there must be persistence, flexibility and sustained
political commitment from all parts involved.
Since the issuance of the Prodi report
(S/2008/813), several important steps have been taken,
as noted in the Secretary-General’s report under
consideration today. Portugal welcomes the recent
launching of the Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security between the United Nations Secretariat and
the African Union Commission. This is a commitment
of the utmost importance to strengthening the strategic
cooperation between the two organizations in this area.
We also welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in July, headed by
our former colleague Zachary Muburi-Muita, whom I
salute and congratulate most warmly. We believe that
the establishment of the Office will help to reduce
duplication and reinforce the joint work where it is
most needed — at the local level.
All these are very significant steps towards the
enhancement of the strategic cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, as are the
annual consultative meetings between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, which provide the fundamental political
commitment. Nevertheless, more should be done to
achieve a truly and essential strategic and operational
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.
The new United Nations Office in Addis Ababa
will have a key role to play in the development of these

31

S/PV.6409

relations, and I am confident that it will do so. Also,
the day-to-day relations between the United Nations
Secretariat and the African Union Commission —
through the implementation of the framework for the
10-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union, and through more regular and operational
communication — will be essential.
The Secretary-General's suggestion to use the
Security Council Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa as an informal
secretariat to the meetings between the Security
Council and the African Union Commission could be a
step towards ensuring that those meetings will have
concrete and substantive results.
Capacity- and institution-building in conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as
management, are crucial areas to be supported.
Portugal praises all the work being done here by the
Secretariat and all the efforts being conducted on the
African Union side, and we urge the African Union and
all its members to continue these efforts, thus
becoming more capable of assuming full ownership of
their own peace and security.
We recognize that, even with all these efforts
going on, there are other major challenges, difficult to
overcome, to improving the effectiveness of the
African Union authorized peacekeeping operations.
One example is the imbalance between the number of
deployed forces and the vastness of the territories;
another is the related challenge of financing the
missions.
Portugal, while recognizing the enormous efforts
the United Nations has undertaken regarding
increasingly large and complex operations in Africa,
believes that the African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations require
more sustainable, predictable and flexible financing in
their current form. Portugal welcomes the efforts
undertaken by the Secretary-General, as stated in his
report, regarding budgeting and financial management
and accountability reform. We consider that a certain
measure of pragmatism and realism will be necessary
to address this issue.
Finally, I would also say a word regarding the
relevance of subregional organizations in the African
peace and security architecture. These organizations
can have an important role to play in helping to
maintain peace and security in their regions, but their

32

capacity must be improved in this sense. The United
Nations could also have a role here, helping them to
build their capacities and institutions and reinforcing
effective coordination with them. This would
undoubtedly also reinforce the United Nations capacity
in mediating conflicts and in preventive diplomacy.
In conclusion, much has been done in the past
year regarding the development of this strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. Portugal is strongly committed to
supporting the continuation of these efforts, as they are
essential to promoting peace and security in all parts of
the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Maina (Kenya): I thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Council on a matter
that we consider to be crucial to peace and security in
Africa. Kenya welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations
(S/2010/514). The report addresses important issues
related to peacekeeping operations and a number of
recommendations that warrant our collective
consideration.
Regional organizations play a pivotal role in
matters of peace and security, and indeed serve to
further the Council's mandate of ensuring the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
African Union in particular has played and continues to
play this role in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in Africa. However,
there are many challenges that face the African Union
in the deployment and management of peacekeeping
operations. The question of capacity-building is vital if
the institutional development of the African Union is to
be strengthened. Capacity-building is important to
enable the African Union to address not only
immediate peacekeeping operations, but also conflict
prevention, mediation and peacebuilding.
Partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is crucial in addressing the question of
peace and security in Africa. In that regard we note that
the Secretary-General’s report underscores the
necessity of a close strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union and gives
direction on mechanisms and processes to be put in
place so as to enhance this critical partnership.

10-59826

S/PV.6409

We are encouraged by the increased momentum
of a bid to strengthen and solidify the relationship
between the two organizations. We welcome the
establishment in July of the United Nations Office to
the African Union, headed by Ambassador Muburi
Muita. The fusion of the various United Nations offices
in Addis Ababa into a single compact office will
certainly greatly assist in streamlining the channels of
interaction between the United Nations and the African
Union. Indeed, by reducing duplication and pooling
resources in a more cost-efficient manner, the United
Nations Office to the African Union will be a prime
example of the evolution of qualitative engagement
between the African Union and the United Nations.
The issue of funding in support of African Union
peacekeeping operations has been on the table for quite
a while. The Prodi panel report (S/2008/813) and
subsequent reports, assessments and initiatives have all
sought ways for the United Nations to assist the
African Union to improve effectiveness in deploying
and managing peacekeeping operations mandated by
the United Nations. The United Nations has indeed
recognized the importance of enhancing the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of financing
for the African Union’s peace and security capability. It
is our hope that the strengthened partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union will lead to a
better understanding of the dynamics involved and a
way forward in this matter.
In the specific case of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), Kenya strongly supports the
call made yesterday to this Council by the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
Ambassador Lamamra (see S/PV.6407) to endorse the
newly authorized strength of AMISOM and authorize
an enhanced support package for it, as well as all of the
other four action points raised by the Commissioner,
including rehatting AMISOM.
In conclusion, I wish to recall the SecretaryGeneral’s observation in the current report that:
“Africa’s needs are great, but so are the
contributions that Africans have made ... to
keeping the peace in their region and beyond.”
(S/2010/514, para. 65)
Therefore, it is only right and just that the United
Nations and international partners walk the path with
Africa as it seeks solutions to the conflicts that have
sadly ravaged the African continent for so long.

10-59826

We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report that intends to define the Secretariat’s strategic
vision for United Nations and African Union
cooperation in peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr.
Quinlan
(Australia):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate. We very
much welcome the presence of African leaders in the
Chamber today. That is a strong statement of the
understandable importance that countries of Africa
give this item. Australia shares that sense of
importance.
The item under consideration today goes to the
heart of how the system of international relations
conceived by the United Nations Charter in 1945 must
remain relevant to the contemporary challenge of
maintaining international peace and security in
circumstances that we all know are so very different
from those when the United Nations was established. It
is for the same contemporary reasons that early
Security Council reform must lead to increased African
representation on the Council.
Australia welcomes the latest report from the
Secretary-General (S/2010/514). Obviously, some real
progress has been made over the past 12 months in
strengthening both the strategic and, more importantly,
the operational partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU).
The annual consultative meeting between the AU
Peace and Security Council and this Council has
become a fixture on the meetings calendar. It embodies
the importance of those two bodies forging the close
and strategic partnership that is needed. Also at the
strategic level, we were particularly pleased to
participate in the inaugural meeting between the AU
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission earlier this year. That
relationship also is one that needs to evolve into a
strong and effective partnership.
We welcome the recent establishment of the
United Nations Office to the African Union in Addis
Ababa. That should create greater synergies and
efficiencies in the United Nations-AU relationship. The
range of other measures set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report are all practical, sensible and need to
be expanded into the future, including staff exchanges,

33

S/PV.6409

annual retreats and ongoing collaboration on country
specific issues. All of that should ensure that the AU,
in developing its own systems, learns from the
experience and best practices of the United Nations.

for all military personnel and support staff. We have
also been pleased to contribute to the United Nations
Trust Fund for AMISOM, with a view to strengthening
the AU’s capacity to manage peace operations.

Australia welcomes the progress that has been
made. It is in the global interest of all of us that the AU
continue to develop as a credible and strong regional
organization that is fully equipped to deal with the
challenges of the African continent, especially in
relation to conflict prevention and response.

We look forward to remaining engaged with the
AU to support its work and strengthen its capacity to
address the challenges in Africa. We have recently
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
African Union Commission, which will strengthen our
cooperation in areas of mutual interest across the broad
remit of the AU agenda, including in the area, above
all, of peace and security — which of course is relevant
to today’s discussion. We have also recently opened —
I should say “finally”, but it has been done — a
resident embassy in Addis Ababa and appointed a
defence attaché and staff who are accredited to the AU.
Those recent developments should provide a solid
foundation for an expanding engagement by Australia
with the AU in this area in the future.

The AU and African troop-contributing countries
are carrying a large and difficult — but impressive —
responsibility when it comes to peacekeeping in Africa.
The broader international community needs to
recognize the role those countries are playing in the
direct maintenance of regional and international peace
and security, and take steps to support them.
For our part, we have been pleased to contribute,
in a small way, to strengthening the AU’s peace and
security architecture. Australia has given practical
support to the efforts of the African Union Commission
to develop AU guidelines on the protection of civilians
in peacekeeping operations, as referenced in the
Secretary-General’s report, and we will continue to
support the AU in that endeavour.
Australia is supporting the E-learning for African
Peacekeepers — ELAP — programme and has done
so since its inception in 2006. In that time, the
programme — which is a good one — has attracted
over 200,000 enrolments across 20 peacekeeping
operations in distance training courses, at no cost to the
participants. The provision of standardized training to
peacekeepers is a foundation of strengthening the
effectiveness of that peacekeeping.
This past summer we provided training to the
military planning element of the East Africa standby
force, with a focus in the first instance on headquarters
and logistics planning. We will continue that assistance
with that standby force and other standby brigades.
Also this past summer Australia was pleased to
sponsor, with Nigeria, the United Nations Regional
Conference on Deterrence, the Use of Force and
Operational Readiness in Peacekeeping, held at the
Nigerian Army Peacekeeping Centre in Kaduna,
Nigeria. That Conference attracted participants from
around 20 African troop-contributing countries, with a
view to developing comprehensive guidance material

34

Obviously, the most difficult issue under
consideration today is the question of predictable,
flexible and sustainable financing for the AU’s peace
and security capability. We commend the major
contributors to AU peacekeeping missions for
assuming the massive responsibilities that they have
done. The issue of funding that responsibility goes to
the heart of the global community’s ability to respond
to threats and to the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations, in particular the
AU.
The question, however, does not arise only when
we consider the question of support for AU
peacekeeping. Just last week in its debate on
post-conflict peacebuilding (see S/PV.6396), the
Council expressed a similar sentiment when it
reaffirmed “the critical importance of timely, flexible
and predictable funding for peacebuilding” (see
S/PRST/2010/20). In July, following its consideration
of the use of preventive diplomacy tools (see
S/PV.6360), the Council recognized the importance of
enhancing efforts to ensure predictable, coherent and
timely financial support to optimize the use of
preventive diplomacy tools.
Australia will work pragmatically with Member
States to address this issue. It is one in which we all
have an interest, not just the members of the Council.
We need to collectively consider the financing of peace
operations if we are to be serious about assisting

10-59826

S/PV.6409

countries emerged from conflict and helping them
establish themselves as stable, prosperous nations, and
if we are to be serious about the responsibilities we
have all assumed as United Nations Members under the
Charter. All United Nations Member States should give
that question priority, and we should give that priority
sooner rather than later.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Abay (Ethiopia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened today’s meeting. I would like to
express my appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, the Secretary-General, for his report
(S/2010/514). I also wish to express my deep
appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador Lamamra
and his colleagues for the update and for their efforts to
consolidate peace in Africa and to coordinate the
support for African Union (AU) peacekeeping
operations.
Early this year, the Secretary-General told the
Council, during its open debate on Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, to envision a world in
which regional organizations and the United Nations
work together on all continents, in accordance with the
principles of the Charter, to prevent, manage and
resolve crises (see S/PV.6257). The increased attention
given to the need to strengthen the partnership and
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union has been a very encouraging
development for African states.
Ethiopia attaches great importance to the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We believe it is critical to harness the
synergy in the relevant domains of both organizations,
maximizing the relative advantages that each can offer.
While we acknowledge that this strategic partnership is
established within the context of the Security Council’s
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the AU’s proximity to
and familiarity with the problem and its capability
would obviously enable it to respond quickly to issues
arising in that regard.
We are seeing that peacemaking and
peacekeeping have become a shared responsibility in
which the global community has significant roles to
play, and thus working with the regional organizations
would assist the United Nations in attaining its
objectives. The Council, taking this into account, has

10-59826

taken steps in the right direction to accomplish our
common responsibilities.
My delegation emphasizes the need to accelerate
the implementation of the United Nations-African
Union 10-year capacity-building programme in a
consistent manner. Hence, that venture — or, for that
matter, investing in building Africa’s peacekeeping
capacity — means empowering the regional organ in
its handling of the security, stability and future of the
continent. It would enable the continental organ to
realize its potential to the maximum and to stand on its
own by building its capabilities.
We share the proposal by the Secretary-General
indicating that the time has arrived to elaborate clearer
principles and take practical measures to address the
challenges of this partnership. The work already begun
by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur and the African Union Mission in Somalia
serve to illustrate the kind of model collaboration that
the two need to adopt. Those Missions and the lessons
learned could be a basis upon which we can build with
regard to what has been achieved thus far.
My delegation welcomes the joint effort to
develop the African Union’s capacity to respond to
crises on the continent and thus supports the proposal
to establish a joint United Nations-African Union team
to examine the detailed modalities for implementing
the capacity-building programme as a whole.
The Council’s measures to enhance the
predictability, sustainability and flexibility of funding
to strengthen the AU peace and security architecture,
particularly the peacekeeping operations under the
United Nations mandate, are commendable. Yet a lot
remains to be done.
We would like to express our support for the use
of United Nations assessed funding to support United
Nations-authorized African Union peacekeeping
operations, based on the proposal presented in the
Secretary-General’s report. The Council should
demonstrate its resolve and political will by providing
the necessary resources to boost the AU’s capability in
this domain.
Ethiopia stands ready to work towards the
realization of the objectives of the partnership between
the two organs. As the time for further action has
arrived, I wish to state that my delegation looks

35

S/PV.6409

forward to the effective measures that the Council will
take in this regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to start by warmly congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your leadership of the Council this
month, all the more so as you come from a neighbourly
and brotherly African country that has contributed so
greatly to promoting peace and stability throughout our
African continent. It is my great pleasure to commend
your role as President of the Council and the role you
have played in ensuring the success of the Council’s
stock-taking visit to the Sudan. That visit enabled the
Council to observe the situation on the ground. I would
also like to congratulate you for having organized these
important discussions on peace and security in Africa
in the area of support for the peacekeeping operations
of the African Union (AU).
The founding fathers of the United Nations
wanted to guarantee, through Chapter VIII of the
Charter, that there were legally binding texts regarding
the support to be provided by the United Nations to
peacekeeping operations carried out by regional and
subregional organizations. They were fully aware of
the fact that global peace is an integral and indivisible
whole and that genuine partnership between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations on
issues of the maintenance of international peace and
security was inevitable.
The recommendations of the African UnionUnited Nations panel established under Security
Council resolution 1809 (2008) were aimed at
acquiring the means of financial sustainability for AU
peacekeeping operations as authorized by the United
Nations. The first part of the report (S/2008/813)
focused on the ways to strengthen the strategic
relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union in order to revitalize channels for joint
action between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council in a way that fully
utilized the potential capacity for partnership and direct
coordination in the field of decision-making and the
sharing of responsibility, according to the mandates of
the two organizations.
I welcome here the mutual visits organized thus
far and the joint advisory meetings between the two
bodies from 2007 to today. However, we all yearn for

36

greater and closer coordination, especially with regard
to United Nations support for the African Union
10-year capacity-building programme and the
promotion and enhancement of peacekeeping, as
provided for by the joint communiqué publicized by
the two Councils following their joint advisory meeting
held on 4 July 2010 in New York.
All of us are aware of the need to step up the
number of regular briefings by the leaders of the
African Union to the Security Council in which they
spell out their position regarding progress made in
areas of cooperation between the two organizations. In
the past, these briefings have stressed the need for
cooperation between the two organizations, especially
with regard to the situations in Burundi, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia, Madagascar and my country, the
Sudan.
We agree with the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral with respect to the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union, which is a
two-tiered process. The first tier is the implementation
of the 10-year capacity-building programme and
support for the mechanisms of the African peace and
security architecture. The second consists of joint
efforts by the two organizations through regional
mechanisms and the relevant United Nations agencies
and institutions in the areas of peacebuilding.
Conflict prevention should also be a priority. I
would refer to the concept note on optimizing the use
of preventive diplomacy tools (S/2010/371, annex)
used by the Security Council to guide its debate of 16
July (see S/PV.6360). The presidential statement
adopted on that occasion (S/PRST/2010/14) stressed
the enhancement of capacity-building for regional and
subregional organizations and national Governments in
the areas of preventive diplomacy and peace through
mediation, including, more broadly, developing
regional working methods in the area of conflict
resolution.
With regard to peacekeeping, and specifically the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), cooperation between the United
Nations Secretariat and the AU Commission has been a
success, given the transformation of the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan into UNAMID in December 2007.
The goal was to create a model for implementation
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

10-59826

S/PV.6409

With regard to cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security, the reports of the
Secretary-General and the Chair of the African Union
at the time clearly asserted that this was to be an
African-owned mission, made up solely of Africans.
The United Nations was to provide the necessary
technical, financial and logistical assistance, including
technical advice, in all areas. That experience
illustrates the importance of regional capacity-building
in peacekeeping, including efforts aimed at
strengthening AMISOM and activating its role.
We believe, however, that the AMISOM
experience attests to the importance of predictable and
sustainable financing for AU peacekeeping operations
mandated by and in coordination with the United
Nations. Such operations face many challenges,
including the main challenge of being financially
dependent on the contributions of international donors
and partners, including the African Union. We are well
aware that the AU’s inability to count on sustainable
and predictable sources of financing makes its plans
and strategies for peacekeeping operations arbitrary,
fluctuating and unstable. The position of donors at the
moment when peace agreements are signed sometimes
change when it comes to providing assistance in the
post-peacekeeping phase.
I could list several examples in that regard, but
will limit myself to reminding the Council of the very
generous contributions and pledges made by donors at
Oslo in 2005 in order to implement the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement in the Sudan. However, such
contributions were not forthcoming once both parties
to the Agreement entered the implementation phase.
In conclusion, I would like to say that forging a
comprehensive strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union requires

10-59826

practical guidelines and measures on the part of the
competent legal bodies of the United Nations,
especially with respect to financing and its sources.
That is all the more true now that the African Union
has
assumed
many
responsibilities
in
the
implementation of promising regional initiatives that
have contributed to the settlement of conflicts
throughout Africa.
I would also like to stress the importance of joint
meetings between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council. We should establish
a broader mechanism to deal with the preparatory work
for those meetings, without in any way impinging upon
the mandate of the Security Council’s Ad Hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa.
It is for those reasons that I welcome the African
Union’s contributions to and initiatives on the
continent, including in my own country, the Sudan.
The President: The Council has before it the text
of a statement by the President on behalf of the
Council on the subject of today’s meeting. I thank
Council members for their valuable contributions to
this statement. In accordance with the understanding
reached among the members of the Council, I shall
take it that the members of the Security Council agree
to the statement, which will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/21.
It is so decided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

37
