United Nations

A/RES/58/193

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 March 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 117 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/508/Add.2)]

58/193. Globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of all
human rights
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
and expressing in particular the need to achieve international cooperation in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all without distinction,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 as well as the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference on Human
Rights on 25 June 1993, 2
Recalling also the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 3 and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,3
Recalling further the Declaration on the Right to Development adopted by the
General Assembly in its resolution 41/128 of 4 December 1986,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration 4 and the outcome
documents of the twenty-third 5 and twenty-fourth 6 special sessions of the General
Assembly, held, respectively, in New York from 5 to 10 June 2000 and in Geneva
from 26 June to 1 July 2000,
Recalling also its resolutions 57/204 and 57/205 of 18 December 2002,
Recalling further Commission on Human Rights resolution 2003/23 of
22 April 2003 on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of human
rights, 7
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
3
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
4
See resolution 55/2.
5
Resolution S-23/2, annex, and resolution S-23/3, annex.
6
Resolution S-24/2, annex.
7
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
2

03 50616

A/RES/58/193

Recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent
and interrelated and that the international community must treat human rights
globally in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing and with the same
emphasis,
Realizing that globalization affects all countries differently and makes them
more exposed to external developments, positive as well as negative, inter alia, in
the field of human rights,
Realizing also that globalization is not merely an economic process, but that it
also has social, political, environmental, cultural and legal dimensions, which have
an impact on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Realizing further the need to undertake a thorough, independent and
comprehensive assessment of the social, environmental and cultural impact of
globalization on societies,
Recognizing in each culture a dignity and value that deserve recognition,
respect and preservation, and convinced that, in their rich variety and diversity and
in the reciprocal influences that they exert on one another, all cultures form part of
the common heritage belonging to all humankind, and aware that the risk of a global
monoculture poses more of a threat if the developing world remains poor and
marginalized,
Recognizing also that multilateral mechanisms have a unique role to play in
meeting the challenges and opportunities presented by globalization,
Expressing concern at the negative impact of international financial turbulence
on social and economic development and on the full enjoyment of all human rights,
Deeply concerned that the widening gap between the developed and the
developing countries, and within countries, has contributed, inter alia, to deepening
poverty and has adversely affected the full enjoyment of all human rights, in
particular in developing countries,
Noting that human beings strive for a world that is respectful of human rights
and cultural diversity and that, in this regard, they work to ensure that all activities,
including those affected by globalization, are consistent with those aims,
Recognizes that, while globalization, by its impact on, inter alia, the role
1.
of the State, may affect human rights, the promotion and protection of all human
rights is first and foremost the responsibility of the State;
Reaffirms that narrowing the gap between rich and poor, both within and
2.
between countries, is an explicit goal at the national and international levels, as part
of the effort to create an enabling environment for the full enjoyment of all human
rights;
Reaffirms also the commitment to creating an environment at both the
3.
national and the global level that is conducive to development and to the elimination
of poverty through, inter alia, good governance within each country and at the
international level, transparency in the financial, monetary and trading systems and
commitment to an open, equitable, rule-based, predictable and non-discriminatory
multilateral trading and financial system;
Recognizes that, while globalization offers great opportunities, the fact
4.
that its benefits are very unevenly shared and its costs unevenly distributed
represents an aspect of the process that affects the full enjoyment of all human
rights, in particular in developing countries;
2

A/RES/58/193

5.
Welcomes the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on globalization and its impact on the full enjoyment of human
rights, 8 which focuses on the liberalization of agricultural trade and its impact on
the realization of the right to development, including the right to food, and takes
note of the conclusions and recommendations contained therein;
Calls upon Member States, relevant agencies of the United Nations
6.
system, intergovernmental organizations and civil society to promote equitable and
environmentally sustainable economic growth for managing globalization, so that
poverty is systematically reduced and the international development targets are
achieved;
Recognizes that only through broad and sustained efforts, including
7.
policies and measures at the global level to create a shared future based upon our
common humanity in all its diversity, can globalization be made fully inclusive and
equitable and have a human face, thus contributing to the full enjoyment of all
human rights;
Underlines the urgent need to establish an equitable, transparent and
8.
democratic international system in which poor people and countries have a more
effective voice;
Affirms that globalization is a complex process of structural
9.
transformation, with numerous interdisciplinary aspects, which has an impact on the
enjoyment of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, including the right
to development;
10. Affirms also that the international community should strive to respond to
the challenges and opportunities posed by globalization in a manner that ensures
respect for the cultural diversity of all;
11. Underlines, therefore, the need to continue to analyse the consequences
of globalization for the full enjoyment of all human rights;
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General, 9 and requests the
Secretary-General to seek further the views of Member States and relevant agencies
of the United Nations system and to submit a substantive report on this subject to
the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

_______________
8
9

E/CN.4/2002/54.
A/58/257.

3
