S/PV.8031

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8031st meeting

Thursday, 24 August 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Melki
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Lundkvist
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Clay
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and
the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2017/695)
Report of the Secretary-General on the progress made with regard to
the stabilization and restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2017/715)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-26702 (E)
*1726702*

S/PV.8031

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Mr. Touré (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Egypt on its successful presidency
of the Security Council during the month of August.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and the
activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2017/695)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
progress made with regard to the stabilization
and restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2017/715)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Guinea-Bissau
and Togo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Modibo
Touré, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau, and His Excellency Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the GuineaBissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/695, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, and document
S/2017/715, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the progress made with regard to the
stabilization and restoration of constitutional order in
Guinea-Bissau.
At this meeting, the security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Touré, Ambassador Vieira and
Ambassador Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative
of Uruguay to the United Nations, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-Bissau.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touré.
2/12

24/08/2017

It is indeed my honour to introduce the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS) (S/2017/695). I would like to provide my
analysis of the most recent developments in the process
to resolve the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, the immediate
steps to be taken, as well as the role that the member
States of UNOGBIS should continue to play in order to
ensure long-term stability and realize the country’s full
economic and social development potential.
In that regard, I would like to underscore that the
Conakry Agreement and the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) road map remain
the keys to resolving the current crisis and to helping
Guinea-Bissau address the structural causes of its
political instability and the recurring institutional
deadlocks the country has faced since its independence.
The implementation of the Agreement and the road
map will require political will from within GuineaBissau, as well as long-term commitment from the
international community.
(spoke in English)
The political situation in Guinea-Bissau has
evolved since my last briefing to the Security Council
in February (see S/PV.7883). Three months ago,
tensions had reached a new peak, leading the GuineaBissau base group of international partners to publicly
express, on 26 May, its concern about increasing
inflammatory rhetoric and the threats of violence
through demonstration, and to reiterate the calls for
restraint made by ECOWAS and the Security Council,
among others. By contrast, in recent weeks the tone
of media coverage in the country has quietened down
and dialogue aimed at resolving the political impasse
within the framework of the Conakry Agreement has
resumed between the parties to the crisis.
In July, for the first time since the start of the
crisis in 2015, bilateral discussions took place among
the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the
Speaker of the People’s National Assembly and leaders
of the main political parties. I congratulate BissauGuinean political actors for that positive development.
I must also acknowledge the continued efforts of the
international community to convey the need for urgency
17-26702

24/08/2017

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

in the implementation of the Conakry Agreement, the
commitment of the Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS to maintain their focus and engagement
on the crisis, and their determination to impose, if
need be, targeted sanctions on those who obstruct the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement, as well as
the intense facilitation efforts led by the group of women
facilitators with advisory, technical and operational
support from UNOGBIS.
Next month, the three-month extension by
ECOWAS of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in
Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) to enable political actors to
fully implement the Conakry Agreement will expire.
The resolution of the crisis in Guinea-Bissau, in the
framework of the Conakry Agreement, requires our
continued engagement and support. As I brief the
Council today, I believe that essential conditions exist
for the implementation of the Agreement. To capitalize
on recent positive developments and on considerable
concerted international efforts, I call upon the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of States and Government and on
the Security Council to jointly urge the President of the
Republic to abide by his commitment to implement the
Conakry Agreement within the time frame provided
by ECOWAS; urge the leadership of the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
(PAIGC) and the remaining members of the group
of 15 parliamentarians expelled from the PAIGC to
complete their effective reintegration into the party;
and encourage the leadership of the PAIGC and the
leadership of the Party for Social Renewal, as well the
three other parties represented in Parliament, to reach
an agreement on a stability pact to ensure the stability
of the inclusive Government.
As we enter a sensitive electoral period, with the
legislative and presidential elections scheduled for
2018 and 2019, respectively, requisite measures must
be taken to establish an environment conducive to the
holding of free, peaceful and credible polls. I therefore
urge Member States to consider ways to financially
support the continued presence of ECOMIB through
the full implementation of the Conakry Agreement and
the completion of the next electoral cycle.
Recent positive developments include the
continuation of processes involving national
reconciliation with the support of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS); combating drug trafficking and serious
organized crime, with joint support from UNIOGBIS and

S/PV. 8031

the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; as well
as mainstreaming the issues of women’s human rights
and gender equality. Progress on the implementation of
reform of the security sector has been slow, although the
process has seen some positive developments, including
the recent endorsement of an ambitious three-year joint
programme on police, justice and corrections, which
focuses on building the capacities of national law
enforcement agencies and strengthening the capacities
of the national justice system. I have called on the
members of the Peacebuilding Commission to kindly
support resource mobilization efforts to ensure the
timely implementation of that programme
On the economic front, economic growth is forecast
to reach 5.2 per cent owing to another robust cashew
harvest in the context of favourable international market
prices. According to the International Monetary Fund,
the country has made notable progress in improving
the macroeconomic framework and the management of
public expenditures.
(spoke in French)
The long-term and concerted commitment of
ECOWAS, the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), the African Union, the European
Union and the United Nations remains crucial in
supporting the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement. Only by meeting the minimum
requirements of the Agreement will the country be
able to move forward in the reform process, organize
credible and peaceful elections, channel national
resources and mobilize the necessary international
assistance to support its socioeconomic development
for the well-being of its people. I encourage ECOWAS
to carry out an assessment of the implementation of
the Conakry Agreement as soon as possible through
its high-level ministerial committeee, in accordance
with the most recent decision taken at the fifty-first
ordinary session of the Authority of Heads of State and
Government . That will allow the Authority to take
stock of the challenges that remain and to recommend
the appropriate measures to be taken.
I also encourage the ECOWAS Heads of State to
organize a meeting on Guinea-Bissau on the sidelines
of the upcoming session of the General Assembly.
Moreover, the realization of the visit envisaged by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in
Bissau during this year, with a view to monitoring the
implementation of the decisions of the African Union

17-267023/12

S/PV.8031

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

and ECOWAS, would be an important contribution
to maintaining the commitment of the international
community alongside Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, in
so much as possible, it would be desirable for such a visit
to be made in conjunction with the Security Council.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate my
sincere thanks to the Council for the unflagging interest
that it has taken in the development of the situation
in Guinea-Bissau, as evidenced by the meetings and
press statements on the subject. It is important that
the Council maintain its commitment. In that regard,
a special session of consultations could be devoted to
Guinea-Bissau on the sidelines of the upcoming General
Assembly session so as to agree on the next steps to be
taken so as to ensure the resolution of the crisis.
I congratulate ECOWAS and its new Chair,
President Faure Gnassingbé of Togo, and the ECOWAS
Mediator for Guinea-Bissau, President Alpha Condé
of Guinea, for their tireless commitment to seeking
stability in that country and for their mediation efforts.
My thanks also go to all regional and international
partners, including the African Union, the CPLP and
the European Union, with whom UNIOGBIS will
continue to work closely so as to help the country stay
the course towards sustainable stability and prosperity,
which are the hallmarks of peace and regional and
international stability.
The President (spoke in Arabic) I thank Mr. Touré
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil):I would like to thank you,
Sir, for the invitation extended to me in my capacity
as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). In that capacity,
I conducted a visit to Bissau and Lisbon, from 25 to
28 July, to obtain first-hand accounts concerning efforts
to end the ongoing political impasse.
During the visit, I was able to consult with a broad
range of stakeholders, including the President, the
Speaker of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister,
the President of the Supreme Court and a number
of Ministers and members of all political parties
represented in the National Assembly. I also held
meetings with the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces,
the National Election Commission and representatives
of the international community, including the United
4/12

24/08/2017

Nations. Moreover, I took part in meetings with
representatives of Guinea-Bissau civil society.
In Lisbon on 28 July, I met the Executive Secretary
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP), Ms. Maria do Carmo Silveira, at which time
we discussed the role of the Community in supporting
Guinea-Bissau and in helping find a solution to
the political situation. As members of the Council
know, Brazil is currently the Chair of the CPLP. It is
our firm belief that those increased synergies and
complementarities among the relevant international
partners have been beneficial for an effective
peacebuilding endeavour in Guinea-Bissau.
My consultations served to highlight the
complexity of Guinea-Bissau’s political impasse. The
Conakry Agreement, signed in October 2016, remains a
fundamental point of reference for most political actors,
although it continues to be the subject of conflicting
interpretations. The meetings that I held made it
clear that there are two distinct narratives on what
was reached in Conakry. For one group there was no
agreement on who should have been appointed Prime
Minister; others, however, believed that one name was
in fact agreed during the negotiations.
Some interlocutors noted that the African Party for
the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC)
no longer controlled the National Popular Assembly,
while others underlined that the 2014 elections gave
the majority to the PAIGC and that this could not be
changed through the establishment of a block of 15
dissident parliamentarians. I did not find that those
differing positions were moving closer together.
Most stakeholders consulted were supportive of
the efforts of the women’s facilitation group, aimed
at facilitating dialogue among key actors so as to
overcome the political impasse, while noting that it had
been effective as a confidence-building measure and
that it had positive effects in de-escalating tensions.
It was also instrumental for opening up lines of
communication among some actors who had not spoken
to one another directly for more than one year.
The group is composed of 10 women from different
local organizations. When I was in Bissau, the process
had already gone through one round of bilateral
meetings between the President and key actors, and
my visit coincided with a second round of discussions,
on 27 and 28 July. It was decided that during this
facilitation process no declarations should be made to
17-26702

24/08/2017

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

the press. The actors initially involved in the dialogue
were the President of the Republic, the Speaker of the
National Assembly, the Prime Minister, the President
of the Supreme Court and the Presidents of the PAIGC,
the Party of the Social Renovation and the group
of 15 dissident parliamentarians of the PAICG. The
other three political parties with representation in the
National Assembly were also invited to the second
round of meetings.
In my meeting with President José Mário Vaz, he
was very supportive of this process and affirmed he
would wait for a report of the group before making any
decision on next steps. According to the report issued
on 2 August, the facilitation has contributed to fewer
incidents of violence, a de-escalation of tensions and
the fostering of dialogue in order to reach a consensual
solution and implement the Conakry Agreement.
I also had an opportunity to be in contact with two
other initiatives from local civil society. A network of
youth organizations presented to me their view that there
had been little effort in having the youth population
involved in decisions on policy. Additionally, I was
briefed by the Organizing Committee of the National
Conference, which hopes to identify a model of national
reconciliation to be considered at a national conference
to be held in early 2018.
The National Electoral Commission (CNE)
informed me that it had already finalized a timeline for
holding legislative elections in May 2018, which must
now be approved by the President of the Republic. It
noted that prior to the elections, it was necessary for the
CNE to update the voter-registration lists. That process
should happen between January and March 2018. There
are currently 775,500 registered voters, and the number
is expected to increase. In the CNE’s view, the elections
could be held within the foreseen framework, provided
that the needed resources are obtained.
One point that some interlocutors expressed to me
was that the CNE President’s mandate had already ended
and that the position was currently being occupied ad
interim. They informed me that the appointment of a
new Commission had to be approved by the National
People’s Assembly, which would be difficult in view of
the paralysis in the Parliament.
Sufficient time must be allowed for technical
preparations, including the update of the voterregistration lists. However, many believe that elections
alone cannot solve the impasse without a political

S/PV. 8031

solution to the crisis. Finally, it is important to note that
some stakeholders requested that the United Nations
follow and support the electoral process in GuineaBissau.
The leadership of the armed forces again provided
assurances of their strict respect for the constitutional
order. A request was made for cooperation to train
and modernize the armed forces and to resume their
participation in international peace operations. Concern
was expressed regarding the fact that there had been no
progress in the implementation of plans for the creation
of a pension fund for the military.
Several interlocutors expressed concern about the
possible negative effect of an eventual departure of the
Economic Community of West African States Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB). Some of my interlocutors
also called for sanctions to be imposed on civilians,
in particular on politicians, for not implementing
the Conakry Agreement. On the other hand, other
stakeholders expressed their strong opposition to
that idea, seeing it as interference in the country’s
internal politics.
With regard to the police force, a request was made
to develop capacity. The importance of countering
international crime, enhancing border controls and
maritime security and supporting the expansion of
community policing were underlined.
With respect to public demonstrations, it was
noted that, following confrontations between the police
and demonstrators in April, the situation had become
calmer. However, some interlocutors raised the issue
that public demonstrations had been restricted. Many
stakeholders noted that little progress had been made
with regard to the prevailing climate of impunity.
Several interlocutors noted that the economy was
doing well. The gross domestic product is expected to
grow at around 5 per cent in 2017. The Government
remains the largest employer in the country. The
President underlined to me the importance of making
Guinea-Bissau food sufficient. However, other actors
noted that many people continued to struggle, with the
lack of health and education services. Interlocutors
also noted that in 2015 the Brussels Round Table had
pledged $1.5 billion in support of the Terra Ranka
programme. They stressed the importance that donors
fulfil their pledges. However, it should be underlined
that a solution to the current crisis would enable the
international community to fulfil its commitments.

17-267025/12

S/PV.8031

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

It will also provide the country with stability and
contribute to its development, benefiting the people of
Guinea-Bissau.
I would like to make the following final remarks,
which have also been endorsed by CPLP. I would
conclude my statement by reaffirming that the PBC will
continue to make every effort to support the country.
I reiterate the PBC’s backing for the various efforts
made by international and regional stakeholders aimed
at assisting the Bissau-Guineans to end the political
stalemate. I urge all key political actors to engage in
a national dialogue with a view to implementing the
Bissau six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement.
I also welcome the political consultations that have
taken place with the support of the group of Wwmen
facilitators. I underline the importance of holding
elections in the country with the necessary preparations,
in particular the update of the voter-registration lists.
I congratulate the armed forces of Guinea-Bissau for
respecting the Constitution. I recognize the efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States in
the mediation of the crisis as well as the important role
being played by ECOMIB.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Vieira
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Rosselli.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), on
Guinea-Bissau, I have the honour of briefing the
members of the Council on the visit that I conducted to
Guinea-Bissau from 13 to 15 June of this year.
The purpose of the visit was to collect first-hand
information on the effective implementation of the
sanctions imposed under resolution 2048 (2012) and
assess the political developments in Guinea-Bissau.
I was accompanied by the Political Coordinator of
Senegal and the Secretary of the Committee, who took
part in all the meetings we had in Bissau.
In the five years since sanctions were adopted, this
was the first time that a Chair of the Committee visited
the country. Accordingly, I had the impression that
the political actors and civil society were interested in
engaging in dialogue and presenting their views to the
Committee. That is why I believe that it is essential to
have greater dialogue between the Committee — and
the Council — and the citizens of Guinea-Bissau.
6/12

24/08/2017

I was happy that I was able to get to know all
the interlocutors that were included in the mandate
issued by the Committee and to have been able
hold fruitful discussions with them. During our
conversations, I stressed the importance of pursuing
dialogue and collaboration with the various interested
parties — national and international — with a
view to resolving the political crisis andfinding a
lasting solution. I also stressed that the international
community continued to support Guinea-Bissau but that
it was necessary to take concrete measures to create a
stable political environment and to receive the pledged
funds in Brussels in March 2015. I further highlighted
that the situation in Guinea-Bissau remained of great
importance to the Security Council.
While the situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
stable overall, uncertainty over the resolution of the
current political crisis could easily undermine the calm
in the country. Thus far, the constitutional order does
not seem to be directly challenged, but the ambiguity
in the division of powers between the President and
the Prime Minister continues to foment political strife.
In addition, uncertainty in the political environment
has eroded the confidence of donors and investors, as
the root causes of instability in Guinea-Bissau remain
unresolved. International and regional efforts to find
a durable solution to the political crisis appear to have
no effect on the ground, since none of the provisions
of the Conakry Agreement have yet been implemented,
mainly due to a lack of political will.
The country continues to be affected by the
uncertainty of the political situation without any clear
signs of substantive progress towards a solution in the
near future. However, thus far, the security situation
has remained stable without episodes of violence — the
army has not interfered in political controversies; human
rights, in general, seem to be respected; and
constitutional order is not directly challenged. I think
it is important to emphasize that the current situation
might not be sustainable for much longer and that the
patience of the military and the population could end
at any time. That is why it is urgent to find a political
solution to the crisis.
Many interlocutors pointed out that the political
crisis was generally perceived to have been caused by
the lack of political will to arrive at a solution and was
based on personal interests and ambitions rather than
different religious, ideological, ethnic or philosophical
considerations. In that regard, while all political actors
17-26702

24/08/2017

S/PV. 8031

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

expressed their readiness to engage in dialogue and
find a solution to the political crisis, they each blamed
some group or person for the stagnation. That shows an
uncompromising attitude, whereas what is needed are
specific concessions.
Almost all the interlocutors pointed out that since
2012 the military had respected the constitutional
order and the laws of the country, including refraining
from interfering in the political life of Guinea-Bissau.
Many speakers believe that it would be appropriate to
remove persons from the sanctions list on the basis of
their commendable conduct. It should be noted that the
persons who are subject to sanctions continue to serve
in the the army and some have been promoted to higher
ranks, which has contributed to the feeling, within
a segment of the population, that there is a climate
of impunity.
The general feeling among most interlocutors
was that sanctions remained effective as a deterrent
to possible disruptive elements, both military and
civilian. However, while the sanctions were considered
to be effective, many pointed out that the measures did
not appropriately target those who merited sanctions
and called, in turn, for sanctions against civilians,
particularly politicians. Those who were not part of the
Government indicated clearly that the responsibility for
the political crisis lay with the political class, political
parties and, in general, civilians driven by personal
interests rather than the interests of the entire country.
Since last year, two designated persons have
travelled outside of Guinea-Bissau. However, they were
detained at the destination airport and repatriated to
Guinea-Bissau. No other report has indicated that other
persons have violated the travel ban. That is a positive
sign that Member States are increasingly vigilant and
are striving to implement sanctions. There is still
some confusion as to the scope of the restriction on
the travel ban. In that regard, I made sure to explain
the procedures to the authorities during the visit and
also provided them with a copy of the guidelines for
carrying out the work of the Committee.
In a number of meetings, many emphasized the
positive role played by the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) in helping to prevent the constitutional
order from being challenged, although it is clear that
the role of ECOMIB is very symbolic and that, in the
event of large-scale armed intervention by military

forces, the Mission would be ill-equipped to match it
due to its limited capacity.
The visit reflects the positive momentum of
the cooperation between the Committee and the
Government, which should be maintained and increased.
I submitted a report to the Committee on 17 July and
made recommendations. In particular, I focused on the
need to review the list of sanctions, taking into account
the current situation and developments in GuineaBissau, as well as the views expressed by those I spoke
with during my visit. I also believe that we should
exercise caution during the review process.
I would like to thank the authorities of GuineaBissau for their warm welcome and the fruitful meetings.
I also wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Touré, and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in GuineaBissau for the excellent support provided during
the visit.
The President (spoke
Mr. Rosselli for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I will
now make a statement in my national capacity.
I would first like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Touré, as well
as the Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Mauro
Vieira, for their briefings today.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau has improved as
compared to that of five years ago and, in that regard,
the international community has made tireless efforts
to consolidate constitutional order in the country.
However, Guinea-Bissau has been undergoing a
political crisis over the past two years and, although
the situation remains stable in general, the uncertainty
surrounding a possible resolution of the crisis threatens
to undermine the calm in the country.
Let me point out that the political crisis in GuineaBissau is not based on ideological, partisan, religious
or ethnic differences. Rather, it results from, and is
fuelled by, the personal differences of some of its main
political leaders. If we continue along that path, we will
find ourselves only one step away from undermining
all the efforts made to date. That is not because the

17-267027/12

S/PV.8031

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

international community has left Guinea-Bissau to its
own devices. On the contrary, the United Nations, the
countries of the region and other international partners
have provided Guinea-Bissau with all the necessary
tools to become a success story. But those efforts will
continue to be in vain if its political leaders do not do
their part.
Today we are facing a political crisis with domestic
roots, where the political class seems to ignore the
support initiatives of the international community.
The last and most important effort to resolve this crisis
is the six-point road map and, within it, the Conakry
Agreement. Uruguay urges that the provisions contained
in the Agreement be implemented without further delay
in order to find a solution to a crisis that primarily
harms the civilian population of Guinea-Bissau. We
commend ongoing efforts towards dialogue, which
undoubtedly contribute to resolving the situation and
to encouraging the participation of women in political
decisions. However, we reiterate that tangible results
will not be achieved until leaders take concrete steps to
implement the Conakry Agreement.
The worrying information contained in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/695)
concerning various restrictions on the freedom of
expression is noteworthy. We encourage the authorities
of Guinea-Bissau to ensure that fundamental freedoms
are respected, promoted and protected for all of the
country’s inhabitants.
In connection with the sanctions imposed under
resolution 2048 (2012), allow me to offer some
observations in my capacity as the representative of
Uruguay, on the basis of the information I obtained at
first hand during my visit to the country from 13 to
15 June, during which I met with the highest-ranking
Government authorities, politicians and civil society
groups. We believe that the penalties applied to certain
high-ranked military officials in Guinea-Bissau have
been a fitting and useful tool that has played an important
role in the consolidation of the democratic order in the
country, and we welcome the commitment and action of
the international community in that respect.
My interlocutors were almost unanimous in their
view that, to date, the members of the military subject to
sanctions have conducted themselves in a praiseworthy
manner and have refrained from interfering in national
politics. The individuals listed on the sanctions list
in accordance with resolution 2048 (2012) are not
8/12

24/08/2017

responsible for the political impasse that reigns in
Guinea-Bissau today. The sanctions regime as well
as the list of individuals subject to sanctions pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012) have remained the same
since their establishment, although the circumstances
certainly have changed. The Security Council should
initiate a frank, critical and constructive review on
this matter, including the definition of criteria for an
eventual removal of names from the list of individuals
subject to sanctions.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the briefing by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNIOGBIS), Mr. Modibo Touré. We are also grateful
for the briefings by Ambassadors Elbio Rosselli and
Mauro Vieira in their respective capacities as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2048 (2012), on Guinea-Bissau, and of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We also welcome the presence of the
Ambassador of Togo, representing the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and of
the Ambassador of Guinea-Bissau.
Bolivia is following closely the situation of
political and social instability in Guinea-Bissau, and
we take note of the relative calm in the country. It is
clear that the current context is the result of stagnation
in the implementation of the agreements reached by the
parties to the conflict, notably the Conakry Agreement
of October 2016, which is ultimately the fundamental
framework for a peaceful settlement of the crisis and
the pursuit of lasting and sustainable peace.
We are also concerned by the consequences of
the political and social instability on crucial State
institutions, as noted by ECOWAS following its highlevel ministerial visit in April.
In that context, we again commend the active
participation of the African Union, ECOWAS and the
United Nations, through the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and UNIOGBIS, and their
continued efforts to bring about rapprochement between
the parties in conflict and to provide assistance in the
security sector and in the political field with a view to
encouraging an inclusive Government.
We also encourage and highlight the initiative of
the women’s forum for peace. The efforts of women
17-26702

24/08/2017

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

in Guinea-Bissau in the pursuit of a political solution
demonstrate that the gender perspective and the
participation of women in mediation and dialogue at all
levels is fundamental.
Bolivia rejects any action that may destabilize or
jeopardize the continuity of any process of dialogue
and reconciliation established with the participation
of all the parties involved. We call upon the parties to
definitively consolidate agreements in line with the
inclusive national dialogue, which will enable members
of all sectors of civil society, Government and political
parties represented in the National Assembly to reach
consensus in order to give effect to those agreements
in a constructive manner. We call for a legitimate
commitment to a lasting political solution owned, led
and determined by Guinea-Bissau, for the sole benefit
of its people and in strict respect for that country’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
On the subject of sanctions, Bolivia welcomes
the work of Uruguay’s Ambassador Rosselli in his
capacity as Chair of the 2048 Sanctions Committee.
As he himself stated, his was the first visit to GuineaBissau since the establishment of the Committee five
years ago. The visit allows us to have information
regarding the implementation and effectiveness
of the sanctions. It is necessary to emphasize how
important it is that the Security Council — and its
subsidiary bodies in particular, especialy the sanctions
committees — maintain coordination with local
authorities. In that regard, the visit of Ambassador
Rosselli is worth highlighting and commending.
We reiterate that sanctions should not be an end in
themselves. Moreover, it is necessary to carry out
periodic evaluations of sanctions in order to analyse
their effectiveness and to be able to make modifications
where necessary. In this case, the conclusions of the
visit of the Ambassador Rosselli should guide our
future steps.
Along the same lines, Bolivia reiterates its
categorical rejection of the application of unilateral
sanctions. They constitute a flagrant violation of
multilateralism and a serious threat to the international
order, as they are illegal measures that extend the
jurisdiction and the internal legislation of one State over
another, thereby violating the principles of equality,
sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States.
Finally, we urge all donor countries and agencies
to continue to fulfil their commitments by contributing

S/PV. 8031

and combining efforts that are conducive to the
definitive resolution of the conflict. In times of political,
institutional and social crisis, ensuring the well-being
of the population, in particular the most vulnerable
segments, must and should be the overriding interest
that determines the path towards lasting stability in
Guinea-Bissau.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guinea-Bissau.
Mrs. Pinto Lopes d’Alva (Guinea-Bissau): I thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to the
Security Council table. At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you and Egypt on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of August and
to wish you successful deliberations.
Allow me to exted to you, Sir, and to all Council
members the greetings of His Excellency Mr. José
Mário Vaz, President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
on behalf of Bissau-Guineans, with special thanks to
the Secretary General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, for the report on the situation in Guinea-Bissa
(S/2017/695) presented by his Special Representative
for Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Modibo Touré. The continued
support of the United Nations to our country through
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the entire United
Nations country team on the ground, working together
with Bissau-Guineans for sustainable peace and
development, is very much appreciated.
The commitment of the United Nations to GuineaBissau is undoubtedly extensive and diversified.
It touches almost all sectors of our political and
institutional life, from defence and security to health,
education, culture, the promotion of women, human
rights, the fight against transnational organized crime,
social communication for national reconciliation and
constitutional order and peacebuilding — as is clearly
detailed in the report. For all that support, we cannot
but express our boundless gratitude and recognition of
the commitment of the United Nations to our country.
We hope that the engagement of the United Nations
will continue to lead us to much-needed peace so
that, together with our bilateral and other multilateral
partners, we can finally engage in new partnerships for
the development of Guinea-Bissau.
Permit me also to thank His Excellency Mr. Mauro
Vieira, Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations, Chair of Guinea-Bissau configuration

17-267029/12

S/PV.8031

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

of the Peacebuilding Commission and Chair of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP),
for his statements in those two capacities.
The engagement of the Commission, demonstrated
by the recent visit of the configuration to GuineaBissau, where Ambassador Vieira had a chance to
meet personally with the main political stakeholders
and civil society, served to reassure our people that the
international community is still standing with them on
many fronts, through the United Nations, in their quest
for the consolidation of peace.
As Chair of the CPLP, Ambassador Vieira’s
stop in Lisbon, with a peace message on GuineaBissau, once again reassures us that our group of nine
Portuguese-speaking countries, which share not only a
language but also a culture and history as well, also
has an important role to play in fostering dialogue and
long-lasting peace in our country.
We would like to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Elbio Rosselli, Permanent Representative of Uruguay
to the United Nations and Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012),
concerning Guinea-Bissau, for his statement and for the
report on his recent visit to our country, where he also
met with all the relevant political actors. We believe that
visit enabled him to better assess the present sanctions
on Guinea- Bissau.
The diligent efforts of our subregion and of the
African Union to achieve peace in Guinea-Bissau have
been important. We thank His Excellency Ambassador
Kokou Kpayedo, Permanent Representative of Togo to
the United Nations and present Chair of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for his
diligence and for his statement to the Security Council.

24/08/2017

front lines of the process to resolve the situation in
Guinea-Bissau. Such patience and wisdom will assist
in finding the sustainable solution that we all seek, with
the support of ECOWAS, the African Union and the
United Nations. Such a solution will require a strong
and irreplaceable internal commitment from State
institutions and political parties. That point is very well
reflected in the report and we cannot agree more that,
indeed, Bissau-Guineans will have to work harder to
make that commitment.
From the outside looking in, it seems that politics
has come to an end in Guinea-Bissau. However, the
truth is that our institutions, as strategic political
actors, are seeking answers and finding solutions that
are adequate and sustainable. The recent initiative by
the group of women facilitators of dialogue, which
was deservedly embraced by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau and
gained immediate visibility, was the result of efforts
made at many levels, but always away from the media
spotlight. We thank those courageous women for their
important work. In Guinea-Bissau, since our struggle
for independence, women have always been involved in
every aspect of our political life and there are no better
messengers of peace than women.
One of the most significant things that should
be pointed out is the fact that the institutional crisis
remains somehow circumscribed in the ambit of
political institutions, Parliament and Government. In
reality, we could say that it is a political party crisis,
which has disarticulated the functional relationship
between the National Assembly and the Government.

We are aware that we bear the ultimate responsibility
for resolving the crisis in our country. We understand
the concern expressed in the report about the evolution
of the political situation and the final observations,
which focus on the political and institutional impasse
that, unfortunately, we are still not able to overcome.
In general, the analyses that were done do not reflect a
lack of objectivity.

There is a need for broader dialogue, in particular
within political parties, which is the recognized
path that must be taken to generate consensus, make
commitments, dissolve internal political tensions and
break the persistent political-institutional impasse that
has become entrenched in our political order. It is the
path outlined by the report of Secretary-General, and
it is the path that President Vaz has always called for.
Despite the institutional crises, Guinea-Bissau lives in
peace and there have been no disturbances for the past
five years.

Without intending to comment on the analysis
and conclusions of the report, allow me to express
our appreciation for the patience and the wisdom that
has characterized United Nations interventions and
the actions of ECOWAS and African Union on the

We can state that there have been no human rights
violations in Guinea-Bissau worthy of report in recent
years. The everyday life of civil servants has become
increasingly normal, as salaries are now paid early
and regularly, like never before seen in Guinea-Bissau.

10/12

17-26702

24/08/2017

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Political tension, which is normal in a democracy, has
nevertheless been reduced and is almost insignificant.
We therefore do not agree with the sanctions because
they seem excessive and counterproductive in the light
of Guinea-Bissau’s political context.
In conclusion, we have faith that Guinea-Bissau
will overcome its institutional crises. With the
Council’s continued support, solidarity and patience,
we will consolidate our democracy by working out
our differences, achieve long-lasting peace and
lead our nation to the path of development and the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Togo.
Mr. Kpayedo (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Sir, for inviting us to
today’s meeting. We also thank you for steering the
work of the Security Council this month.
Like those who spoke before me, I would like
to commend today’s briefing of the very detailed
report of the Secretary-General on developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2017/695). Its relevant findings are an excellent
description of the situation on the ground and reflect
the willingness of international community, including
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), to help Guinea-Bissau to resolve the crisis
by peaceful means — an inclusive and sincere political
dialogue and appropriate reforms.
Driven by a deep concern about the stalemate in the
process aimed at resolving Guinea-Bissau’s political
and institutional crisis, which has lasted for more than
two years, despite the fact that stakeholders have signed
the Conakry Agreement on 14 October 2016 in order to
find a sustainable solution to the crisis in the country,
the fifty-first ordinary session of the Authority of
Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS, held in
Monrovia on 4 June, called upon all political actors
to take all the necessary, immediate measures to
ensure the smooth functioning of Guinea-Bissau’s
State institutions, in the interests of the population. To
that end, the summit requested that the international
community and development partners honour their
pledges and commitments.
Following the assessment of the situation delivered
by the high-level ministerial committee tasked with

S/PV. 8031

monitoring the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement after its visit to the country on 23 and
24 April, the summit took note of the promises made
by stakeholders to ensure the implementation of the
Conakry Agreement. It called upon all actors concerned
to strictly adhere to the terms of the Agreement. In the
light of all that I have mentioned and given the political
stalemate, which is a detriment to stability and social
peace, the Monrovia summit reaffirmed the primacy of
the Conakry Agreement as the only credible basis on
which to resolve the crisis.
For its part, and to demonstrate its commitment
and good will, ECOWAS decided to extend the mandate
of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau by an
additional three months. Its withdrawal had initially
been scheduled for 30 June in order to maintain the
calm required to enable all Bissau-Guinean political
actors and stakeholders to implement the Agreement.
Unfortunately, two months following the extension
of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in GuineaBissau, motivated by the request of the President of
Guinean-Bissau, Mr. José Mário Vaz, to give a chance
to the success of the initiative of a group of women who
have been committed to facilitating the implementation
of the Conakry Agreement, no significant progress has
been made with regard to the conflicting issues fuelling
the crisis. The latter include, inter alia, the appointment
of a Prime Minister by consensus during the interim
period leading up to the 2018 legislative elections,
the formation of an inclusive Government and the
reintegration of the 15 members of the African Party
for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde.
Lastly, with a view to ensuring a rapid and lasting
exit from the crisis and after commending the neutrality
observed thus far by the Guinea-Bissau army, ECOWAS
has affirmed its steadfast determination to implement,
if necessary, sanctions targeted against all those who
would impede the proper implementation of the Conakry
Agreement — the first step in the implementation of
the ECOWAS six-point road map signed in Bissau on
10 September 2016.
At its fifty-first ordinary session held in Monrovia
on 4 June, the ECOWAS Authority of Heads of State
and Government elected the President of the Republic
of Togo, His Excellency Mr. President Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbé, as Chair of the of the subregional
Authority. The new Chair immediately and urgently
appealed to the parties to the conflict to exercise

17-2670211/12

S/PV.8031

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

restraint and responsibility so as to ensure every chance
of a negotiated and durable exit from the crisis. He also
held meetings on 16 June in Lomé with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General concerning
short-term prospects and modalities of support to
ensure the success of the ECOWAS mediation process.
In relying on the Conakry Agreement, he believes
that Guinea-Bissau is at a decisive turning point
regarding its future and that henceforth it is now up to
all stakeholders, on the one hand, to accelerate the pace
of normalization by settling all the ongoing disputes
and, on the other hand, to concentrate the vital forces
of the nation on the tasks of recovery and economic
development so as to meet the immense expectations of
its youth and general population.
Moreover, he did not fail to warn of the dangers of
the persistence of the crisis in a region of West Africa

12/12

24/08/2017

that is facing an increasing number of new dangers,
first and foremost among which are terrorism and
transnational organized crime, which are fuelled, to
a large extent, by chronic political instability, poverty
and the social disarray they engender.
Finally, I would like to convey the gratitude of
the ECOWAS senior leaders to the African Union,
the United Nations, the European Union and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries for their
unyielding and continued confidence in and support for
the mediation efforts of ECOWAS.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

17-26702
