General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

38

operate closely with the United Nations Institute for Namibia
in their efforts to support its programme;
16. Commends the progress made in the implementation
of the pre-independence components of the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and requests the United Nations
Council for Namibia to elaborate and consider in due course
policies and contingency plans regarding the transitional and
post-independence phases of the Programme;
17. Expresses its appreciation to those specialized
agencies and other organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system that have contributed to the Nationhood
Programme for Namibia and calls upon them to continue
their participation in the Programme by:
(a) Implementing projects approved by the United Nations Council for Namibia;
(b) Preparing new project proposals at the request of
the Council;
(c) Allocating funds from their own financial resources
for the implementation of the projects approved by the
Council;
18. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Development Programme for its contribution to the financing and administration of the Nationhood Programme for
Namibia and calls upon it to continue to allocate, at the
request of the United Nations Council for Namibia, funds
from the indicative planning figure for Namibia for the implementation of the projects within the Nationhood Programme and to increase the indicative planning figure for
Namibia;
19·_ Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Office of the United Nations Commissioner for Namibia with
the necessary resources for the performance of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the co-ordinating authority in the implementation of the Nationhood Programme for Namibia.
93rd plenary meeting
/0 December /98/

36/137.

Appointment of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations

The General Assembly,
Acting in accordance with the recommendation contained
in Security Council resolution 494 ( 1981) of 11 December
1981, 71
Appoints Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar Secretary-General
of the United Nations for a term of office beginning on I
January 1982 and ending on 31 December 1986.
98th plenary meeting
/5 December /98/

36/171.

Question of human rights relating to the case
of Mr. Ziad Abu Eain

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 72
Recalling its resolution 32/14 of 7 November 1977 and
other pertinent resolutions in which the General Assembly,
inter alia, reaffirmed the legitimacy of the struggle for independence, territorial integrity, national unity and libera71

Ibid., Thirty-sixth Session. Annexe;, agenda item 16, document

A/36/820.
72

Resolution 217 A (III)

tion from colonial and foreign domination and alien
subjugation by all available means,
Noting that Mr. Ziad Abu Eain, a Palestinian national
from occupied Palestinian territory and a Jordanian citizen,
was illegally detained in prison in the United States of America for over two years,
Noting also that the sole basis for "probable cause"
against Mr. Ziad Abu Eain was a statement in Hebrew
extracted from a person who had no knowledge of the Hebrew language and who was in Israeli custody. whose statement was later recanted.
Deeply concerned that the Government of the United
States has extradited Mr. Ziad Abu Eain and delivered him
to Israel, the occupying Power,
I . Strongly deplores the action of the Government of
the United States of America in extraditing Mr. Ziad Abu
Eain to Israel, the occupying Power;
2. Demands that Mr. Ziad Abu Eain be immediately
released and that the Government of the United States, being
responsible for his safety, should facilitate his safe transfer
to the country of his choice;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly no later than 31 December 1981 on the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to retain item 12 on the agenda of its thirtysixth session for the sole purpose of further considering the
question of human rights relating to the case of Mr. Ziad
Abu Eain.
JO l st plenary meeting
16 December 1981

36/172.

Policies of apartheid of the Government of
South Africa 71
A
SITU A IION IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid. 74
Reaffirming that apartheid is a crime against humanity
and a threat to international peace and security,
Recognizing the contribution of the struggle for freedom
and equality in South Africa to the purposes of the United
Nations,
Conscious of the responsibility of the United Nations and
the international community towards the oppressed people
of South Africa and their national liberation movement, as
proclaimed, in particular, in General Assembly resolution
3411 C (XXX) of 28 November 1975,
Convinced that it is incumbent on the international community to provide all necessary assistance to the oppressed
people of South Africa and their national liberation movement in their legitimate struggle for the establishment of a
democratic society in accordance with their inalienable
rights, as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 75
Welcoming with great satisfaction the growing mobilization of world public opinion and of all segments of the
oppressed people of South Africa against apartheid,
Commending, in particular, the courageous struggle of
the black workers of South Africa for their legitimate rights,
,, See also sect. I, footnote 8, and sect. X.B.2. decision .~61419.
" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 22 (A/36122 and Corr. I) and Supplement No. 22A (A/36/221
Add.! and 2)
" Resolution 217 A (Ill).

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Commending the liberation movements, particularly the
African National Congress, and the oppressed people of
South Africa for intensifying the armed struggle against the
racist regime,
Paying tribute to all those who have sacrificed their lives
in the struggle for freedom and human dignity in South
Africa,
Reaffirming that the apartheid regime is totally responsible for precipitating violent conflict through its policy of
apartheid and inhuman repression.
Gravely concerned at the intensification of repression in
South Africa and the imposition of death sentences on six
freedom fighten, of the African National Congress, namely,
Mr. Johannes Shabangu, Mr. Anthony Tsotsobe, Mr. David
Moise, Mr. Ncimbithi Johnson Lubisi, Mr. Naphtali Manana and Mr. Petrus Tsepo Mashigo.
Reaffirming that freedom fighters of South Africa are
entitled to prisoner-of-war status under Additional Protocol
176 to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 77
Denouncing as an international crime the policy of "bantustanization" designed to deprive the African majority of
citizenship and to further dispossess it of its inalienable
rights, as well as the continuing forced removals of millions
of black people,
Recognizing that apartheid cannot be reformed but must
be totally eliminated,
Noting with indignation the recent vetoing by the Western
permanent members of the Security Council of proposals
to impose mandatory sanctions against the apartheid regime
of South Africa,
Concerned that some Western countries and Israel continue to provide military supplies to South Africa, directly
and indirectly, in gross violation of the provisions of Security Council resolution 418 (I 977) of 4 November 1977
forbidding the supply of arms and all related materiel to th.:
apartheid regime,
Reaffirming that the policies and actions of the apartheid
regime, the strengthening of its military forces and its escalating acts of aggression, subversion and terrorism against
independent African States have resulted in frequent breaches
of the peace and constitute a grave threat to international
peace and security,
Recognizing the urgent need for increased humanitarian
and educational assistance to the oppressed people of South
Africa, as well as for direct assistance to the national liberation movement in its legitimate struggle,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/54 of 22 July 198 I on implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and assistance to the oppressed people of
South Africa and their national liberation movement by the
specialized agencies and the international institutions associated with the United Nations,
Recalling and reaffirming the Declaration on South Africa
contained in its resolution 34/93 0 of 12 December 1979.
Endorsing the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa, 78 adopted by the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris from 20 to 27
May 1981, as well as the declarations of international seminars organized by the Special Committee against Apartheid
in 1981, 79
76

A/32/144, annex I.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970-973.
78
A/CONF.107/8, sect. X.A.
1
• See A/36/190-S/14442, A/36/201-S/14443 and A/36/496-S/14686.
For the printed text of the latter document, see Official Records of the
Security Council, Thirty-sixth Year, Supplement for April, May and June
1981.
77

39

Emphasizing the conclusion of the Paris Declaration that
the continuing political, economic and military collaboration
of certain Western States and their transnational corporations with the racist regime of South Africa encourages its
persistent intransigence and defiance of the international
community and constitutes a major obstacle to the elimination of the inhuman and criminal system of apartheid in
South Africa and the attainment of self-determination, freedom and national independence by the people ofNamibia, 80
Considering that the acquisition of nuclear capability by
the apartheid regime constitutes a grave menace to Africa
and the world,
Condemning all military, nuclear and other collaboration
of certain Western States and Israel with South Africa,
Condemning also the collaboration of transnational corporations and financial institutions with South Africa,
I. Strongly condemns the apartheid regime of South
Africa for its brutal repression and indiscriminate torture
and killings of workers, schoolchildren and other opponents
of apartheid, and the imposition of death sentences on freedom fighters;
2. Vehemently condemns the apartheid regime for its
repeated acts of aggression, subversion and terrorism against
independent African States. designed to destabilize the
whole of southern Africa;
3. Reiterates its firm conviction that the apartheid
regime has been encouraged to undertake these criminal acts
by the procection affordeu by major Western Powers against
international sanctions, especially by the pronouncements.
policies, and actions of the Government of the United States
of America;
4. Condemns, in particular, the actions of those States,
especially the major trading partners of South Africa, that
have increased their political, economic, and military re1.itiuns with the racist regime of South Africa despite repeated appeals by the General Assembly;
5. Further condemns those transnational corporations,
financial institutions and other organizations that collaborate
with the racist regime and apartheid institutions in South
Africa;
6. Reaffirms its conviction that comprehensive and
mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, universally applied, are the most appropriate and effective means by which the international
community can assist the legitimate struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa and discharge its responsibilities for the maintenance of international peace and
security;
7. Urges the Security Council to determine that the
situation in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole.
resulting from the policies and actions of the apartheid
regime of South Africa, constitutes a grave and growing
threat to international peace and security, and to impose
comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against that regime
under Chapter VII of the Charter;
8. Deplores the action of the Western permanent members of the Security Council in vetoing proposals for mandatory and comprehensive sanctions against South Africa
and calls upon them to co-operate in effective action for the
elimination of apartheid;
9. Denounces the proclamation of the so-called "independence'· of the Ciskei on 4 December 1981;
IO. Again calls upon all States and organizations to
refrain from any recognition of or co-operation with the socalled "independent" bantustans;
'" A/CONF. 107/8, para 210.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

40

11. Calls upon all States, in particular the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America, the Federal Republic of Germany, France and
Israel to take urgent, effective measures to terminate all
collaboration with South Africa in the political, diplomatic,
economic, trade, military, nuclear and other fields in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
12. Appeals to all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the International Convention on the Suppression
and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid: 81
13. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa and their national liberation
movement by all available means, including armed struggle,
for the seizure of power by the people, the elimination of
the apartheid regime and the exercise of the right of selfdetermination by the people of South Africa as a whole;
14. Demands that the apartheid regime treat captured
freedom fighters as prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 77 and Additional Protocol I
thereto; 76
15. Again proclaims its full support of the national liberation movement of South Africa as the authentic representative of the people of South Africa in their just struggle
for liberation;
16. Appeals to all States to provide all necessary humanitarian, educational, financial and other necessary assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and their
national liberation movement in their legitimate struggle;
17. Urges the United Nations Development Programme
and other agencies of the United Nations system to expand
their assistance to the oppressed people of South Africa and
to the South African liberation movements rec~gnized by
the Organization of African Unity, namely, the African
National Congress and the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania, in consultation with the Special Committee against
Apartheid;
18. Decides to continue the authorization of adequate
financial provision in the budget of the United Nations to
enable those liberation movements to maintain offices in
New York in order to participate effectively in the deliberations of the Special Committee and other appropriate
bodies;
19. Extends its greetings to the African National Congress on its seventieth anniversary;
20. Requests Governments and organizations to co-operate with the Special Committee in publicizing the national
liberation struggle in South Africa, its legitimate objectives
and its wider significance;
21. Reaffirms the commitment of the United Nations
to the total eradication of apartheid and the establishment
of a democratic society in which all the people of South
Africa as a whole, irrespective of race, colour, sex or creed,
will enjoy equal and full human rights and fundamental
freedoms and participate freely in the determination of their
destiny.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

B
INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF MOBILIZATION FOR SANCTIONS
AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly.
Having considered the report of the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris
from 20 to 27 May 1981, 82
81

Resolution 3068 (XXVIII), annex.

82

NCONF.107/8.

Recognizing that the Paris Declaration on Sanctions
against South Africa, 78 adopted by the Conference, provides
the framework for effective international action for the elimination of apartheid and for averting the growing threat to
international peace and security,
Recognizing the need to promote maximum support for
the implementation of the Paris Declaration.
Having considered the special report of the Special Committee against Apartheid on the International Year of Mobilization for Sanctions against South Africa, 83
Having also considered resolution CM/Res.865 (XXXVII)
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity at its thirty-seventh ordinary session, held at
Nairobi from 15 to 26 June 1981, 84
I. Endorses the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa and commends it to the attention of all Governments and organizations;
2. Proclaims the year 1982 International Year of Mobilization for Sanctions against South Africa;
3. Endorses the programme for the Year recommended
by the Special Committee against Apartheid in its special
report; 85
4. Requests the Special Committee to take all appropriate action to promote the widest and most effective observance of the Year;
5. Invites all Governments, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and institutions to participate
effectively in the observance of the Year in co-operation
with the United Nations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to encourage the
widest possible observance of the Year and to provide all
necessary assistance to the Special Committee in the discharge of its responsibilities.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

C
ACTS OF AGGRESSION BY THE APARTHEID REGIME AGAINST
ANGOLA AND OTHER INDEPENDENT AFRICAN STATES

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 8"
Gravely concerned at the explosive situation in southern
Africa resulting from the policies and actions of the apartheid regime of South Africa,
Condemning the continuing acts of aggression committed
by the apartheid regime against independent African States,
in particular its raid on Matola, Mozambique, in January
1981, its large-scale invasion of Angola since July 1981
and its recent invasion of Seychelles on 25 November 1981,
Noting with grave concern that the Security Council was
unable on 31 August 1981, owing to the veto by the United
States of America, to adopt a resolution condemning the
unprovoked and massive armed aggression of South Africa
against Angola,
Commending the Government and people of Angola, as
well as the Governments and peoples of other front-line
States, for their sacrifices in the cause of the liberation of
South Africa and Namibia,

"Official Records of the Genaal Assembly. Thirtv-sixth Session, Supplement No. 22A (N36/22/Add. I and 2). document A/36/22/Add.2.
,w See N36/534, annex I.
" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-sixrh Session, Supplement No. 22A (N36/22/Add. I and 2). document A/36/22/Add.2. annex.
"' Ibid .. Supplement .Vo. 22 (A/36/22 and Corr. I)

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that the apartheid regime of South Africa
is guilty of repeated breaches of the peace and acts of aggression which constitute an ever-growing threat to international
peace and security,
Condemning any encouragement to the apartheid regime
in its acts of aggression, direct or indirect, as hostile to the
interests of peace and freedom,
Commending all States that have provided assistance to
Angola and other front-line States in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
1. Condemns the unprovoked acts of aggression committed by the racist regime of South Africa against Angola,
Seychelles and other independent African States;
2. Urges the Security Council to adopt effective measures, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
to prevent breaches of the peace and acts of aggression by
the apartheid regime, and thereby avert the grave threat to
international peace and security;
3. Demands the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all troops of the apartheid regime of South Africa
fro~ Angola and demands that South Africa respect fully
the mdependence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Angola and other States;
4. Further demands that the Government of South Africa pay full compensation to Angola for the damage to life
and property caused by its acts of aggression;
5. Calls upon all States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to provide moral and material
support to the Government and people of Angola and other
independent African States subjected to acts of aggression,
subversion and terrorism by the apartheid regime;
6. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to publicize the criminal acts of aggression, subversion and
terrorism by the apartheid regime and to promote moral and
material support to Angola and other front-line States.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

D
COMPREHENSIVE AND MANDATORY SANCTIONS AGAINST
SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 35/206 C of 16
December 1980,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 74
Recognizing that comprehensive and mandatory sanctions
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations are
essential to avert the grave threat to international peace and
security resulting from the policies and actions of the apartheid regime of South Africa,
Considering ~hat political, economic, military and any
other collaboration with the apartheid regime of South Africa encourages its persistent intransigence and defiance of
the international community and its escalating acts of repression and aggression,
Deploring the attitude of those Western permanent members of the Security Council that have so far prevented the
Council from adopting comprehensive sanctions against that
regime under Chapter VII of the Charter,
Dep{oring also the attitude of those States, in particular
the Umted States of America, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the Federal Republic of Germany and Israel, which have continued and increased their
political, military, economic and other collaboration with
South Africa,

41

Strongly condemning the activities of those transnational
corporations that continue to collaborate with the apartheid
regime, especially in the military, nuc)ear, petroleum and
other fields, and of those financial institutions that have
continued to provide loans and credits to South Africa,
Deploring the policies of those States that refuse to take
firm action against transnational corporations and financial
institutions within their jurisdiction to prevent them from
collaborating with the apartheid regime,
Commending the efforts of trade unions, religious institutions, student organizations and anti-apartheid movements in their campaigns against transnational corporations
and financial institutions collaborating with the racist regime
of South Africa,
Taking into account the relevant decisions adopted by the
Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 9 to 13 February 198 l , 87
and by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary
session, held at Nairobi from 24 to 27 June 1981, 88
Having considered the declarations and reports of commissions of the International Conference on Sanctions
against South Africa, 84 as well as the declarations of the
international seminars organized in 198 l by the Special
Committee against Apartheid, 79
I. Endorses the declarations of the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa90 as well as the
reports of its Political and Technical Commissions, and the
declarations of the international seminars organized by the
Special Committee against Apartheid;
2. Also endorses the recommendations of the Seminar
on Effective Measures to Prevent Transnational Corporations and Other Established Interests from Collaborating
with the Racist Regime of South Africa, held at Geneva
from 29 June to 3 July I 981 ;91
3. Requests the Security Council urgently to consider
the above declarations and reports with a view to the imposition of comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against
the apartheid regime of South Africa under Chapttr VII of
the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Condemns the continuing economic and other collaboration of certain Western and other States, in particular
the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the Federal Republic of Germany and Israel. with the racist regime of South Africa;
5. Commends all Governments that have taken action
to break off, or to refrain from, any relations with the apartheid regime of South Africa;
6. Urges all States that have not yet done so to adopt
separate and collective measures for comprehensive sanctions against South Africa, pending action by the Security
Council;
7. Calls upon all Governments that have not yet done
so:
(a) To sever diplomatic, military, nuclear, economic,
cultural, academic, sports and other relations with the
apartheid regime of South Africa;
(b) To implement scrupulously the arms embargo
against South Africa and prohibit all forms of nuclear collaboration with South Africa;
(c) To cease all direct and indirect trade and commercial transactions with, as well as loans to and investments
in, South Africa;
87
See A/36/116 and Corr.I, annex.
•• See A/361534, annex II.
9
•
See A/CONF. 107/8, annexes X and XI.
90
A/CONF.107/8, sect. X.
91
ST/HR/SER.A/9, chap. IV.

42

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

(d) To terminate all government promotion of, or assistance or facilities to, trade with and investment in South
Africa;
(e) To prohibit the sale of krugerrands;
if> To prohibit, within their jurisdiction, collaboration
of corporations and individuals with the racist regime of
South Africa;
(g) To cease any facilities to airlines and shipping lines
of South Africa and to prevent their national airlines and
shipping companies from providing services to and from
South Africa;
(h) To deny visas and other facilities to South African
athletes, artists, entertainers and academic personalities and
effectively to prevent their nationals from having cultural.
academic and sporting contacts with South Africa;
8. Again requests States members of the European Economic Community, the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank, as well as States parties to the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, to take the necessary steps
to deny all assistance and commercial or other facilities to
the racist regime of South Africa;
9. Expresses serious concern that the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank have not taken steps
to terminate loans and credits to South Africa and to suspend
South Africa from membership;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake urgent
consultations with the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank in order to persuade them to respect the repeated
resolutions of the United Nations on collaboration with the
apartheid regime of South Africa, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, as well as all agencies and organizations of the United Nations system:
(a) To withhold any facilities from, or investment of
any funds in, banks, financial institutions and corporations
that continue to give loans to or invest in South Africa;
(b) To refrain from any purchase of South African products, directly or indirectly;
(c) To deny any contracts or facilities to transnational
corporations and financial institutions collaborating with
South Africa;
(d) To prohibit any official travel by South African
Airways or South African shipping lines;
12. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee:
(a) To continue and intensify its campaign to achieve
world-wide support for comprehensive and mandatory sanctions against the racist regime of South Africa;
(b) To strengthen its co-operation with trade unions and
other organizations in order to promote effective sanctions
against South Africa;
(c) To publicize the activities of transnational corporations, financial institutions and other interests collaborating with the apartheid regime of South Africa;
(d) To organize conferences and seminars, and to arrange for studies and publications on all aspects of sanctions
against South Africa and on the continuing collaboration
with South Africa of Governments, corporations and other
interests;
13. Invites all Governments, parliaments, non-governmental organizations, anti-apartheid and solidarity movements, trade unions, religious bodies and other groups to
promote comprehensive sanctions against South Africa in
co-operation with the Special Committee.

102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

E
MILITARY AND NUCLEAR COLLABORATION WITH
SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions on military and nuclear collaboration with South Africa, in particular its resolution 35/
206 B of 16 December 1980,
Recalling Security Council resolutions 418 ( 1977) of 4
November 1977, 421 (1977) of 9 December I 977 and 4 73
(1980) of I 3 June 1980,
Recalling also its resolutions concerning the denuclearization of the continent of Africa,
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid74 and of the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa. held in Paris from 20 to 27
May 1981 ,82
Gravely concerned that the racist regime of South Africa
has continued to obtain military equipment and ammunition,
as well as technology and know-how, to develop its armament industry and to acquire nuclear-weapon capability,
Recognizing that any nuclear-weapon capability of the
racist regime of South Africa constitutes a threat to international peace and security,
Expressing its serious concern at the failure of certain
members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Israel
and other States to cease their co-operation with the racist
regime of South Africa in the military and nuclear fields
and to prevent corporations within their jurisdiction from
carrying out such co-operation,
Condemning the attitude of those transnational corporations that continue, through their collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa, to enhance its military and
nuclear capabilities,
Considering the urgent need for comprehensive mandatory sanctions by the Security Council, under Chapter Vil
of the Charter of the United Nations, to prohibit any military
and nuclear collaboration with the racist regime of South
Africa,
I. Strongly condemns the collusion by the Governments
of certain Western countries and other States, particularly
those of the United States of America, the Federal Republic
of Germany and Israel, with the racist regime of South
Africa in the nuclear field and calls upon France and all
other Governments to refrain from supplying the racist minority regime of South Africa, directly or indirectly, with
installations that might enable it to produce uranium, plutonium and other nuclear materials, reactors or military
equipment;
2. Further condemns the manoeuvres to create a South
Atlantic Treaty Organization with the racist regime of South
Africa and appeals to the Security Council to undertake
measures to ensure that this sinister organization is not
established;
3. Condemns all States that violate the arms embargo
and continue to collaborate with South Africa in the military
and nuclear fields, in particular certain Western States and
Israel;
4. Expresses its deep concern about reports on the recent talks between the United States of America and South
Africa concerning closer collaboration in the nuclear field;
5. Urges the Security Council to take immediate steps
to ensure the scrupulous and full implementation of the arms
embargo imposed by the Council in its resolution 418 ( 1977)
and the effective monitoring of the embargo in the light of
the report of the Council Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977) s:oncerning the question of South Africa

II.

43

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

on ways and means of making the mandatory arms embargo
against South Africa more effective; 92
6. Again requests the Security Council to take mandatory measures to strengthen the arms embargo and secure
the immediate cessation of any form of collaboration with
the racist regime of South Africa in the military and nuclear
fields;
7. Requires all States to co-operate with the Special
Committee against Apartheid in its efforts to ensure the total
cessation of military and nuclear collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa;
8. Invites all Governments and organizations to assist,
in consultation with the national liberation movements of
South Africa and Namibia, persons compelled to leave
South Africa because of their objection, on the ground of
conscience, to serving in the military or police force of the
apartheid regime;
9. Authorizes the Special Committee:
(a) To follow closely the question of the nuclear plan
and capability of South Africa;
(b) To continue its efforts to promote a comprehensive
and effective embargo on all forms of military and nuclear
collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa;
(c) To continue its efforts to expose all developments
concerning military and nuclear collaboration with the racist
regime of South Africa, particularly:
(i) Supply of arms, technology and other vital resources in contravention of resolutions of the
United Nations;
(ii) Attempts to forge any military alliance with the
racist regime of South Africa;
(iii) Development of further links with the apartheid
regime as an ally, in the context of aggravating
international tension and conflict.
102nd plenarv meeting
17 December /981
F
ARMS EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/206 B of 16 December 1980.
Further recalling Security Council resolutions 418 ( 1977)
of 4 November 1977, 421 ( 1977) of 9 December 1977 and
473 (1980) of 13 June 1980,
Recognizing the importance of the effective and universal
implementation of the arms embargo against South Africa,
the cessation of all military co-operation with South Africa
and the denial of any assistance or co-operation, either direct
or indirect, to South Africa in its military build-up or nuclear
plans,
Considering that military or nuclear co-operation with
South Africa increases the threat to international peace and
security,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 86
Taking note of the report of the International Seminar on
the Implementation and Reinforcement of the Arms Embargo against South Africa, 93 held in London from I to 3
April 1981, and the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa, 78 adopted by the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris from 20 to 27
May 1981,
92
Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-fifth Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1980, document S/14179.
93
A/AC.115/L.547.

t:xpressing its grave concern about the large increase in
the military budget of South Africa since the imposition of
the arms embargo by the Security Council, the development
by South Africa of its nuclear-weapon capability and the
increasing acts of aggression by South Africa against independent African States.
Noting with regret that the Security Council has so far
failed to take action on the report of 19 September 1980 of
the Council Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977)
concerning the question of South Africa on ways and means
of making the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa
more effective. 92
Commending the World Campaign against Military and
Nuclear Collaboration with South Africa and other groups
for their co-operation in providing information to organs of
the United Nations on infringements of the arms embargo.
I. Urges the Security Council to consider effective
measures to reinforce and strengthen the arms embargo
against South Africa, taking into account the recommendations of the Council Committee established by resolution
421 ( 1977) concerning the question of South Africa, the
Paris Declaration on Sanctions against South Africa and the
Declaration of the International Seminar on the Implementation and Reinforcement of the Arms Embargo against
South Africa; 94
2. Calls upon all States to take effective measures to
ensure that governmental and non-governmental organizations within their jurisdiction cease any relations with the
military and police forces. military industry and nuclear
institutions of South Africa;
3. Requests all States concerned to take firm steps to
prevent any co-operation or contacts with the regime of
South Africa by military alliances to which they are parties;
4. Requests all States to extend their co-operation to the
Special Committee against Apartheid and the Security
Council Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977)
concerning the question of South Africa in the discharge of
their respective mandates;
5. RequesB· the Secretary-General to ensure more effective Secretariat services for the monitoring of the arms
embargo against South Africa and maximum co-ordination
towards that end;
6. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee:
(a)
To strengthen its co-operation with the Security
Council Committee established by resolution 421 ( 1977)
concerning the question of South Africa;
(b)
To continue in its efforts to promote a comprehensive and effective embargo on all fonns of military and
nuclear collaboration with the racist regime of South Africa.
/02nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981
G
011. EMBARGO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assemblr,
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 35/206 D of 16
December 1980,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid, 8 "
Taking note of the Paris Declaration on Sanctions against
South Africa, 78 adopted by the International Conference on
Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris from 20 to 27
May 1981, and the Declaration of the Conference of West
44

Ibid. \eel. VIII.

_44_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _<_;e_n_er_a_l_A_s_se_m_b_cly-Thirty-sixth Session

European Parliamentarians on an Oil Embargo against South
Africa, held at Brussels on 30 and 31 January 1981, "'
Convinced that an embargo on the supply of petroleum.
petroleum products and other strategic materials is an essential complement to the arms embargo against South
Africa,
Commending all Governments that have imposed an oil
embargo against South Africa,
Taking note of the resolution adopted on 6 May 1981 by
the Council of Ministers of the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries96 to tighten crude oil sales contracts in order to prevent oil from reaching South Africa,
Reiterating the urgent need for the imposition of a mandatory oil embargo against South Africa under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations and for more effective
monitoring of the embargoes imposed by most oil-exporting
States,
Condemning the activities of corporations and other interests engaged in the clandestine supply to South Africa
of oil from countries which imposed an oil embargo.
l. Again requests the Security Council to consider urgently a mandatory embargo on the supply of petroleum
and petroleum products to South Africa under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations;
2. Urges all States that have not yet done so to take
effective legislative and other measures to ensure the implementation of an oil embargo against South Africa:
3. Requests all States concerned to take effective action
against corporations and tanker companies involved in the
illicit supply of oil to South Africa;
4. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid to continue its efforts, including the undertaking of missions, the holding of seminars and the publication of studies, to promote an effective oil embargo
against South Africa;
5. Further authorizes the Special Committee, in consultation with the Secretary-General and oil-exporting countries, to organize if necessary, under the auspices of the
United Nations, a conference of oil-exporting countries that
have imposed an oil embargo against South Africa to consider national and international arrangements to ensure the
effective implementation of their oil embargo;
6. Invites Governments, international and non-governmental organizations, trade unions and other appropriate
bodies to lend their full support to the oil embargo against
South Africa.
102nd plenary meetin~
17 December 19HI

H
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE OF TRADE UNIONS ON
SANCTIONS AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/206 C of 16 December 1980.
Deploring that some Member States have maintained and
even increased their political, military. economic and other
relations with South Africa despite the resolutions of the
United Nations on apartheid,
Having considered the report of the International Conference on Sanctions against South Africa, held in Paris
from 20 to 27 May 1981 ,82 as well as the report of the
Special Committee against Apartheid, 86
95
See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thirtv-sixth Session.
Supplement No. 22 (A/36/22 and Corr. I), para,. 79 and 80
96
A/36/665-S/14750, annex. f'or the printed text. see Official Record.,
of the Security Council, Thirt,·-sixth y,,,ir. Supplem,·111 fo~·Octoher. No
vember and December I 98 I.
·

Recognizing the important role of trade union organizations in the international campaign for sanctions against
South Africa.
I. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
against Apartheid to take all necessary steps, in co-operation
with the United Nations Council for Namibia, the International Labour Organisation, the Organization of African
Unity and the Organization of African Trade Union Unity,
to organize in 1982 an International Conference of Trade
Unions on Sanctions against South Africa for the purpose
of working out a programme of action towards the enforcement of sanctions against apartheid:
2. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to the Special Committee in the organization of the Conference.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /9Hl
I
ACADEMIC. ( l 1LTURAL AND SPORTS BOYCOTTS OF
SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assemh/_\',
Recalling its resolutions 35/206 E and M of 16 December
1980,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
against Apartheid8° and the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
on the Drafting of an International Convention against
Apartheid in Sports,'n
Recognizing the imixmance of the participation of writers.
musicians, artists, sportsmen, academic personalities an<l
others in the international campaign against apartheid,
Commending all Governments, organizations and individuals that have taken action for the academic, cultural,
sports and other boycotts of South Africa in solidarity with
the oppressed people of South Africa and their national
liberation movement.
Commending, m particular, the organizations and individuals in Ireland, New Zealand and the United States of
America that have effectively demonstrated their opposition
to exchanges with South African rugby teams,
Deploring the actions of those sports bodies and sportsmen that have continued to collaborate with South Africa,
and the failure of several Governments to take firm action
to terminate sporting contacts with South Africa, in particular the Governments of New Zealand and the United States
of America. which have permitted tours by Springbok rugby
teams despite widespread public protests in their countries
and appeals by the Special Committee.
Emphasizing the urgent need for an international convention against apartheid in sports,
I. Commends the Special Committee against Apartheid
for its efforts to promote effective academic, cultural and
sports boycotts of South Africa and to mobilize academic.
cultural and sports personalities in the campaign against
apartheid:
2. Notes with appreciation the action of the Special
Committee in publishing lists of sportsmen, entertainers and
others visiting South Africa. in order to enable the Governments and organizations to take any action they mav
deem appropriate:
"
3. Condemns those sports organizations, sportsmen and
promoters of sports events that have collaborated with South
Africa in violation of the resolutions of the General Assemhly and the International Declaration against Apartheid in
Sports; 98
07
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 36 (A/Jhd6 and Corr. I).
0
' Resolution :'21 I O'i M.

II.

45

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Endorses the proposal of the Special Committee to
organize national and international conferences and exhibits
to promote action by academic. cultural and sports personalities against apartheid;
5. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee on the Drafting of
an International Convention against Apartheid in Sports to
continue its work with a view to submitting a draft convention as soon as possible;
6. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to continue consultations with representatives of Governments and organizations concerned and experts on apartheid in sports.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /981

J
POLITICAL PRISONERS IN SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions concerning political prisoners in
South Africa, in particular resolution 35/206 K of 16 December 1980,
Noting with grave concern the continued escalation of
repression against all opponents of apartheid in South Africa, including the persecution of black trade unionists, students and journalists, as well as the threats against churches,
Alarmed at the imposition of death sentences on six freedom fighters, namely, Mr. Johannes Shabangu, Mr. Anthony Tsotsobe, Mr. David Moise, Mr. Ncimbithi Johnson
Lubisi, Mr. Naphtali Manana and Mr. Petrus Tsepo
Mashigo,
Further alarmed at the recent assassination of attorney
Griffith Mxenge and other opponents of the apartheid
regime,
Con~idering that the continued repression against and
executions of opponents of apartheid are bound to have
grave repercussions.
Taking note of the Declaration adopted by the Special
Committee against Apartheid on 12 October 1981 to commemorate the Day of Solidarity with South African Political
Prisoners, 99
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the oppressed
people of _South Africa for the elimination of apartheid and
the estabhshment of a democratic society.
1. Demands again that the racist regime of South
Africa:
(a) End repression against the black people and other
opponents of apartheid;
(b) Cease all trials under arbitrary repressive laws;
(c) Refrain from the execution of persons sentenced
under such repressive laws for acts arising from opposition
to apartheid;
(d) Release all political prisoners in South Africa:
(e) Abrogate bans imposed on organizations and the
media for their opposition to apartheid;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments.
cities, organizations and institutions that have honoured the
leaders of the struggle against apartheid imprisoned or restricted by the South African regime, as part of the campaign
for the release of political prisoners in South Africa;
3. Urges all Governments and intergovernmental and
~on-governmental orga~izations to take all appropriate actJ~n for an_end to repre~ston and for the release of all political
pnsoners m South Afnca, and to lend their co-operation to
the Special Committee against Apartheid:
99
A/36/592-S/14724. annex. For the printed text. see Official Records
of the Security Council. Thirtv-si,th Year, Supplement .f<1r October.
November and December /9/U

4. Requests the Special Committee, with the assistance
of the Centre against Apartheid of the Secretariat, to continue to promote the world campaign for the release of all
political prisoners in South Africa.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

K
WOMEN AND CHILDREN UNDER APARTHEID

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 35/206 N of 16 December 1980.
Gravely concerned about the inhuman oppression of millions of women and children under apartheid. resulting in
the killing, detention and torture of schoolchildren protesting against discrimination, the enforced separation of
women from their husbands and mass starvation in the
rese1ves,
Commending the Special Committee against Apartheid
and its Task Force on Women and Children for giving special attention to the plight of women and children under
apartheid,
Noting the wide observance of 9 August 1981 as the
International Day of Solidarity with the Struggle of Women
in South Africa and Namibia,
Noting with appreciation the establishment of the International Committee of Solidarity with the Struggle of
Women in South Africa and Namibia,
I. Invites all Governments and organizations to observe
9 August annually as the International Day of Solidarity
with the Struggle of Women in South Africa and Namibia;
2. Encourages the Special Committee against Apartheid
to intensify activities in support of women and children
oppressed by apartheid. and authorizes it to organize conferences, seminars and missions for this purpose;
3. Appeals to all Governments and organizations to
provide generous contributions to the projects of the national
liberation movements and front-line States for assistance to
refugee women and children from South Africa;
4. Invites the co-operation of all Governments and organizations with the Special Committee in promoting solidarity with and assistance to the women and children of
South Africa in their struggle for liberation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the closest
co-operation by the Centre against Apartheid and the Centre
for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs as well
as the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat,
with a view to maximum publicity for the plight of women
and children under apartheid and their struggle for national
liberation.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /98/

L
PUBLIC INFORMATION AND PUBLIC ACTION AGAINST APARTHEID AND ROLE OF THE MASS MEDIA IN THE STRUGGLE
AGAINST APAR7HE//)

The General Assembly.
Recognizes the important role of non-governmental organizations and of public action in the international campaign against apartheid.
Recoxnizing further the importance of public information
and the role of the mass media in combating apartheid and
promoting international action for the eradication of apartheid,
Recognizing, in particular. the need to encourage trade
union action for sanctions against South Africa.

General Assembly-Thirt}-sixth Session

46

Noting with appreciation the co-operation of the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
the International Labour Organisation and other agencies
in this respect,
Noting with great regret the actions of some non-governmental organizations which are actively collaborating
with the apartheid regime of South Africa,
Recognizing, in particular, the need to encourage trade
union action for sanctions against apartheid,
Having considered the Declaration of the International
Seminar on Publicity and the Role of the Mass Media in
the International Mobilization against Apartheid, held at
Berlin, German Democratic Republic, from 31 August to
2 September 1981, 10o
Recalling and reaffirming its resolutions 34/93 L and M
of 12 December 1979,
l. Commends all anti-apartheid and solidarity movements, trade unions, religious bodies, student and youth
organizations and other non-governmental organizations
that have made a vital contribution to the international campaign against apartheid;
2. Commends the Declaration of the International Seminar on Publicity and the Role of the Mass Media in the
International Mobilization against Apartheid to the attention
of all Governments and organizations and the media;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps for the
widest dissemination of the Berlin Declaration; 100
4. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to take all appropriate action towards the implementation
of the recommendations of the International Seminar on
Publicity and the Role of the Mass Media in the International
Mobilization against Apartheid, including the publication
of studies by experts and the organization of national and
regional seminars for journalists;
5. Requests the Secretary-General and the Special Committee to give special attention to encouraging action by
non-governmental organizations and the mass media in the
international campaign against apartheid;
6. Authorizes the Special Committee to promote the
organization of the International Conference of Trade
Unions on Sanctions against South Africa; 101
7. Calls upon all non-governmental organizations that
have not yet done so to desist from any form of collaboration
with the apartheid regime and institutions based on racial
discrimination in South Africa;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to lend his co-operation to the Special Committee in investigating and publicizing_ ~e col~aboration of certain non-governmental
organ1zat1ons with the apartheid regime and institutions of
South Africa, and in persuading them to desist from such
collaboration;
9. Appeals to all Governments to contribute generously
to the Trust Fund for Publicity against Apartheid;
10. Approves the recommendations of the Special Committee contained in paragraph 401 of its report 102 and authorizes it to initiate a feature service on apartheid;
l l. Requests the Special Committee to continue and
intensi[y co-operation with non-governmental organizations
and with the Non-Governmental Organizations Sub-Committee on Racism, Racial Discrimination, Apartheid and
Decolonization in promoting the widest public mobilization

for sanctions against South Africa and assistance to the
national liberation movement of South Africa.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

M
RELATIONS BETWEEN ISRAEL AND SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assemblr.
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 35/206 H of 16
December 1980.
Having considered the special report of the Special Committee against Apartheid on recent developments concerning
relations between Israel and South Africa. I0 '
Gravely concerned about the reports of continued collaboration between Israel and South Africa. in particular in
the military and nuclear fields.
Considering that such collaboration is a serious hindrance
to international action for the eradication of apartheid, an
encouragement to the racist regime of South Africa to persist
in its criminal policy of apartheid and a hostile act against
the oppressed people of South Africa and the entire African
continent. and constitutes a threat to international peace and
security.
I. Strongly condemns the continuing and increasing
collaboration of Israel with the racist regime of South Africa.
especially in the military and nuclear fields;
2. Demands that Israel desist from and terminate all
forms of collaboration with South Africa forthwith. particularly in the military and nuclear fields. and abide scrupulously by the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council;
3. Requests the Special Committee against Apartheid
to keep the matter under constant review and to report to
the General Assembly and the Security Council as appropriate.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

N
PROGRAMME OF WORK OF !'HE SPECIAL COMMITTEE
AGAINST APARTHf.'flJ

The General Assemblv.
Having considered the reports of the Special Committee
against Apartheid. 104
Recalling and reaffirming its resolution 35/206 P of
16 December 1980.
Commending the Special Committee for its activities in
the discharge of the mandate given to it by the General
Assembly.
Noting with appreciation the work of the Centre against
Apartheid of the Secretariat in assisting the Special Committee,
Recognizing the urgent need for the expansion of activity
by the Special Committee and the Centre against Apartheid
during 1982.
I. Reaffirms the mandate of the Special Committee
against Apartheid for the promotion of the international
campaign against apartheid in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the General Assembly and endorses the report
of the Special Committee to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session. in particular the recommendations of the Committee
on its programme of work contained in paragraphs 409 to
415 of its report; 102

100

A/36/496-S/14686, annex I.
See resolution 36/172 H above.
02
'
Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirt\'-sixth Session. Supplement No. 22 (A/36/22 and Corr. I).
·
101

"" /hid .. Supp/eml'lll N,, 2.:'A IA/36/22/Add. I and 2). document A/36/
221Add. I.
"" /hid .. Supp!,'ment No 22 IAi.16/22 and Corr. I) and Supplement Nu.
22A iA/36/22/Add.l and 'I

ll.

47

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Requests the Special Committee to give the highest
priority in 1982 to:
(a) Mobilizing support for sanctions against South
Africa;
(b) Reviewing the implementation of United Nations
resolutions on apartheid, especially those for the promotion
and effective monitoring of military, nuclear and oil embargoes against South Africa;
(c) Publicizing all developments concerning military.
nuclear, economic, political and other collaboration with
the racist regime of South Africa;
(d) Promoting the participation of writers, artists and
other cultural personalities in the international campaign
against apartheid,
(e) Promoting the world campaign for the unconditional
release of all persons imprisoned or restricted for their opposition to apartheid,
3. Decides to make a special allocation of $300,000 to
the Special Committee for 1982 from the regular budget of
the United Nations for the cost of special projects to be
decided on by the Committee in order to promote the international campaign against apartheid, in particular:
(a) Organization and co-sponsorship, and financial assistance, to international and national c0nferences and seminars against apartheid;
(b) Assistance to enable national liberation movements
to participate in such conferences:
(c) Promotion of the widest observance of international
days against apartheid and of international campaigns
against apartheid;
(d) Studies by experts on apartheid;
4. Requests Governments and organizations to make
voluntary contributions or provide other assistance for the
special projects of the Special Committee, particularly in
order to promote the effective observance of the International Year of Mobilization for Sanctions against South
Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Special Committee, to make urgent and necesary administrative arrangements for effective services to the Committee, as indicated in paragraphs 413 to 415 of its report;
6. Requests all Governments, specialized agencies and
other institutions in the United Nations system and other
organizations to co-operate with the Special Committee in
the discharge of its responsibilities.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /981
0
INVESTMENTS IN SOl.JTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/206 Q of 16 December 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, 102
Convinced that a cessation of all new foreign investments
in, and financial loans to, South Africa would constitute an
important step in international action for the elimination of
apartheid, as such investments and loans abet and encourage
the apartheid policies of that country,
Welcoming the actions of those Governments that have
taken legislative and other measures towards that end,
Noting with regret that the Security Council has not yet
taken steps towards that end, as requested by the General
Assembly in its resolutions 31 /6 K of 9 November 1976,
32/105 0 of 16 December 1977. B/183 0 of 24 January

1979, 34/93 Q of 12 December 1979 and 35/206 Q of
16 December 1980,
Again urges the Security Council to consider the matter
at an early date with a view to taking effective steps to
achieve the cessation of further foreign investments in, and
financial loans to, South Africa.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

p
UNITED NATIONS TRUST FUND FOR SOUTH AFRICA

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 10~
to which is annexed the report of the Committee of Trustees
of the United Nations Trust Fund for South Africa,
Gravely concerned at the continued and increased repression against opponents of apartheid and racial discrimination in South Africa, and the institution of numerous trials
under arbitrary security legislation, as well as continued
repression in Namibia,
Reaffirming that increased humanitarian assistance by the
international community to those persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and Namibia is appropriate and essential,
Recognizing that increased contributions to the Trust Fund
and to the voluntary agencies concerned are necessary to
enable them to meet the increased needs for humanitarian
and legal assistance,
I. Commends the Secretary-General and the Committee
of Trustees of the United Nations Trust Fund for South
Africa for their efforts to promote humanitarian and legal
assistance to persons persecuted under repressive and discriminatory legislation in South Africa and Namibia, as well
as assistance to their f~milies and to refugees from South
Africa;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that have contributed to the Trust
Fund and to the voluntary agencies engaged in rendering
humanitarian and legal assistance to the victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination;
3. Appeals for generous and increased contributions to
the Trust Fund;
4. AlsJ appeals for direct contributions to the voluntary
agencies engaged in assistance to the victims of apartheid
and racial discrimination in South Africa and Namibia.
102nd plenary meeting
17 December /981

36/226.

The situation in the Middle East

A
The General Assembly,
Having discussed the item entitled ''The situation in the
Middle East",
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of
11 November 1981, 10"
Welcoming the world-wide support extended to the just
cause of the Palestinian people and the other Arab countries
in their struggle against Israeli aggression and occupation
in order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
'"' A/361619 and Corr. I.
0
' " A/.16/655-S/14746. For the printed text, see Official Record,· of the
Securi/_\' Council, Thirlv•si.Hh Year, Supplemenl for October, Nol'ember
and /)ecembrr 198 I
