UNrfEfi

NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2299’”

MEETING:

31 AUGUST

.~

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2299). . . . . . . , , , , . , . . . , . . . . . . . , , , , . . . , , , , , , ,

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Angola to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/14647) .,....I.....O..,............I..O................

if
j I5
,jj
1

SIPV, 2299

:%;
d
‘B
‘2
;

President:

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of SW:, a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemenrs of the Of~ciul Records of rhe Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
rg:troactively to resolutions adoptedbefore 1January 1%5, becamefully operative
on that date.

Present: The
,China, France,
JaDan, Mexico
Tkisia, Ugand
United Kingdl
Ireland, Unites
I%Ovlr

1, Adoption c
2. Complaint
Letter d
d’affai
Angel;
the Se
The meeting

The agenda

Complatnt by 1
Letter datet
dktfaires I
to the Uni
General (S

1. The PRES
In accordance
2298th meeting
to take a place
tatives of Braz
of Germany, 1
hiriya, South
Zimbabwe to t
side of the COI
Al the invita,
(Angola),
took
(Brazil),
Mr.
(Cuba), Mr. va
Mr. Krishnan
win (Libyan
A
Africa),
Mr. H

(Yugoslavia) a
rhe places
chamber.

rese

2299th MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 31 August 1981, at la) a.m.
President:

M. Jorge E. ILLUECA (Panama),

Present:The
representatives of the following States:
, China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Provisional agendaWAgendaI2299)
I. Adoptionof the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
I shouldlike to inform membersof the Security
Councilthat I receiveda letter dated29August 1981
from the representative
of Tunisia[S/146661,
which
readsasfollows:
“I have the honour to requestthe Security
Councilto invite Mr. ClovisMaksoud,Permanent
Observerfor the Leagueof Arab States,to participatein theconsideration
of the questionentitled
‘Complaintby Angola againstSouth Africa’, in
accordance
with rule39 of the provisionalrulesof
procedure.”

2. Complaintby AngolaagainstSouthAfrica:
3. If I hear no objection,I shalltake it that the
Letter dated26 August 1981from the Charge Council
decidesto complywith thisrequest.
d’affairesa.i. of the PermanentMissionof
Angolato the United Nationsaddressed
to
It was so decided.
the Secretary-General
(S/14647)
4. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
The meeting was called to order at 12.00 noon.
Membersof theCouncilhavereceivedthe text of the
draft resolutionsponsoredby the delegationsof
Adoption of the agenda
Mexico,Niger, Panama,the Philippines,
Tunisiaand
Uganda,distributedin documentS/14664.
The agenda

was adopted.

Complaint by Angola agahwt louth Africa:
Letter dated 26 August 1981 from the Char&
dkffaires a-i. of the Permanent Mlssion of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (8114647)

5. I shouldalsoliketo drawtheattentionof members
to the other newdocuments
relatedto this question:
S/14661,
letterdated29August 1981addressed
to the
Presidentof the Councilby the representativeof
Cuba:S/14662,
letterdated29Augustaddressed
to the
Secretary-General
by the representative
of Mongolia
and5114663,
letter dated29 Augustaddressed
to the
Secretary-General
by the representative
of Kenya.

1. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance
with decisionstakenat the 22%thto
2298thmeetings,
I invite the representative
of Angola 6. The first speakeris Mr. Maksoud,whom the
to takea placeat the Counciltableandthe represen- Councilhasagreedto invite under rule 39 of the
tativesof Brazil,Canada,Cuba,the FederalRepublic provisionalrules of procedure.I invite him to be
of Germany,India, Kenya, the Libyan Arab Jama- seatedat the Counciltableandto makehisstatement.
hiriya, South Africa, Viet Nam, Yugoslaviaand
Zimbabwe
to takethe placesreservedfor themat the 7. Mr. MAKSOUD: First of all, I want to consideof theCouncilchamber.
gratulateyou, Mr. President,on the statesmanlike
mannerin which you have been conductingthe
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. de Figueiredo
proceedingsof this seriesof important Security
(Angola),
fook a place at the Council table; Mr. Bueno
Council meetings.1 shouldlike also to take this
(Brazil),
Mr.
Morden
(Canada),
Mr.
Roa Kouri
opportunityto offer the condolences
of the Leagueof
(Cuba), Mr. van Well 1Federal Republic of Germany),
Arab Statesonthe deathof presidentTorrijosandto
Mr. Krishnan
(India),
Mr. Muina
(Kenya),
Mr. Burcongratulate
thenewleadership
of thefriendlycountry
win (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriyu),
Mr. Eksteen
(South
of Panama.
Africa),

Mr.

Ha Van Lau (Viet Nam), Mr. Lazarevid
Mashingaidze
(Zimbabwe)
rook
reserved for them at the side of the Council

(Yugoslavia)
and Mr.
the places
chamber.

8. TheCouncilis meetingtoday because
it isseized
of the aggression
by the racistrdgimeof SouthAfrica
againstAngola.The reasons
that motivatetheLeague

of Arab States in participating in the Council’s
deliberations are basically twofold. One is the solidarity of the Arab States and the Arab peoplewith the
people of Angola and, more emphatically, also with
the people of Namibia through their sole legitimate
representative, the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), That solidarity is dictated by the
common aspirations and historical experiences which
the Arabs and Africans have had. That community of
experiences, as well as the community of aspirations,
constitutes a determinant in our joint struggle.

12. We seehow, for example,the strikesagainst
Lebanonaresaidby Israelnotto beagainstLebanon,
in the samemanneras the South African representativehasstatedherethat thestrikesin Angolaarenot
againstAngolabut are againstSWAPO.In the same
way, Israelhasstruck in Lebanon,not intendingto
strikeat Lebanonbut in Lebanon.WhetherAngolan
women,childrenand mendie in the meantime01
whetherhundreds
andhundreds
of Lebanese
arekilled
in Beirut-that becomes
accidentaland,asBeginhas
saidin hisreferenceto Beirut, merelyregrettable.
13. SouthAfrica’sattacksareagainstwhat it claims
9. We should therefore like to affirm our total to be SWAP0 “terrorist bases”%Angola,notwithsolidarity with the Republic of Angola and to condemn standingthe fact that SWAP0 is the recognized
in no uncertain terms the aggression by South Africa.
representative
of the peopleof Namibiaandthat as
And although solidarity constitutes a determining suchit is entitled underthe Charterof the United
factor moving us to share in this Council’s delibera- Nationsto struggleby all means-peaceful,
if possitions, perhaps more relevant-inasmuch as our solible; diplomatic,if possible;political,if possible;and
darity is assumed, our identity of purpose is reaf- armed,if necessary,
firmed, our community of objectives is well known
and established-more important and vital is that our
14. By the sametoken, when Israel strikes in
input into these deliberations is also motivated by Lebanon,it strikesthe Palestine
LiberationOrganizathe similarity of our experience: the similarity of the tion (PLO), its peopleandrefugeecamps.It saysit is
Arabs’ experience with Israel-another lingering rastriking the so-calledPLO becauseIsrael-alone
cist entity- to that of the peopleof Namibia, Angola oerhaps-doesnot recognizethe centrality of the
and the rest of Africa with the lingering racist regime balesiinianquestionand-thecentralauthority of the
of South Africa.
PLO as the sole regresentativeof the Palestinian
people.
IO. During the deliberations of the Council, there has
IS. So the SecurityCouncilis intermittentlyseized
been an almost universal consensus condemning the of the aggressions
bf lsraeland the aggressions
of
attack by South Africa against Angola. This univerSouthAfrica. Henceour familiaritywith the problem
sality of condemnation, emphatic, unequivocal and and our experienceconstitute an input into the
inevitably shared by the member States of the Arab
deliberationsof the Council becausethe latter is
League. ooints to a situation that is becoming ever
confrontedwith patternsof behaviourthat are, if not
more dangerous, inasmuch as racist rCgimes-whether
identical,very similar.
in Western Asia, like Israel, or in southern Africa. like
apurtheid South Africa-behave towardsthe world 16. If we relateour experienceof what hastaken
communityasthoughthey weretotally unaccountable placein Lebanonwith whatis takingplacetoday in
to the resolutionsof the United Nations, to the Angola, it is becausethe United Nations,and parimperativesof internationalconsensus
and to the ticularly the SecurityCouncil,mustregainthe credithe
m&al guidelines
thatdetermineinternationalrelations bility that comesfrom internationalconsensus,
and civilized behaviour. It is that total lack of effectiveness
of UnitedNationsmachinery,and the
of Africa, theArabworldandthe entireworld
accountabilitywhichleadsthosetwo remaining
racist peoples
entitiesintheworldto arrogateto themselves
theright mustbe ableto rely on themechanisms
of the United
to allowtheir racismto be transplanted,
to work at Nationsandits resolutions.
will, to strike at will, wheneverand whereverthey
17. Because
of thedifficulty of enablingtheSecurity
want.
Councilto becomethe crediblemachkery that wk
want it to be, insteadof the UnitedNationsbeingthe
I I, We have seenhow Israelhasdonethat in the anchorof thefreedomfightersanda frameworkfo;.the
attack on Baghdad,in its attackson Beirutandin its legitimateaspirations
of thepeoplesof the worldwho
repeatedongoingattackson southernLebanon.We can then resort to the Council to redresstheir
haveseenhowthemassi\Lactsof aggression
bySouth grievancesin order to avoidthe violencethat is the
Africa emergefrom its exclusivistideathat it holds rnescapab!e
outcomeof the racistregimes’violations
within itself the right to violate the independence of territorial integrity, we find that the credibility of
and territorial integrity of other countries,suchas the UnitedNationsis beingseriouslyquestioned-and
Angola, in the nameof hot pursuitand pre-emptive at timesundermined
by the positionthat the United
strikesagainstfreedomfighters.WCseean amazing St; estakesin orderto providethoselingeringracist
correlationin the unfoldingbehaviourof Israel in andcolonialregimes,whetherin SouthAfrica or in
Lebanon-in a way, the Angolaof the MiddleEastIsrael,with the encouragement
that internationallaw
andof SouthAfrica in Angola.So wehavea situation andconsensus
havedeniedthem.It isthat encouragethat is very familiarto the Arab League.
mentwhichwemustseekto preventbecause,
although

this may
interprete
that any I
of the Un
Africa ar
that they
Angolao
makesus
objectivit
is right a1
the victit
national
secureth

18, Thi
Cracker
between
fact a dis
of Africa
just as11
Arabsis
raciststr
between

19. Anf
versusb
resilient
outside
tions of

20. It i
havehat
fact tha
today S
beingta)
the mor
s,‘,‘i;;

uni;ersa
sary to
repeatin
become
UnitedI

21. MI
thatthe
us in it
approai
South ,’
aspects
full con

22. Th
South 1
against
SamNc
Africa’s
extensi
the war

23. It
decade

this may not have been the original intention, it is
interpreted by South Africa and Israel in such a way
that any modicum of so-called objectivity on the pait
of the United States becomes a licence for both South
Africa and Israel to conduct the acts of aggression
that they have uninterruptedly committed whether in
Angola or in Lebanon. It is that encouragement that
makes us appeal to the United States to realize that
objectivity is not an equidistant position between what
is right and what is wrong, between the aggressor and
the victims of aggression, between those who violate
national and human rights and those who seek to
secure these rights.

expectedthe momentous
changesthat have irrevocably altered the political geographyof southern
Africa. .Theybelievedthenthat Portuguese
colonialismwouldremaina durablefeatureof theregion,thus
ensuringthat a wide belt of southernAfrica would
indefinitelyremainsafefor ~parrbeld.
24, Thevictoriesof thepatrioticforcesinAngolaand
Mozambiquetook SouthAfrica andits friendssomewhat by surprise,Insteadof a regionsafefor apartheid, wi no& havenext doorto SouthAfrica themost
powerful symbolsof dignity and freedom. South
Africa and-itsfriendshavenever reconciledthemselvesto thenewrealitycreatedby the triumphof the
liberationmovements
in AngolaandMozambique.

18, This is not, as Assistant Secretary of State
Cracker said in his speech on Saturday, a struggle
between whites and blacks. That is a misnomer and in
fact a distortion. This is a struggle between the peoples
of Africa, the people of Namibia and a racist rkgime,
just as the struggle of the Palestinian people and the
Arabs is not against the Jews but against the Zionist
racist structure in Palestine. So much for equidistance
between what is wrong and what is right.

25. The secondpriniary objectiveof SouthAfrica
concernsNamibia.By seeking
to elhninate
all patriotic
elementsboth within and outsideNamibia,South
Africa is trying desperately
to consolidate
its illegal
hold on the Territory and thereby to frustratethe
processof genuineself-determination,
It wasnot by
coincidencethat
SouthAfrica announced
its intention
to increasethe powersof the DemocraticTurnhalle
Alliancetraitorsjust astheinvasionof Angolawasin
progress.

19. And it is insulting to state that it involves whites
versus blacks. It is the white racists versus the moral
resilience of the white people within Africa and
outside Africa. It is a challenge to the basic foundations of human equality that many whites have
championedand that blacks seek to achieve.

26. Clearly,SouthAfrica is takingadvantageof the
climateof uncertaintycreatedby the equivocationof
the Westerncontactfive with regardto the planfor
Namibianindependence.

20. It is in that context-of the familiarity that we
have had in Lebanon and in other places and of the
fact that the Palestinians have been targeted, that
today SWAP0 is being targeted and that Angola is
being targeted-that all this constitutes a challengeto
the moral, diplomatic and political authority of the
Security Council. That is why we plead with all
members of the Council to seek to bring about not only
universality of condemnation but the measures necessary to inhibit the aggressor, to prevent it from
repeating this aggression and to make it respect and
become answerable to the higher authority that the
United Nations consti’utes.

27. The third objectiveof SouthAfrica is to intimidateall thefront-lineStateswith theaimof inhibiting
their expressionof solidarity with the liberation
movements
andwith therefugees
whoarefleeingfrom
the forcesof oppression
andoccupation.
28. The fourth objectiveof SouthAfrica’s massive
invasionof Angolais to imposeits granddesignof
weakening
theeconomies
of the neighbouring
Statesin
order to make them dependenton South Africa,
therebycreatingthe so-called
constellation
of States.
It is thereforenot surprising
that, duringthis invasion
asonpreviousoccasions,
economic
infrastructureand
installations
havebeenthemJor targetsfor theSouth
African invaders.

21. Mr. OTUNNU (Uganda): It has been suggested
that the Security Council should view the issue before
us in its full context. I am in agreement with that
approatih.1 too believethat the Council must examine
South Africa’s aggression against Angola in all the
aspects that make up a full context. What, then, is the
full context of the case before the Council?

29. Thesecond
aspectof thefull contextisthatof the
reasonsfor SouthAfrica’s feelingfree to pursueits
objectiveswith completeimpunity.
30. The SecurityCouncilmustbeara heavyresponsibility for thisstateof affairs.Sinceits independence
on I I November1975,Angola haslived asthe victim
of constantactsof aggression
fromSouthAfrica. The
tiles of the Councilare repletewith reportsof these
incidents.

22. The first thing to appreciate in the full context is
South Africa’s objectives in committing aggression
against Angola. III his book Sartl~ AjZcu in @k-u,
SamNolutshungu
notessimplyandclearlythat South
Africa’s aggressive
policy is “little more than the
extensionof itsinternalconflict-the struggleto make
the worldsafefor nparGt&‘.

3I. Thisis the fifth timesince1978that the Council
hasconsidered
a formalcomplaintby Angolaagainst
SouthAfrica for an act of aggression.
As recently as

23. 1needhardlyremindtheCouncilthat lessthana
decadeago neither South Africa nor its friends
3

thisfact to theact of aggression
that hasgivenriseto
the complaintbeforethe COUnCil.

23 April 1981, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Angola reminded the Council of the agony and
suffering of his country in the face of constant acts of
aggression by South Africa. Referring only to the three
years covering the period 1978to 1980,he stated:

38, In any case,what is so uniqueabout having
foreignmilitaryequipment7
Thefact isthat manyof US
in thethird worlddependon externalsources
for the
supplyof anymilitaryhardware,for thesimplereason
that we have not yet developedthe technologyfor
manufacturing
thesedeadlyitems.Thisfact issobasic
that the economies
of many industrializednations
boompreciselybecauseof their supplyof military
hardwareto ,he third world.

“South African armed forces have carried out
1,400 reconnaissance flights, 290 air raids, 56 debarkations of helicopter-borne troops, 72 land
attacks, causing the death of more than 1,800persons and the wounding cf about a thousand persons
and material damage estimated at $7 billion.”
(2271~1 meaiing,

pm.

161

39. Thereianr armsembargo
againstAngola,nor has
In spiteof themagnitude
of theseatrocitiesandof the Angola usedits military equipmentto commitany
Ontheotherhand,therehasbeenanarms
suffering.the supportthat SouthAfrica enjoysfrom aggression,
somepermanent
members
of the Councilhasalways embargoagainstSouthAfrica sinceNovember1977.
ensuredthat everythingexceptthe mostperfunctory
pronouncements
isblocked.
40. It is clear from the details providedby the
representative
of Angolathat the military equipment
32. The reactionsof the Councilto recentactsof usedby SouthAfrica to launchthe invasionagainst
aggression
elsewhere
havealsoservedto encourage Angolawassuppliedby Westerncountries,in clear
SouthAfrica’saggressive
designs.
WhenIsrael,barely violation of the armsembargoregime.Insteadof
a few weeksago, got away with the invasionof focusingonthe illegalsupplynetworkto SouthAfrica,
southernLebanonandthecarnagein westBeirut,the insteadof bringingto bookthosewhicharepartof that
andinsteadof condemning
the mercenaries
message
to SouthAfrica wasclear,namely,that it too enterprise
coulddo the samewith equalimpunity.
in the employof SouthAfrica, we arebeingaskedto
divert ourattentionto Angola’smilitaryequipment.If
33. Weseemto bedeveloping
two international
legal themerepossession
of foreignmilitaryequipment
by a
rCgimes:
onethat isall permissive,
underwhichSouth countryor the presence
of foreignmilitarypersonnel
Africa andIsraeloperate,andanotherregulated
bythe on the soilof a country wereto constitutesufficient
usualrightsand obligations.which the rest of the groundsfor invasionby anothercountry, the result
wouldnotonly beabsurdbut it wouldalsoplacemost
international
communityobserves.
countriesin the world today under immediateand
34. Themostelementary
aspectof thepresentcaseis permanent
threatof aggression.
the simplefact that therehasbeenanact of aggression,anact of aggression
committedby SouthAfrica 41. Evenas the Angolansare mourningtheir dead
aeainstAngola. A clearerexampleof premeditated andcountingtheir losses,
we heardwordsof comfort
aid unprovokedaggression
wouldbe impossible
to andencouragement
flowingin the directionof South
find. So clear, indeed,is the situationthat South Africa.
Africa itself,far fromdenyingthe actionin question,
hasin fact loudly proclaimed
its invasionof Angola.
42. It hasbeensaidby somePowersthat it is not
their task to choosebetweenblacksand whitesin
35. It is surelvcuriousthat, in spiteof this elemen- SouthAfrica. I am afraidthat the problemin South
tary fact, some-members
of theCo&c& andespecially Africa is not about choosingbetweentwo racial
thosewhohavesookenof thefull contextof thiscase, groups.Thechoiceisbetweenthe forcesof apurtheid
have not even been able to bring themselvesto which have brutatizedand dehumanizedthe vast
pronounce
the word “aggression”.
majorityof SouthAfricans,on the onehand,andthe
forcesthat seekto setthemfree on theotherhand.
36. It wasvery sadto listenlo the statementby a
pcrmancntmemberof the Council.Fromtnat statc- 43. How can a country that professesdemocracy
mcnt.WC wouldconcludethat it is Angola,andnot remainneutralbetweenanoppressive
systemthat has
SouthAfrica, whichhascommittedanact of aggres- deprived80percentof thecitizensof theirbasicrights
sion.Howcanweexpecttheinternational
community anda movementof the peoplethat seeksto restore
to takethe SecurityCouncilscrioustywhena perma- thosedemocraticrights?In the full context of South
11e11l member
IctsSouthAfrica, theaggressor,
goscot- Africa, anynotionof neutralitycanonly meansupport
free and insteadplacesAngola, the victim, in the for theSIUIUS
y~owhichmeans
supportfor thesystem
dock’?
of upurtheid.
37. Much hasbeenmadeof the fact that thereis
someforeign military equipmentand personnelin
Angola.
WhatI shouldlike to knowistherelevanceof

44. ThosewhoviewAfrica throughthe prismof bie
Power rivalry aresobusylookingfor foreignpresence
in Africa that they seemunableto notice that the
4

I

Africansa
the etepha
“globalistr
thebig-Po
mineralwe
difficult tc
our own
protectan

45. How

the aggre
muchdest
ableto ta
SouthAfr
46. The

Angolaw
the Minis
he said,

“in the
commi
constitl
securit
of viol;
integrit
Securit
bitities,
econon
the vel

into q
[2271st

41. The

lastFridr
AngolaH

“Le
paper1
for ho
Pretor!
[22%ti

Africans are also there. In Africa. we sav that when
the elephants fight it is the grass that suffers, For the
“globalists”, Africa is but a aatch of mass over which
the big-Power elephantsfight’for stratgglc locations and
mineral wealth and other raw materials. They find it
difficult to recognize the fact that we in Africa have
our own independent interests, which we seek to
protect and enhance.
45. How long will the friends of South Africa protect
the aggressor7 How many lives must be lost and how
much destruction must be caused before the Council is
able to take concrete and effective measures against
South Africa?
46. The deep sense of frustration felt by the peopleof
Angola was expressed before the Council in April by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of that country when
he said,
“in the face of the criminal acts of aggression
committed against the front-line countries, which
constitute a serious threat to internationalueaceand
security, we should like to know how many new acts
of violation of the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of our country we must bear before the
Security Council finally shoulders its resnonsibilities,- by imposing comprehensive mandatory
economic sanctions, because, unless that is done,
the very credibility of the Council will be called
into question, along with its own resolutions”
[2271st meeting, para. 191.

47. Thesamesentiments
weregivena powerfulecho
lastFridayin themovingpleaby therepresentative
of
Angolawho said:

48. In its resolution 475 (1980). the Council decided
to meetanainin the eventof further actsof
vioiationof theiovereignty andterritorialintegrity
of the Peoole’sReaublicof Angolabv the South
African racist regcme,in orde; to considerthe
adoptionof moreeffectivemeasures
in accordance
with theappropriate
provisionsof the Charterof the
UnitedNations,includingChapterVII thereof’.
II

.

.

SouthAfrica’srepeated
invasions
of Angolaconstitute
actsof aggression,
breaches
of the peaceanda grave
threat to internationalpeaceandsecurity,all within
thecontextof Article 39of theCharter.TheCouncilis
thereforeunderaclearobligationto applyArticle 41of
theCharterandimpose
comprehensive
andmandatory
sanctions
againstSouthAfrica.
49. The peopleof Angola are makinga supreme
sacrificefor the sake of freedomand dignity in
southernAfrica. 1takethisopportunityto reaffirmthe
total solidarity of the Governmentand peopleof
Ugandawith the Governmentandpeopleof Angola.
We salutetheir indomitablespirit. That spirit is best
expressedin the wordsof the greatleader,the late
AgostinhoNeto, who wrote in his poemcommemora;a;gthestartof the Angolanrevolutionof4 February
“It wasthenthat in our eyes,fired
Now with blood,nowwith life, nowwith death,
We buriedour deadvictoriously
And on the gravesmaderecognition
Of the reasonmenweresacrificed
For love,
For peace. . .‘*

“Let me not take back to my peopleanother
paperresolution.Let metakebackto thema cause
for hopeandactionto end the tyranny by which And so,the strugglemustcontinue.
Pretoria seeksto subjugatesouthernAfrica.”
[22%th meeting, para. 231

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

HOW TO OBTAIN

UMTED

NATIONS

PUBLICAllONS

United Notions publications
may be oblamed from bookstores and distribulors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LBS PUBLICATIONS

DES NAllONS

UNIES

Lcs publications
drs Nations Units soot en vente dam les librairies et lcs agences dfpwtairer
do
monde emier. Informer-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressekvous
A : Nations Unies. Section
des venter. New York ou Genbve.
