Ill.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

strengthening of international security, in accordance with
the Charter;
9. Stresses that there is an urgent need to enhance the
effectiveness of the Security Council in discharging its
principal role of maintaining international peace and security and, to that end, emphasizes the need to examine
mechanisms and working methods on a continued basis in
order to enhance the authority and enforcement capacity
of the Council, in accordance with the Charter;
10. Emphasizes that the Security Council should consider holding periodic meetings in specific cases to consider and review outstanding problems and crises, thus
enabling the Council to play a more active role in preventing conflicts;
11. Reiterates the need for the S(,curity Council, in particular its permanent members, to ensure the effective
implementation of its decisions in compliance with the relevant provisions of the Charter;
12. Considers that respect for and promotion of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in their civil,
political, economic, social and cultural aspects, on the one
hand, and the strengthening of international peace and
security, on the other, mutually reinforce each other;
13. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
under colonial domination, foreign occupation or racist
regimes and their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence, and urges Member States to increase
their support for and solidarity with them and their
national liberation movements and to take urgent and
effective measures for the speedy completion of the implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples 100 and for the
final elimination of colonialism, racism and apartheid;
14. Calls upon all States, particularly the members of
the Security Council, to take appropriate and effective
measures to promote the fulfilment of the objective of the
denuclearization of Africa in order to avert the serious
danger which the nuclear capability of South Africa constitutes to the African States, in particular the front-line
States, as well as to international peace and security;
15. Welcomes the continuation of the process within
the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe and expresses the hope that the Stockholm
Conference on Confidence- and Security-building Measures and Disarmament in Europe, the continent with the
greatest concentration of armaments and military forces.
will achieve significant and positive results;
16. Reaffirms that the democratization of international
relations is an imperative necessity enabling, under the
conditions of interdependence, the full development and
independence of all States as well as the attainment of genuine security, peace and co-operation in the world, and
stresses its firm belief that the United Nations offers the
best framework for the promotion of these goals;
17. Invites Member States to submit their views on the
question of the implementation of the Declaration on the
Strengthening of International Security, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its forty-first session on the basis of the replies
received;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Review of the imple124 O.tficia/ Records of the General Assemh/r. T/11rt.1·-seventh Session, Supplement No. I (N37/l).
l25 fbid., T/11rty-e1ghrh Session. Supplemenr No. I (N38/l).
126 Ibid., 7hirty-mnth Sesswn. Suppt,,ment No. I (N39/ I).
127 Ibid .. For1ieth Sesswn. Supplement No. 1 (N40/I).
128 See Official Records of rhe Secumy Council, Fortierh rear. 2608th
meeting; St'C also Resolutions and Decrnons o/ rhe Security Council /985, p.
] I.

109

mentation of the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security".
117th p/enar}' meeting
16 Decemher /985

40/159.

Implementation of the collective security
provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 3 7/ 119 of 16 December 1982,
38/191 of 20 December 1983 and 39/ 158 of 17 December
1984 on the implementation of the collective security provisions of the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security,
Reaffirming that the primary function of the United
Nations, in particular through the Security Council. is the
maintenance of international peace and security,
Stressing that the purposes of the United Nations can be
achieved only under conditions in which States comply
fully with their obligations assumed under the Charter,
Alarmed over the growing tendency of States to resort to
the use of force, intervention and interference in the internal affairs of States, thus ignoring the Charter and the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,gg
Concerned that the Srcurity Council has not always been
able to take decisive action for the maintenance of international peace and for resolving international problems,
Recognizing that fundamental approaches to genuine
security include, inter alia, the strengthening of the Charter
system of collective security.
Conscious of the important role with which the Security
Council is entrusted in enhancing the collective security
provisions of the Charter for the promotion of peace and
security in the world in accordance with the Charter,
Regretting that the provisions of the Charter relating to
collective security measures have not been fully implemented.
Taking into account. in this connection, the reports of
the Secretary-General on the work of the Organization to
the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh, 124 thirtyeighth, 125 thirty-ninth 126 and fortieth sessions, 127
Also taking into account the statement by the President
of the Security Council at the commemorative session of
the Council on 26 September I 985. 118
Recalling the Final Political Declaration adopted by the
Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Luanda from 4 to 7 September 1985, JN
Also recalling the views of the Governments of the five
Nordic countries on thr strengthening of the United
Nations, 130
Taking note of the note by the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the collective security provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security, 111
Having considered the item entitled, "Implementation
of the collective security provisions of the Charter of the
129 A/40/854-S/l 76 IO and (orr. L annex I.
1JO A,38/271-S/15830. annex. For the printed lt'Xt, see Otfinal Records o(
rh,· Sccunty C.mncil. Thmr-e,~hth l'car. S11p1•lc1110,r /,>r lpnl. Mav awl June
/9113. document Sil 5810. am,n
IJI A,40/454

110

General Assembly-Fortieth Session

United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security",
I. Regrets that the Ad Hoe Committee on the Implementation of the Collective Security Provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations which the General Assembly, by its resolution 38/191, decided to establish for the
purpose of exploring ways and means of implementing the
said provisions has not been constituted;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly, as
a matter of urgency, to appoint fifty-four Member States
and on the basis of consultation already conducted to constitute the membership of the Ad Hoe Committee on the
basis of equitable geographical representation and including the permanent members of the Security Council;
3. Requests the Secretary-General urgently to invite
those Member States that have not yet done so to communicate to him not later than 30 April 1986 their views and

comments on the matter and to transmit those views and
comments to the Ad Hoe Committee as soon as possible;
4. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee, in considering the
matter, to take due account of the views and comments of
Member States, including their recommendations, and to
submit a progress report to the Security Council for its
consideration and comments and to the General Assembly
at its forty-first session, and a final report to the Assembly
at its forty-second session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Implementation of the
collective security provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security".
117th plenary meeting
16 December 1985
