S/2017/503

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2296
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) until 30 June 2017 and requested
me to report every 90 days on its implementation. The report provides an update and
analysis of the conflict, the political situation and the operational environment in
Darfur, including the main challenges to the effective impl ementation of the
mandate during the period from 16 March to 7 June 2017. It also presents the
progress UNAMID has made in the implementation of its benchmarks and provides
an update on the transfer of tasks to the United Nations Country Team and the
development of an exit strategy for UNAMID.

II. Conflict dynamics and security situation
2.
During the reporting period, the level of armed hostilities in Darfur remained
significantly lower than in previous years. The non -signatory armed movements
attempted to reassert their military presence in Darfur, but remained unable to
conduct sustained operations in the face of the military dominance of the
Government of the Sudan. In response to intercommunal conflict during the
migration season, state and local governments and community leaders, supported by
UNAMID, undertook preventive and mitigation measures, resulting in a lower level
of violence as compared with previous years. However, the root causes of such
disputes, as they relate to the ownership of and access to land and other resources,
remained unresolved. Civilians and internally displaced persons were exposed to
physical attacks, most often by armed militia and government security personnel.
Despite an overall improvement in security conditions as co mpared with one year
ago, the lack of significant progress towards effectively addressing the root causes
and consequences of the conflict, especially with respect to the issue of land and
presence of armed militias, prevented the further stabilization of the situation in
Darfur.
Fighting between forces of the Government of the Sudan and armed movements
3.
For the first time since the outbreak of the conflict in 2003, the annual dry
season in Darfur witnessed only one major and a few minor military co nfrontations
between government and armed movement forces in April and May. Having

17-09216 (E)

160617

*1709216*

S/2017/503

extended its unilateral ceasefire in January 2017 for a further six -month period, the
Government did not relaunch its counter-insurgency campaign against the
significantly weakened Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) in Jebel
Marra this year. The Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) clashed
with government forces in North and East Darfur.
4.
Following military losses at the hands of the forces of the Government of the
Sudan in Darfur in 2014 and 2015, as reported by the Panel of Experts on the Sudan
(see S/2017/22), SLA/MM and JEM have maintained a presence and involvement in
the conflicts in Libya and South Sudan. On 20 May, SLA/MM, with elements of the
Sudan Liberation Army/Transitional Council (SLA/TC), a splinter faction of
SLA/AW reported to have established tactical cooperation with SLA/MM, clashed
with the Sudanese Armed Forces and Rapid Support Forces in North and East
Darfur for the first time in three years.
5.
In North Darfur, on 20 May, SLA/MM and SLA/TC elements on board
280 gun-mounted and utility vehicles were intercepted by quickly mobilized SAF
and Rapid Support Forces in Musbat and Wadi Howar (Furawiyah), approximately
60 km north-east and 120 km north of Umm Barru, North Darfur, near the border
with Chad. Unable to sustain operations against government forces, the majority of
armed movement elements were reportedly forced to retreat to Chad a nd Libya by
22 May. On 28 and 29 May, Government and SLA/MM forces also clashed in Ayn
Sero, 30 km north-west of Kutum, North Darfur, reportedly resulting in at least
three civilian fatalities, four incidents of rape, burning and looting of villages and
civilian displacement. The Mission is verifying these reports.
6.
Concurrently, in East Darfur, on 20 May, SLA/MM and SLA/TC forces on
board 80 vehicles clashed with Sudanese Armed Forces in Sharaya, 70 km west of
Ed Daein, East Darfur, resulting in the deaths of five Sudanese Armed Forces
soldiers and an unconfirmed number of rebels. Further clashes were reported near
the Adoula mountains and Arto Bargo, 25 km south and 16 km south -east of
Shearia, respectively, on 21 and 22 May, resulting in the deaths of seven SLA/MM
fighters and one Sudanese Armed Forces soldier. On 21 May, 15 men identifying
themselves as SLA/MM members approached the Mission’s team site in
Muhajiryiah, East Darfur, and were subsequently arrested by Military Intelligence.
By the end of 22 May, the Government confirmed that approximately 30-40
SLA/MM combatants with seven vehicles had managed to reach Jebel Marra via
East Darfur. The majority of rebels, however, were reported to have retreated to
South Sudan via Abu Jabra. UNAMID has received conflicting accounts of the total
number of casualties in these incidents and has not received reports of civilians
being affected.
7.
The Government claimed to have captured at least 130 armed movement
elements and 83 vehicles and confirmed the deaths of the Rapid Support Forces
Deputy Commander, Colonel Hamdan al-Samih, during fighting in North Darfur.
The SLA/TC commander and former SLA/AW deputy commander, Mohamed Adam
Abdulsalam (Tarada) and several other SLA/MM and SLA/TC commanders, were
also reportedly killed in the fighting. Government officials and the SLA/MM
leadership exchanged public accusations with respect to the cause of the fighting
and violations of their unilateral ceasefires, which JEM and SLA/MM had also
renewed for six months on 3 May, and issued conflicting accounts regarding the
impact. The Government accused the armed movements of launching a coordinated
incursion from Libya and South Sudan into Darfur with the objective of
undermining peace and stability and delaying the permanent revocation of United
States Government sanctions which are scheduled for review in July 2017, as well
as possibly re-establishing a military presence in the region after years of absence.

2/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

SLA/MM, in turn, claimed the fighting was caused by Government at tacks on rebelheld areas, including through aerial bombardment in eastern Jebel Marra.
8.
Meanwhile, as a result of the territorial losses suffered in 2016 and internal
fracturing and defections, SLA/AW maintained only a limited military presence in
the higher reaches of Jebel Marra in Killing, Boullay, Kibli, Bar Arie, Kalokitting,
Kwila and Galol. Facing the closure of supply routes and logistical constraints,
SLA/AW resorted to incursions and ambushes north of Kass, Deribat and
Menawashei, South Darfur, areas in which government forces have not established
full control. On 7 April, reportedly in search of supplies, SLA/AW ambushed a
government police vehicle along the Keila-Al Malam road area between
Menawashei and Deribat, killing two police officers a nd wounding one. On 7 May,
according to local sources, Sudanese Armed Forces retaliated by attacking SLA/AW
positions in Katti, Kurifal, Burro, Kadingo, Marra, Kwila, Boga and Barbara, within
20 km south and south-east of Guldo, Central Darfur. UNAMID was unable to
verify the impact of the fighting owing to road conditions in the area.
9.
Significant military setbacks over the past year and reported internal
disagreements due to a lack of effective leadership on the ground resulted in further
divisions within SLA/AW and the defection of its members. On 3 and 4 April,
clashes between two groups within the movement were reported in Kaylah, 30 km
north-west of Menawashei, resulting in the death of a local commander. On
14 April, the Governor of Central Darfur announced the signing of a peace
agreement between the Government and a SLA/AW faction under the leadership of
Abdel-Latif Abdel-Hamid in Zalingei, which was the third defection from the armed
movement within six months.
Local conflicts and intercommunal violence
10. The reporting period, characterized by the ongoing migration season,
witnessed 11 intercommunal security incidents resulting in 88 fatalities compared
with 8 incidents and 45 fatalities during the previous period. The most significant
clashes took place between Arab tribes over access to limited resources such as
grazing pastures and water along migration routes. State and locality-level authorities,
native administrations and community leaders, with the support of UNAMID, took
expedient action to maintain security, mediate between the communities and initiate
reconciliation processes. Such measures, many of which have been implemented
since mid-2015, contributed to a decrease in the number of fatalities as compared
with two years ago, which saw 278. Nonetheless, the sustainability of reconciliation
and peace agreements remained a significant challenge in the absence of progress in
resolving underlying issues over land ownership.
11. Two of the conflicts involved Salamat, a nomadic communit y without
recognized land rights and competing over resources with Misseriya in Central
Darfur, and Habbaniya and Ta’aisha in South Darfur. In South Darfur, fighting
between Salamat and Habbaniya over the sharing of migration routes led to 28 deaths.
Following a cattle-rustling incident, on 29 April, Salamat launched an attack on the
Habbaniya village of Um Sial, west of Buram, to recover the stolen animals, to
which Habbaniya responded in Nadeif on 8 May and in Sakhara on 10 May, west
and south-west of Buram. Following the engagement of the State-level mediation
committee, community leaders and UNAMID on 12 May in the presence of the
Governor of South Darfur, the two communities agreed to cease hostilities and to
convene a reconciliation conference in August 2017. The conference is expected to
build on the previous agreement of 2009, which did not fully address the issue of
land ownership and access in Al Nadeif.

17-09216

3/17

S/2017/503

12. In Central Darfur, following a cattle-rustling incident, Salamat and Misseriya
clashed near Kabar, north of Um Dukhun, on 9 April, resulting in three fatalities.
Despite Government efforts to stabilize the security situation, clashes over cattle rustling and other crimes ensued in Umm Sory, south of Um Dukhun, on 16 May; in
Magula, north-east of Um Dukhun, on 17 May; in Bir Bagara and Mogali, west of
Bindisi, on 19 May; in Sure, north-east of Um Dukhun, on 20 May; in Murraya, east
of Um Dukhun, on 21 May; and Salayle, south of Kabar, on 22 May. A total of
15 Misseriya and 24 Salamat were killed, with reports that the Misseriya burned
down 10 Salamat-inhabited villages and that 716 households were displaced to Um
Dukhun. Government forces reinforced their presence in the area, and the two
communities agreed to cease hostilities at a meeting in Um D ukhun on 27 May.
Meanwhile, a peaceful co-existence committee engaged both sides with a view to
initiating a reconciliation process.
13. In East Darfur, tensions between Ma‘aliya and Southern Rizeigat persisted. No
further progress was reported in efforts to resolve their dispute over the ownership
of land and oil in Abu Karinka and Adilla localities, with Ma‘aliya maintaining their
rejection of the draft Marawie agreement presented to the parties by the
Government in 2015 and which grants land rights to the Southern Rizeigat, as the
framework for the process. In this context, a series of cattle -rustling-related criminal
incidents resulted in 21 fatalities and threatened to reignite the conflict. On 9 April,
five Southern Rizeigat and four Ma‘aliya, as well as two Government soldiers, were
killed during clashes in Sabah al-Nima, south-west of Abu Karinka. Further clashes
took place in Sabah al-Nima on 18 April, and in Okus, north-east of Muhajiriyah, on
7 May, resulting in four Ma‘aliya and three Southern Rizeigat fatalities. In an effort
to maintain security, government forces enforced the buffer zone established by the
State Government in the wake of the fighting in 2015. Government police
investigated but failed to apprehend the perpetrators, while communi ty leaders
urged both sides to treat these incidents as crimes and not an escalation of the
broader conflict.
Violence against IDPs
14. As compared with the previous reporting period, there was a decrease in
reported violence against internally displaced persons, with 104 criminal incidents,
resulting in 22 fatalities, compared with 249 incidents and 31 fatalities previously.
These crimes included violent attacks against internally displaced persons in or near
camps and gathering sites, the killing of women and children, sexual and genderbased violence and abductions. Most often, the perpetrators were members of armed
militias, the Rapid Support Forces, Border Guards and organized criminal groups.
15. Internally displaced persons were most vulnerable in Kutum, Tawilah, Korma,
Kabkabiyah and Sortony in North Darfur, El Geneina and Kereinik in West Darfur,
Zalingei and Nertiti in Central Darfur, and Nyala and Bulayl in South Darfur. In the
North and Straha internally displaced person camps in Nertiti an d Rwanda internally
displaced person camp in Tawilah, internally displaced persons reported that attacks
and harassment by armed men prevented them from farming in the area. At Otash
camp in Nyala, criminality and attacks against internally displaced perso ns,
especially women and girls, despite the presence of Government police in the camp,
were reported.
16. In Sortony, North Darfur, despite the signing of a peace agreement with the
Government in January 2017, the presence of former SLA/AW elements under the
leadership of “General” Sadiq at the gathering site raised tensions with Fur
internally displaced persons. The former rebels were reportedly engaged in the
forcible recruitment of internally displaced person youth and attacks and harassment
of internally displaced persons, calling for their return to their places of origin. On
4/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

22 March, the former rebels abducted two internally displaced persons from the site.
They were subsequently released on 30 March following the intervention of
UNAMID. On 27 April, the former rebels also clashed with Arab nomads over
access to the Kube water point, north-west of the gathering site, resulting in the
deaths of three nomads and one former rebel. SAF deployed reinforcements and
facilitated an agreement between the two communities over access to the water
point. The Government has yet, however, to ensure the removal of the former rebels
from the internally displaced person gathering site and integrate them into the armed
forces as stipulated in the agreement.
Crime and banditry
17. A total of 239 criminal incidents and 60 fatalities were recorded, compared
with 673 criminal incidents and 106 fatalities during the previous period. The
decrease is attributable to several Government security measures, including the
increased use of Rapid Support Forces capacity to combat crime, the banning of the
use of non-registered motorcycles, the use of facemasks and the carrying of arms by
civilians. Incidents included assault and harassment (52 cases), shooting (30),
murder (30), armed robbery (18), livestock theft (12), abductions (8), burglaries and
break-ins (4), attempted robberies (4), attacks and ambushes (2) and other
incidents (2).
18. Armed militia remained a threat to Government military and police personnel,
with four incidents recorded, as was the also case during the previous period. In
East Darfur, following an attempt to arrest an armed motorcyclist in Donki Kamal,
west of El Daein, Government security personnel clashed with Rizeigat militia from
24 to 26 March, resulting in 15 security personnel fatalities and nine injured,
including two civilians. In Central Darfur, following an ambush on the convoy of a
locality commissioner in Chad earlier that day, Rizeigat militia, alleged members of
Rapid Support Forces, clashed with Chadian security forces and Misseriya in Gaiya,
west of Bindisi, Central Darfur, on 25 March. The fighting resulted in the deaths of
four members of the Chadian troops and two Misseriya. On 14 May, armed Rizeigat
clashed with South Sudan security forces along the border at Tuhama in Bahr
al-Arab, East Darfur, reportedly resulting in 20 casualties among the security forces.

III. Political developments
Darfur peace process
19. During the reporting period, the African Union High -level Implementation
Panel (AUHIP)-led mediation, supported by UNAMID and regional stakeholders,
continued with efforts to convince the parties in Darfur to agree to a formal
cessation of hostilities as a first step towards a political settlement of the conflict.
However, further delays to the process by the armed movements in order to avoid a
binding agreement, coupled with the Government’s increased confidence due to its
military dominance on the ground, have prevented any tangible results.
20. From 6 to 9 April, AUHIP, led by former President Thabo Mbeki, visited
Khartoum and engaged with government officials and the Sudan -based opposition
on the way forward in the talks on the cessation of hostilities and on ensuring an
inclusive national dialogue. Citing the conclusion of the national dialogue process
in October 2016, Government officials expressed the view that the negotiations
should now focus solely on convincing those outside the process, in particular the
Sudan Call coalition, to accept its outcome and join the Government of National
Unity. The Sudan Call, in turn, highlighted the need for a meeting of the coalition to

17-09216

5/17

S/2017/503

adopt a unified position on the implementation of the Roadmap Agreement for
Ending the Conflicts in Sudan, of 2016.
21. Given the deadlock, on 9 April, AUHIP announced plans to hold consultations
with opposition groups in Addis Ababa, to be followed by a meeting between the
opposition and the National Dialogue High Implementation Committee, as the basis
for determining the next steps in the peace process. On 11 April, the Sudan Call
rejected discussion on the national dialogue prior to the conclusion of the cessation
of hostilities and humanitarian access agreements in Darfur and the Two Areas in
accordance with the Roadmap Agreement. On 7 May, SLA/MM issued a press
release calling for a new peace process which would address the root causes of the
conflict and provide for greater participation of the European Union and countries
neighbouring Sudan.
22. In the absence of progress in determining the next steps in the negotiations, on
18 and 19 May, the Government, JEM and SLA/MM held informal consultations in
Berlin, facilitated by the Government of Germany, to discuss their main point of
disagreement, namely the use of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as the
framework for future talks. Notwithstanding the lack of a breakthrough, the parties
committed to maintain dialogue. Meanwhile, according to media, SLA/AW, which
remained outside the peace process, declined the invitation to Berlin and reiterated
its rejection of any negotiations with the Government prior to the improvement of
security conditions in Darfur, the disarmament of militias and compensation fo r
internally displaced persons.
National dialogue
23. In line with the outcome of the national dialogue, on 11 May, the Prime
Minister, Bakri Hassan Saleh, who was appointed by the President, Omar Hassan
al-Bashir, in March 2017, announced the formation of a new government of national
unity. The new government is composed of 31 ministers and 44 state ministers and
has a mandate until 2020 to oversee the implementation of the recommendations of
the national dialogue, which concluded in October 2016, including constitutional
and economic reforms and national reconciliation. The number of ruling National
Congress Party posts at the ministerial level was reduced from 18 to 12 (58 to 39
per cent) to accommodate the other participating groups. At the level o f state
ministries, the number of National Congress Party ministers was reduced from 23 to
17 (64 to 38 per cent). President al-Bashir also appointed 65 new members of the
National Assembly representing the participants of the national dialogue, increasing
the size of the legislature from 426 to 491 and decreasing the majority of the
National Congress Party in the chamber from 83 to 65.8 per cent.
24. Two out of four federal ministers from Darfur, Bahar Idriss Abu Garda and
Ahmed Babiker Nihar, retained their positions as, respectively, Minister of Health
and Minister of Labour and Administrative Reforms. Leadership in two further
ministries changed hands between officials from Darfur, with Abdul Karim Musa
replacing Hayder Galokoma Ateim as Minister of Youth and Sports, and Bushara
Aru replacing Musa Tebin Musa as Minister of Animal Resources. Mohamed Abdel
Rahman Hassabo maintained his position as Vice-President, while Tijani al-Sisi,
former chairperson of the Darfur Regional Authority, is no longer part o f the
Government. At the level of State Ministers, Darfuris retained their roles in the
Ministries of the Presidency and Industry and the Council of Ministers, and gained
representation in the Ministries of Decentralization and Transport.
25. Non-participating opposition groups, including members of the Sudan Call
Coalition, denounced the formation of the new government in the absence of
constitutional reform and in the context of the current political and human rights
6/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

environment. The National Umma Party stated that opposition participants had
forsaken meaningful national reforms in exchange for government positions and the
status quo. On 3 May, despite calls from participating opposition parties such as the
Popular Congress Party for the completion of constitutional reforms prior to the
formation of the new government, President al-Bashir extended the mandate of the
commission tasked with leading this process for an additional year in order to
complete its task. Disagreements were also reported between the National Congress
Party and participating opposition parties prior to the decision of the National
Assembly on 24 April to maintain the arresting and emergency powers of the
National Intelligence and Security Services and to remove amendment proposals
pertaining to fundamental freedoms.

IV. Humanitarian situation
26. In the past three months, humanitarian partners have verified 8,048 individuals
newly displaced in Darfur during 2017. This included 7,554 individuals displaced as
a result of intercommunal fighting in East Darfur to El Lait, North Darfur, in
February and March, and 494 individuals displaced from central Jebel Marra to
Hasahisa camp in Zalingei, Central Darfur, in January. In the absence of major
armed hostilities during the current dry season, there was a significant decrease in
displacement as compared with previous years, including 2016, during which
approximately 158,000 people were newly displaced. The level of displacement
following the fighting between government and rebel forces in May is currently
being verified.
27. In April, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) resumed the
verification of displaced persons in Tawilah and Sortony, North Darfur, which had
been delayed by Government restrictions since February 2016. IOM also registered
10,229 new returnees in April, including 4,385 in Otash village, South Darfur,
mainly from the Otash internally displaced person camp, and 5,844 returnees
registered in nine localities in North Darfur, mainly from Chad and other locations
in North Darfur. Water shortage remained a concern in Sortony during the dry
season as boreholes had dried up owing to lower water tables. Elsewhere in Darfur,
an estimated 3 million people, including 2.1 million internally displaced persons,
remained in need of assistance.

V. Operating environment
Attacks and restrictions of movement on and denials of access to the Mission
28. During the reporting period, the level of security incidents affecting United
Nations personnel and property decreased, with 18 criminal incidents recorded,
compared with 50 in the previous period. These incidents included break-ins and
theft (2), trespassing (2), carjacking (3), attempted carjacking (2), property damage
(2), shooting (3) and other incidents (4). On 20 and 30 April, Military Intelligence
detained three peacekeepers for allegedly taking pictures of the local SAF
headquarters and being present in a restricted military area. All three peacekeepers
were released immediately. On 28 May, a UNAMID national staff member was
arrested by the National Intelligence and Security Services in Ed Daein for alleged
corruption, while the Mission’s national staff members arrested on 23 November
2016 remain in custody in Khartoum without charges.
29. On 31 May, unidentified armed gunmen carjacked a UNAMID vehicle with
two peacekeepers in Nyala, South Darfur, killing one of them. The perpetrators fled
the scene with the vehicle. The incident was the first UNAMID fatality since March
17-09216

7/17

S/2017/503

2016, and followed two similar carjacking incidents against humanitarian actors in
the Nyala area in April and May 2017, as described below. UNAMID urged the
Sudanese authorities to swiftly apprehend the perpetrators. The decrease in armed
hostilities during the reporting period witnessed a corresponding decrease in
restrictions on the Mission’s ground movement with 5 cases being reported,
compared with 13 during the previous period. The Government, however, continued
to restrict the Mission’s verification patrols to conflict-affected areas, including to
Furawiyah, Musbat and Ayn Sero, North Darfur, in the aftermath of t he recent
fighting between forces of the Government of the Sudan and armed movement
forces and in Buram, South Darfur, and Um Dukhun, Central Darfur, following
clashes between Habbaniya and Salamat and Misseriya and Salamat, respectively.
UNAMID did not experience any air movement restrictions, compared with 11
during the previous period. However, bureaucratic impediments challenged air
mobility, including delays in the approval of flight schedules, prohibition of flights
between team sites in different sectors and limits on air operation hours.
Access denials and restrictions imposed on humanitarian actors
30. With the issuance in December 2016 of new Government directives on
humanitarian action, the operating environment has improved as compared with
previous years. In addition to faster approval for movement within Darfur and fewer
denials of access, humanitarian partners were also granted access to previously
inaccessible areas such as Boori, Central Darfur, and Belle el Sereif, South Darfur.
In April 2017, United Nations Humanitarian Air Service reactivated regular flights
to Golo, Central Darfur, further facilitating the movement of humanitarian staff and
supplies to the area. Needs assessment missions are being planned to Rockero,
Central Darfur, and to Deribat, South Darfur, which has not been accessed since
2010, although both missions have been delayed due to security concerns.
SLA/AW-held areas in Jebel Marra remained inaccessible. The inconsistent
application of the new directives, however, has restricted travel clearance, approval
of international non-governmental organizations’ technical agreements, and the
ability to select national implementing partners, and has resulted in frequent delays
in the issuance of visas for humanitarian staff.
31. Humanitarian activities were also impacted owing to conditions of insecurity
in certain areas. On 19 April, armed men carjacked an United Nations Humanitarian
Air Service minibus driven by a national staff member in the Hay al -Muglis area of
Nyala, South Darfur. The driver was released by the perpetrators on the Nyala El Fasher road after being robbed of his personal belongings. On 3 May, armed men
in military attire on board a Toyota Land Cruiser vehicle attempted to carjack a
minibus belonging to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees near the World Food Programme warehouse in Nyala. The perpetrators
fled the scene following the intervention of UNAMID troops escorting the vehicle.
No casualties were reported.
Visas and customs clearances
32. The Government granted 292 visas for UNAMID, which included 132 for
military and police personnel, 74 for contractors and 18 for international staff. As of
27 May, 476 visa requests submitted since January 2016 remained pending,
including 155 for police, 104 for contractors, 85 for official visitors, 62 for military
personnel, 58 for civilian staff and 10 for United Nations Volunteers. No additional
visas were granted for the Human Rights Section, which has a vacancy rate of
46 per cent, while the overall vacancy rate for Mission civilian staff is 13 per cent,
of which 6.5 per cent is attributable to pending visas.

8/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

33. The Sudanese authorities have released food ration containers progressively as
they arrive at Port Sudan. However, customs clearances for 112 shipments (for the
previous quarter, the number was 182) of contingent and United Nations -owned
equipment remain pending, some since April 2015. These shipments include
armoured personnel carriers and vehicles, communications and information
technology equipment, generators, submersible pumps and spare parts for vehicles.
The delays resulted in demurrage charges and other costs incurred by troop - and
police-contributing countries associated with the inspection and repair of
equipment. In addition, the Government has not granted the certificate of exemption
from taxation for goods imported by sea in 2016. The request for the same
certificate for 2017 was submitted on 7 November 2016 and is still pending
approval.

VI. Mandate implementation
A.

Support for an inclusive peace process
High-level mediation
34. In support of the AUHIP mediation, the African Union-United Nations Joint
Special Representative for Darfur engaged with the armed movements to seek their
views on the way forward in the Darfur peace process and particularly with respect
to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as the framework for further discussions.
During their meeting with the Joint Special Representative in Paris on 1 May, the
leadership of JEM and SLA/MM presented a document outlining procedural and
substantive areas on which they would like to engage with the Government, the
latter being a reiteration of their previous position with respect to the Doha
Document, including the need to address the root causes and key consequences of
the conflict. The Joint Special Representative called on JEM and SLA/MM to
demonstrate goodwill with respect to the possible resumption of direct talks, after
which the two armed movements extended their unilateral cessation of hostilities on
3 May. On 2 May in Paris, the Joint Special Representative also met with the leader
of SLA/AW, who undertook to consider the possibility of joining the negotiations
process.
Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
35. Following the dissolution of the Darfur Regional Authority in September
2016, UNAMID engaged the Government of the Sudan on the need to complete the
restructuring process necessary for the operation of the remaining five commissions
and one fund of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. During the reporting
period, the Government worked on drafting terms of reference and planning
necessary budget and staffing allocations and reporting lines for those institutions.
In April 2017, the Mission held consultations with State Governments on the status
of the Doha Document for implementation. The consultations revealed that delays in
the restructuring process have also delayed the work of the Voluntary Return and
Resettlement Commission and the Darfur Land Commission, while the Justice,
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the Darfur Reconstruction and Development
Fund and the newly established Commission for the Development of Pastoralists
and Nomads remained non-operational in Darfur.
36. On 14 May, in collaboration with the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
UNAMID launched a two-week demobilization process targeting 500 ex-combatants
in El Geneina, West Darfur. Funding gaps delayed the provision of reintegration

17-09216

9/17

S/2017/503

assistance for 2,000 of the 5,738 ex-combatants who have been demobilized since
2014. On 10 April, the Mission signed memorandums of understanding with
implementing partners for 21 community stabilization projects that will target
800 direct beneficiaries in East, West, North and Central Darfur and promote skills
training, infrastructure development and livelihood and agricultural support.
37. Following a three-month delay owing to financial reporting issues in the
previous phase, the roll-out of the remaining 10 locality consultations in the third
phase of the Darfur Internal Dialogue and Consultation resumed in East Darfur, in
Bahr al-Arab, on 9 and 10 April, and El Ferdous, on 16 and 17 April, with
approximately 200 local participants. Consultations were also held in Tawilah, on
16 and 17 May, and Kornoi, on 22 and 23 May, in North Darfur. Participants
highlighted the need for basic services and infrastructure and the empowerment of
women and children in efforts to resolve intercommunal conflict and selected
participants for the next state-level round of consultations.

B.

Protection of civilians
38. UNAMID commenced the roll-out of its refined protection of civilians
strategy in mid-April. In order to enhance early warning and response capacity,
UNAMID integrated field protection teams carried out 26 missions to remote
locations in Central, North and West Darfur. The teams consulted with local
communities and assessed current protection threats, which highlighted insecurity,
particularly for women and girls undertaking livelihood activities, as well as the risk
posed by small arms, tensions between farmers and pastoralists and crop destruc tion
during the harvest season, and the limited capacity of local police to address these
issues.
Provision of physical protection
39. UNAMID conducted a total of 22,519 patrols, including 8,572 short -range
patrols, 520 long-range patrols and 2,639 night patrols, consisting of 5,868 visits to
villages and 2,531 to camps for internally displaced persons. Police personnel
conducted 7,385 patrols, including 3,499 confidence-building patrols to such camps
and 3,886 patrols responding to security needs, in particular those of women and
children engaged in livelihood activities such as firewood and water collection.
UNAMID also conducted 453 joint patrols with 1,115 community policing
volunteers in camps for internally displaced persons.
40. With the outbreak of clashes between Government and armed movement
forces in mid-May, UNAMID deployed verification patrols to locations west of Um
Baru (Tine and Kornoi), west of Kutum (Disa and Anka), and Musbat and Furawiya,
North Darfur, to assess the situation and verify the impact on civilians. In East
Darfur, UNAMID military and police patrols were deployed to Muhajiriyah, Shearia
and Labado. UNAMID was not granted access to Ayn Sero, North Darfur, the area
reportedly most affected by the fighting. UNAMID also imple mented a contingency
plan, in coordination with the United Nations country team, with particular
emphasis on engaging the Sudanese authorities to allow the opening of a
humanitarian corridor for displaced civilians from Ayn Sero to safe areas and to
facilitate the pre-positioning of basic supplies. The Mission also engaged with the
parties to immediately cease hostilities and the Government to treat all prisoners of
war in accordance with international humanitarian law. In response to the
intercommunal clashes in Buram, South Darfur, the Mission conducted a
verification patrol and intensified regular patrols in, Buram and Nadeif areas in
order to monitor the status of the cessation of hostilities between the communities.

10/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

41. The Mission provided round-the-clock protection for internally displaced
persons at the Sortony gathering site and Tawilah camp in North Darfur and stepped
up its confidence-building patrols in Nertiti, Central Darfur, Kalma and Kass, South
Darfur, and Kabkabiyah, North Darfur, further to reports of attacks on and
harassment of internally displaced persons. In Sortony, North Darfur, UNAMID
advocated for the resolution of the disputes between Fur who had been internally
displaced, former SLA/AW elements and Northern Rizeigat nomads. In thi s regard,
the Mission facilitated the return of five community leaders from among the
internally displaced persons who sought protection at the Mission’s team site to the
gathering site for internally displaced persons and engaged the Government, calling
for the integration into government forces of the former rebels. UNAMID also
engaged with internally displaced persons and nomads to ease tensions over access
to the Kube water point and requested the Government’s intervention to resolve the
dispute over the security incidents which had occurred between them since May
2016 and for the opening of the Kabkabiyah-Sortony road, which remained blocked
by the nomads.
Logistical and security support to humanitarian operations
42. UNAMID provided 364 round-trip escorts for United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, civil society and humanitarian partners, in support of the delivery
and monitoring of humanitarian assistance and assessment missions, including
46 escorts by formed police units and the prepositioning of humanitarian assistance
to the Mission team sites in anticipation of the rainy season. In addition, UNAMID
provided regular armed escorts for the movement of humanitarian personnel
between Sortony and Kabkabiyah, North Darfur.
Promoting a protective environment
43. UNAMID documented 82 new cases of human rights violations and abuses
involving 124 victims, including 15 children, during the reporting period, compared
with 181 cases involving 400 victims during the previous. UNAM ID confirmed
60 cases involving 77 victims. The remaining 22 cases involving 47 victims could
not be verified owing to various factors, including access restrictions. Violations of
the right to life accounted for 24 cases involving 40 victims, and violatio ns of the
right to physical integrity accounted for 31 cases involving 52 victims. There were
17 reported cases of sexual violence in the form of rape and attempted rape
involving 17 victims, including 13 children, of which 9 concerned sexual and
gender-based violence, while 8 concerned conflict-related sexual violence. There
were six cases of arbitrary arrest and illegal detention involving nine victims, and
four abduction cases involving six victims. Of the 82 reported cases, 16 cases
involving 22 victims were reportedly perpetrated by government security forces and
associated groups. The remaining 66 cases, involving 108 victims, were allegedly
perpetrated by unidentified armed men, some described by victims as being Arabs.
44. On 29 March and 29 April, respectively, the Mission engaged with the newly
appointed Attorney-General and the new Director-General of Prisons and Reform,
who pledged their support in strengthening the capacity of justice actors. In an
effort to strengthen the juvenile justice syste m in Darfur, on 27 April, UNAMID and
UNICEF completed a newly constructed family and child court in Zalingei, Central
Darfur, in the context of quick-impact projects. The Mission monitored the trial by
the Special Prosecutor for Darfur Crimes of two Arab d efendants accused of the
murder of Masalit and Tama tribesmen in incidents which took place in West Darfur
on 24 November and 26 December 2016, respectively.
45. UNAMID conducted training on human rights, prison operations, community
policing, criminal investigation and evidence collection, crowd-control management,
17-09216

11/17

S/2017/503

identification of explosive remnants of war and small arms and light weapons
control and computer skills that benefited 268 male and 1 female government police
officers. The Mission supported the establishment of nine security coordination
forums in which the government police, UNAMID, international non -governmental
organizations, non-governmental organizations and community leaders exchanged
information on protection needs. UNAMID also held 14 training courses on
community policing, peer counselling, human rights and road safety awareness for
441 male and 196 female internally displaced person community policing volunteers
and one workshop on gender equality, gender mainstreaming and sexual ex ploitation
and abuse benefiting 36 male and 44 female internally displaced persons. UNAMID
trained prosecutors and police investigators on investigation techniques and new
prison officers on human rights and prison management.
46. The Mission raised awareness on child rights and child protection through
sensitization campaigns and the provision of training to 1,353 local beneficiaries
and 387 male and 966 female prison officials. Communities were also sensitized on
the dangers of child labour, early marriage and unexploded ordnance. UNAMID
supported the establishment of child protection committees in Habila, Al Riyadh,
Al Khairant and Forobaranga localities, in West Darfur. On 16 March, the Mission
launched an awareness-raising campaign in Habila against child recruitment and the
use of child soldiers.
47. On 27 March, the United Nations Country Task Force on Monitoring and
Reporting, together with the Government of the Sudan, extended the Action Plan for
the Protection of Children from Violations in Armed Conflict for six months, which
will allow the completion of the identification and screening of children, complaint
procedure for communities, and awareness-raising activities. As a follow-up to the
meeting with JEM and SLA/MM in Geneva in November 2016, the Task Force
co-chairs attended a workshop organized in Entebbe, Uganda, on 27 and 28 April,
with the support of Sweden and Canada.
48. The Mission deployed explosive remnants of war disposal and risk education
teams throughout Darfur with particular focus on newly accessed areas within and
adjacent to Jebel Marra. The teams conducted general explosive hazard assessment
and disposal operations in 98 villages throughout Darfur, resulting in the
identification of 91 hazard areas and the destruction of 1,412 items of unexploded
ordnance. UNAMID also delivered mine risk awareness training benefiting 43,002
individuals, including 24,828 adults and 18,174 children. The Mission assisted the
Government with the disposal of 47,363 rounds of small arms ammunition in Sereif,
North Darfur, and Tamar, Central Darfur. On 24 April, in Forobaranga, West Darfur,
UNAMID, the National Mine Action Centre and the Governor of West Darfur
celebrated the clearance of all reported explosive remnants of war in the locality,
making it the first locality in Darfur to achieve this status.
49. In coordination with the Government and the United Nations country team,
UNAMID worked on developing innovative and sustainable ways to facilitate the
reintegration of returnees and create conducive conditions in their places of origin.
For example, following the peace agreement signed between the communities in
Shattaya, South Darfur, in August 2016, the Mission supported the re -establishment
of security and rule of law institutions in the locality, with the construction of a
local court, prosecutor’s office and police stations, as well as livelihood projects for
over 400 returnee families. On 6 May, the Deputy Joint Special Representative
(Protection) and the Governor of South Darfur launched a li velihood community
stabilization project in Shattaya.
50. During the reporting period, the Mission implemented 68 quick -impact
projects and 26 community stabilization projects across Darfur, aimed at supporting
12/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

community-led, socioeconomic development and local governance structures. The
projects ranged from ensuring access to water to training on the production of fuel efficient stoves to allow internally displaced women to reduce the time spent
collecting water and firewood.

C.

Local conflict mediation
51. In accordance with its strategy to address intercommunal conflict, UNAMID
implemented measures to prevent, mitigate and address the root causes of the
fighting. As part of its conflict prevention efforts, UNAMID engaged with internally
displaced persons and community leaders through community alert networks,
confidence-building patrols and field assessment missions to assess key protection
concerns particularly as they relate to the criminal activities of militia, including
land occupation and the denial of access to farmland. In anticipation of the
upcoming farming season, in collaboration with UNDP, UNAMID conducted
dialogue forums between nomads and farmers in Habila, West Darfur, Mukjar and
Um Dukhun, Central Darfur, and Kutum and Waha, North Darfur, at which were
discussed the importance of adherence to rules governing migration and farming
and for local and state Government support in this regard.
52. In order to contain the impact of ongoing conflicts, UNAMID deployed
confidence-building patrols to Buram and Nadief, South Darfur, and Um Dukhun,
Central Darfur. The Mission urged the Government to ensure security and support
community leaders and native administrations in the cessation of hostilities and
reconciliation processes. In Buram and Nadief, UNAMID facilitated the work of
community advisory councils, resulting in the signing of a cessation of hostilities
agreement and agreement to initiate a reconciliation process between Habbaniya and
Salamat. UNAMID engaged the South Darfur state government to undertake more
long-term measures to sustain peace, such as enhancing the rule-of-law situation,
disarmament and legislative reform on land management.
53. In East Darfur, while continuing to urge state authorities to move forward with
the peace process between Ma‘aliya and Southern Rizeigat, UNAMID supported the
implementation of mechanisms which have, over the past year, successfully
prevented a further escalation of conflict between the two sides. Specifically, the
Mission engaged the authorities and community leaders to maintain the security
buffer zone between the two communities, as both a security and early warning
mechanism, to ensure that perpetrators of cattle-rustling are brought to justice and
for the two communities to maintain their dialogue with respect to the resolution of
and compensation for such crimes.
54. As part of its support to reconciliation efforts, on 15 May, in collaboration
with the Governor of West Darfur, the Sultan of the Masalit and UNDP, UNAMID
facilitated a conference on peaceful coexistence, the purpose of which was to
discuss the status of community relations between Masalit and the various Arab
communities that had given rise to the fighting in Umtajok, Mouli and Azerni in
2016. Participating communities called on the Government to undertake the
necessary legislative reform to strengthen the role of native administrations,
underlined the need for implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
and social engagement between local communities. On 24 May, the Mission and the
Kabkabiyah Prevention and Conflict Management Committee, led by community
leaders, held a reconciliation meeting between Northern Rizeigat and Fur in
Kabkabiyah, North Darfur, to discuss the situation in Sortony. As a possible first
step towards resolving their dispute, the two sides agreed to establish a committee
to determine compensation required for the killing of six Fur internally displaced
persons in May 2016.

17-09216

13/17

S/2017/503

VII. Transfer of mandated tasks to the United Nations country
team and exit strategy
A.

Transfer of mandated tasks and cooperation with the
United Nations country team
55. UNAMID and the United Nations country team are in the process of finalizing
the Integrated Strategic Framework for 2017-2019. In accordance with the mandate
of the Mission, the Framework priority areas will be durable solutions, the rule of
law and restoration of State authority and peacebuilding for human security. It will
also incorporate United Nations country team planning based on the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework and the Humanitarian Response Plan.
56. During the period under review, the Government of Canada approved the
allocation of funding of $961,391 to implement projects by UNAMID, UNDP and
UNICEF under the Joint Programme for the Rule of Law and Human Rights in
Darfur. Given the existing resource and capacity constraints of the United Nations
country team, UNAMID, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities and UNDP explored further areas of transition and opportunities for
resource mobilization in the area of gender. The Mission’s Gender Affairs Advisory
Unit provided technical support to UN-Women and the Ministry of Social Affairs of
the Sudan in the development of a national action plan on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security.

B.

Exit strategy
57. Further to Security Council resolution 2296 (2016) and the communiqués of
the African Union Peace and Security Council of 13 June 2016 and 29 March 2017,
the United Nations and the African Union engaged in discussions with the
Government of the Sudan on the implementation of the UNAMID benchmarks as
the basis of the exit strategy. During the most recent meeting of the Joint Working
Group, held in Khartoum on 20 April, the African Union and the United Natio ns
briefed the Government of the Sudan on the preliminary findings of the joint
strategic review of UNAMID, which was conducted from 5 to 17 March 2017. On
22 May 2017, a strategic-level meeting of the Tripartite Mechanism was held in
Khartoum during which the report of the meeting of the Joint Working Group held
on 26 February 2017 was endorsed. The Tripartite Mechanism also took note of the
recommendations of the AU-United Nations strategic review report (S/2017/437).
The Government, the African Union and the United Nations further encouraged the
technical-level meeting of the Tripartite Mechanism to resume its monthly meetings
on operational issues, while the Government reiterated its commitment to work
constructively with UNAMID in this regard, including through the early release of
shipments, issuance of visas and provision of timely access.

VIII. Financial aspects
58. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/284, appropriated the amount of
$1,039.6 million for the maintenance of UNAMID for the period from 1 July 2016
to 30 June 2017. As at 17 May 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for UNAMID amounted to $81.7 million. Total outstanding assessed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to
$1,613.5 million. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made
14/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

for the period up to 31 January 2017, while reimbursement for the costs of
contingent-owned equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2016,
in accordance with the quarterly payment schedule.

IX. Observations
59. The situation in Darfur has evolved. For the first time in 14 years of conflict,
the annual dry season witnessed only one major military confrontation between
Government and armed movement forces. Noteworthy efforts have been made,
particularly by State and local governments in Darfur, in cooperation with native
administration and community leaders and with the support of UNAMID, to prevent
and mitigate intercommunal conflict.
60. Despite these significant improvements, many of the crucial grievances that
caused the conflict and its consequences still need to be addressed, together with
their consequences. Civilians in Darfur remain exposed to attacks and harassment,
human rights violations and abuses, and sexual and gender -based violence,
committed by armed militia, government forces and armed movements, as well as
intercommunal violence resulting primarily from unresolved disputes over land and
other resources. The absence of conditions such as security, basic services and the
resolution of land ownership disputes remains an obstacle to the voluntary and
dignified return of internally displaced persons.
61. There is an urgent need for concrete progress on the conclusion of a formal
cessation of hostilities agreement. While taking note of the recent positive
discussions the armed movements held with the African Union-United Nations Joint
Special Representative for Darfur, Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo, in Paris and with
the Government of the Sudan in Berlin, I urge the Government and armed
movements to cease fighting and to recommit to their unilateral ceasefires,
demonstrate the requisite goodwill and political visio n and flexibility and move the
negotiating process forward in accordance with the Roadmap Agreement of 2016
and within the framework of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. I further
reiterate my call to the SLA/AW leadership to desist from any actions t hat could
destabilize the situation in Darfur and to join the peace process without
preconditions or further delay. I urge the Government and former SLA/AW factions
that have signed peace agreements to abide by and implement their provisions, with
a view to delivering the peace dividends expected by the people of Darfur.
62. The national dialogue process remains a unique platform for the Sudan to
address its internal political challenges. I take note of the progress made in the
implementation of its recommendations and the establishment of the national unity
government. I call upon the Government and the opposition to continue with efforts
towards achieving the compromises necessary to ensure that this important process
is fully inclusive and reflects the views and desires of all Sudanese citizens.
63. The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur is central to our joint efforts to
achieve long-term and sustainable solutions for the Darfur conflict. It is therefore
necessary to move forward with the implementation of its provisions, in particular
those relating to the root causes and consequences of the conflict on issues such as
land, the disarmament of militias, reconciliation and accountability and the return of
internally displaced persons. UNAMID stands ready to support the Government of
the Sudan in taking the necessary steps to ensure the effective functioning of the
remaining Doha Document for Peace in Darfur institutions. I further call upon the
Government of the Sudan to accelerate its efforts to ensure the effective presence of
law enforcement and judicial institutions throughout Darfur and to honour its
responsibility to disarm all militias.
17-09216

15/17

S/2017/503

64. The significant decrease in the rate of new displacement in 2017 is a positive
development. A total of 2.7 million people, however, remain displaced in Darfur,
with another 300,000 refugees in Chad. UNAMID, as well as the United Nations
country team, are committed to working with the Darfur state governments on
developing comprehensive peace stabilization plans for local areas that are most
important for the creation of durable solutions for displaced populations, and to
support the Government in creating conditions conducive to the reduction of abuses
against the civilian population. In this context, I would join t he call of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, as expressed in its 673rd meeting, on
29 March 2017, for the international community to continue to provide much needed support, with a view to alleviating the dire situation faced by the vuln erable
and affected populations in Darfur.
65. I welcome the positive discussions held in the past three months among the
Government of the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations on an exit
strategy for UNAMID. Together with our partners in the African Union, we will
continue to work closely with the Government of the Sudan on the implementation
of this process, on the basis of the mandate of the Mission and benchmarks as
defined by the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the Af rican
Union.
66. In maintaining this spirit of cooperation, I call upon the Government of the
Sudan to work with the Mission to fully abide by its obligations under the status -offorces agreement and remove all outstanding operational restrictions on effe ctive
mandate implementation, including through granting access to conflict areas,
issuing visas for all substantive civilian staff, in particular human rights personnel,
and providing customs clearance for military and police equipment at Port Sudan.
67. Since its deployment in 2007, UNAMID has contributed greatly to the
stabilization of the security situation in Darfur and the protection of civilians. In the
context of rapidly changing circumstances in Darfur, however, it is necessary for the
Mission to adjust to the current needs on the ground. I would therefore reiterate the
recommendations for the reconfiguration of UNAMID as presented in my joint
report of 18 May 2017 with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
(S/2017/437), including with respect to the extension of the mandate of UNAMID
for a further 12 months.
68. In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude to the African Union United Nations Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Joint African UnionUnited Nations Chief Mediator, Mr. Mamabolo, the Mission leadership and all the
personnel of UNAMID, the United Nations country team and humanitarian partners
who continue to work tirelessly towards the pursuit of sustainable peace in D arfur in
often very difficult conditions. I also wish to commend my Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan, Nicholas Haysom, and former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and
Abdulsalami Abubakar of AUHIP for their steadfast commitment to sustainable
peace and stability in the Sudan.

16/17

17-09216

S/2017/503

17-09216

17/17
