S/PV.9013

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9013th meeting

Monday, 11 April 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Lord Ahmad/Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31412 (E)
*2231412*

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9013

While the scope of the situation in Ukraine has
grown far beyond the circumstances in 2014, it is
important to recognize its history, and it is possible that
Member States will wish to focus on Crimea during
future meetings. Accordingly, against this backdrop,
the earlier agenda items must remain in place.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine
The President:
Russian Federation.

I

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): In connection with the adoption of the agenda
of today’s meeting, which sounds like us maintaining
peace and security in Ukraine, we would like to make
the following statement.
As we have informed you, Madam President, in the
context of our work, we are not against adding this item
to the agenda of the Security Council. However, seeing
that its authors have attached all kinds of topics to it,
including women, children and education, we conclude
that it covers all kinds of aspects of the situation
in Ukraine, and is therefore in essence universal in
character. In this regard, we think that it would be
a good idea to delete two other items pertaining to
Ukraine from the agenda of the Security Council,
namely, the letters from Russia and Ukraine dating from
2014 (S/2014/264 and S/2014/136, respectively), which
reflects common sense as well as the current situation.
Bearing in mind the foregoing, we call on the
current presidency of the Council to take the necessary
procedural steps to formalize adding the new agenda
item and deleting the two older ones. We expect that
this should be done well at an early date so that future
presidents of the Council will not have problems
in the coming months on agreeing on the Council’s
programme of work.
The President: Would any other Council member
like to speak on this point?
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): As we have made clear to members of the
Security Council, including the Russian Federation,
the meeting under today’s agenda item was proposed
without prejudice to the agenda items in relation to
the 2014 letters, specifically, the 2014 letter from the
Ukrainian Permanent Representative (S/2014/136)
and the 2014 letter from the Russian Permanent
Representative (S/2014/264).
2/30

11/04/2022

I now ask that we continue with the meeting.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I think perhaps we were not understood
correctly. We are not against having meetings continue
on the items the United States representative mentioned
in relation to maintaining international peace and
security in Ukraine. We simply expressed our comments
and hope that they will be taken into account.
The President: Are there any further comments on
this item?
There being none, we shall proceed.
It is my understanding that both the Ukrainian and
Russian letters from 2014 (S/2014/136 and S/2014/264,
respectively) are on the list of items of which the Council
is currently seized. I understand that the process for
removing items is normally governed by the Security
Council’s latest note by the President (S/2017/507) on
its working methods and usually takes three years. If
there are no other views on this matter, given the split
views that we have heard, I propose that we discuss the
issue separately and seek to agree a way forward in the
coming days.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Germany, Poland, Romania and
Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Sima
Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women; Mr. Manuel
Fontaine, Director of the UNICEF Office of Emergency
Programmes; and Ms. Kateryna Cherepakha, President
of La Strada-Ukraine. Ms. Cherepakha is joining
today’s meeting by video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: I thank Ambassadors ThomasGreenfield and Hoxha, for calling for this meeting,
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

and I thank Ambassador Woodward for convening this
briefing during the United Kingdom presidency of the
Security Council.
At the outset, I want to express my solidarity with
all Ukrainians women, girls, men and boys — those
who have left for safety and those who have stayed. My
heart goes out to all the families that have lost a loved
one. This war must stop, and it must stop now.

S/PV.9013

At their request, UN-Women is supporting them
in that adjustment, and UN-Women is acting on its
coordination mandate, working with the refugee
response team and civil society partners to ensure that
the gendered nature of the crisis is addressed with a
gender-sensitive response. That includes providing
services with a focus on protection and addressing the
increased trauma and psychosocial support needs that
are so starkly in evidence.

I returned last night to New York from Moldova,
where the consequences of the senseless war in Ukraine
were stark. Moldova has rightfully been described as a
small country with a big heart. Despite the fact that the
country continues to reel from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and while its people remain
determined to achieve their national development
priorities, they have opened their borders and homes
to those fleeing the shelling and guns in Ukraine, the
majority of whom are women, children and the elderly.
An estimated 95,000 Ukrainians are being hosted in
country to date, with thousands upon thousands more
in transit since the war started.

The trauma associated with young women having
left their homes at night and families that have been
separated and are living in constant fear of the future is
destroying a generation. We must continue our support,
but, most importantly, we must continue all efforts to
advance peace.

At the different temporary shelters that I visited
in Moldova, exhausted, anxious, fearful and tearful
mothers shared their worries about the future of their
country, daughters, sons and families. A young girl
from Odesa, Tatyana, told me that her city is beautiful.
She has a dream to become a doctor and saw her studies
abruptly interrupted by the necessity to flee. In an act
of determination and resilience, she and her colleagues
are continuing their schooling online, also with the help
of their teachers. Tatyana is determined not to let the
war disrupt her dream. Vitaliy, a young boy of maybe
seven, told me about his sleepless nights, as he worried
about his father, who was left behind to patrol the
streets in their hometown.

We are increasingly hearing of rape and sexual
violence. Those allegations must be independently
investigated to ensure justice and accountability. The
combination of mass displacement, the large presence
of conscripts and mercenaries and the brutality
displayed against Ukrainian civilians has raised all red
flags. The Security Council will hear more on that from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict on Wednesday.

I witnessed buses full of women and children arrive
at the Palanca border crossing, tired, weary and fearful.
There, they were met with dignity and compassion
by volunteers from civil society organizations, many
of whom we, as UN-Women, support. I heard from
women’s civil society organizations how they adapted
their work overnight, going from grappling with two
emergencies — COVID-19 and the energy crisis — to a
third. They were able to work with the Government to
ensure that basic needs were met, and services provided.
They are doing that without specific humanitarianresponse training.

I condemn in the strongest possible terms the recent
attack against the Kramatorsk train station, which
also killed civilians and United Nations civil society
partners. The people killed at the train station are like
the people whom I met at the border: women, children
and the elderly looking for safety. Humanitarians are
not a target. Civilians are not a target.

A war of this magnitude affects the world far
beyond the borders of Ukraine. I also heard from the
Government in Moldova and the border police about
the need for increased support to monitor border
crossings. The risk of human trafficking is increasing
as the situation becomes more desperate. Young women
and unaccompanied teenagers are at particular risk. I
call on all countries to increase their efforts to combat
trafficking and commend all the host countries for their
collaboration on that and on prevention. I equally call
on all countries to support Moldova and others with
increased resources for police forces so that they can
ensure support for victims of gender-based violence and
trafficking. A gender-sensitive and survivor-centred
response must be at the heart of all humanitarian action.
Through all the aforementioned horrors, women
continue to serve and lead their communities and support

22-314123/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

internally displaced persons in Ukraine. Women make
up 80 per cent of all health-care and social workers in
Ukraine, and many of them chose not to evacuate. We
have seen the women members of Parliament continue
to fulfil their duties in the Verkhovna Rada, while
bombs were falling around Kyiv. We have also seen the
Deputy Prime Minister engaged in the humanitarian
response. I have also seen Ukrainian women refugees
in Moldova working in the shelters and taking on roles
to support one another.
Women’s organizations within Ukraine have not
stopped working, adjusting their work to meet the
immediate needs of the populations they serve. They
do so at great risk to their own lives. They were there
before the war, they remain there during the war, and
they will be there to pick up the pieces afterwards. I
salute their courage and steadfastness. They need our
continued support.
The Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund is
already supporting several women’s organizations on
the front lines in Ukraine and Moldova to aid displaced
women and girls, including shelter, medication, food
and psychosocial support, including to women and girls
living with disabilities or HIV/AIDS. The fund is also
providing institutional support for these organizations
to sustain them. With the Council’s help, we can do
much more.
Without fail, every Ukrainian man, woman and
child I met had one dream: to be able to return home.
However, as I heard yesterday, many do not have homes
to go back to.
I call on the Council to continue to use all avenues
for peace. From UN-Women’s own rapid gender
analysis, we know that women are asking to be part
of the solution. I heard from women in shelters that
they, too, are taking on leadership roles and supporting
refugee responses in the host countries. Many of
them are in touch with other women, their friends
and families, who are supporting internally displaced
persons in Ukraine.
We know from experience that women’s
participation makes response and recovery more
effective and sustainable, and women’s organizations
are uniquely qualified to help not just women but other
marginalized and vulnerable groups. It is vital that they
be consulted and engaged in all decisions related to
the crisis response and to peace. They need to be seen
4/30

11/04/2022

not only as victims but also as agents and leaders of
change, which they are.
The Security Council has adopted 10 resolutions
calling for women to be meaningfully involved in any
decisions or negotiations about peace and security, and
we know that women’s involvement is both a right and
an opportunity for better outcomes. That is especially
important in a war that has so starkly illustrated genderbased differences. Let us not lose sight of that. I have
seen first-hand the impact that women’s leadership
can have.
Yet women are largely absent from any current
negotiation efforts. We ask the Security Council, all
Member States and our development and humanitarian
partners to ensure the meaningful participation of
women and girls, including from marginalized groups,
in all decision-making processes, be they with respect
to peace, diplomacy or humanitarian undertakings.
Failing that, we will not have peace, development or
human security.
To conclude, we strongly echo the SecretaryGeneral’s repeated calls for peace, an immediate
cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of Russian
troops from Ukrainian territory.
Tatyana, the young girl from the shelter in Moldova,
must be supported and enabled to pursue her medical
degree and to be a part of the future of her country. The
war must stop. It must stop now.
The President: I thank Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fontaine.
Mr. Fontaine: First, I would like to express my
appreciation to Ambassador Thomas-Greenfield
and to Ambassador Ferit Hoxha for having convened
today’s meeting. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Woodward and the United Kingdom for hosting
this briefing during that country’s Security Council
presidency.
I have just returned from a mission to Ukraine,
and I must say that in my 31 years as a humanitarian,
I have rarely seen so much damage caused in so little
time. Friday’s attack on Kramatorsk train station was
particularly horrifying. The station has been a critical
route for thousands of families fleeing Donetsk oblast,
an area that has seen some of the war’s worst violence
and destruction. When the station was attacked, it was
filled with families desperate to escape the mounting
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

violence. I note the tragic irony that our teams were
actually off-loading life-saving humanitarian supplies
only a kilometre away when so many lives were taken
by that needless act of violence.
The attack on Kramatorsk station is unconscionable,
and yet it is just one of many instances in this war
where we have seen a blatant disregard for civilian lives
and international humanitarian law. Inside Ukraine,
children, families and communities are under attack.
Of the 3.2 million children estimated to have remained
in their homes, nearly half may be at risk of not having
enough food. Attacks on water-system infrastructure
and power outages have left an estimated 1.4 million
people without access to water in Ukraine. Another
4.6 million people have only limited access.
The situation is even worse in cities such as Mariupol
and Kherson, where children and their families have
now gone weeks without running water or sanitation
services, a regular supply of food or medical care. They
are sheltering in their homes and on the ground waiting
for the bombs and violence to stop. As of yesterday, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights verified that 142 children had been killed
and 229 injured. We know that those numbers are likely
much higher. Many of them were caused by crossfire or
the use of explosive weapons in populated areas.
I met one of those children in an intensive care unit
in the hospital ward of Zaporizhzhya. Vlad, a 4-yearold, was shot twice in the stomach as he was escaping
with his family from a contested area. Although still
unconscious, Vlad is expected to live, unlike so many
others. All the systems that help children survive are
also under attack. The hostilities have damaged or
destroyed hundreds of residential houses. Attacks on
hospitals, health-care facilities and medical equipment
and the killing and injuring of health-care professionals
are making it even harder for people to access emergency
care, basic health care and medicine.
Hundreds of schools and educational facilities have
been attacked or used for military purposes. Others
are serving as shelters for civilians. Nationwide school
closures are impacting the learning and the future of
5.7 million school-age children and 1.5 million students
in higher education. In the Donbas region, a whole
generation of children have already seen their lives
and education upended during the past eight years
of conflict.

S/PV.9013

We applaud the efforts of the authorities to ensure
the continuity of education. However, that can be only
a temporary solution. Lessons from the pandemic show
the importance of children learning in school with their
peers and teachers.
I met families in Zaporizhzhya that told me that
they had wanted to stay in their homes but were forced
to flee when the shelling and violence became too
much. Thousands of others are now trying to leave
before the fighting closes in around them. They face
further dangers along the way besides crossfire and
explosive remnants. In just six weeks, nearly two thirds
of all Ukrainian children have been displaced. They
have been forced to leave everything behind: their
homes, their school and often their family members. I
have heard stories of the desperate steps that parents are
taking to get their children to safety and children being
saddened that they are unable to get back to school.
A social worker told me a story about parents
who were forced to send their children with a truck
driver just to get them away from the line of fire.
Such unaccompanied children, of course, are at
much higher risk of violence, abuse, exploitation and
trafficking. Women face a particular risk. We are
extremely concerned by increasing reports of sexual
violence and other forms of gender-based violence.
Fortunately, there has been an outpouring of support
from neighbouring countries to welcome refugees. The
solidarity expressed for Ukrainian refugees has been
a very, very welcome development, one that surely
should be replicated globally for all seeking protection
and asylum, no matter where they come from.
UNICEF and our partners are doing everything
we can. Inside Ukraine we continue to face extremely
difficult operating conditions. We have seen some
progress in recent weeks with our teams and supplies
able to reach Sumy, Kharkiv and Kramatorsk, among
others. But that is not enough. Ongoing hostilities
prevent us from reaching those most in need in
many areas of the country. We saw that last week in
Kramatorsk, when our teams were actually forced to
stop offloading supplies and had to evacuate to safety
following the nearby explosions.
We are also helping local authorities to identify and
register unaccompanied and separated children. We are
providing families with much-needed humanitarian
cash assistance and increasing awareness to minimize
the risk of explosive ordnance. In Zaporizhzhya, I

22-314125/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

visited a reception centre set up by local authorities, run
mostly by women professionals, for displaced persons
to access health and psychosocial services, have a warm
meal and rest temporarily. Those services are critical,
but they are not the solution. Many of those who were
able to flee early have been able to find sanctuary
in other countries. It is not clear how those who are
being displaced now will actually fare. They have been
exposed to violence for longer and have fewer resources
at their disposal. Resources are already overstretched,
and local residents live in a state of uncertainty as the
sound of air raids and warnings from local officials are
heard regularly, reminding them that the front lines
may soon reach them, too.

11/04/2022

The math is simple. Every day that the war continues,
children will continue to suffer. As humanitarians,
Council members can count on us to continue our work,
but there is only so much we can do. It is time to end the
war. Ukraine’s children cannot afford to wait.
The President: I thank Mr. Fontaine for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Cherepakha.

I am particularly concerned about the widespread
presence of explosive remnants of war, which expose
children to the risk of death and horrendous injury.
Eastern Ukraine was already one of the world’s most
mine-contaminated stretches of land, even prior to the
recent escalation. That reality is rapidly extending to
other parts of the country.

Ms. Cherepakha: Today I have the honour and
responsibility to speak and testify, as a representative
of one of the civil-society organizations that stand for
the protection of the independence and freedom of
Ukraine from invasion by Russia. These organizations
consolidate their efforts at the national, regional and
community levels with the State, individuals, men and
women, adults and children. They provide assistance
that help save the lives of civilians, often the most
vulnerable. They collect evidence and the testimonies
of the survivors of war crimes committed by Russia
in Ukraine. They do so to document them and help to
bring justice.

We are also carefully monitoring the health, rights
and dignity of women and girls, as the risk of exploitation
and abuse grows. We continue to reiterate the need to
ensure that children who have been separated from their
families and live in institutional care are protected and
that every effort is made to obtain caregiver consent
and the approval of authorities before such children are
evacuated or relocated.

I speak as a women’s rights activist, a specialist,
a mother and, since 24 February, a displaced person.
With the full-scale invasion of Ukraine by Russia, the
whole population of the country is under threat. Women
and children, as always happens in wartime, are the
most vulnerable. In my presentation, I would like to
focus on four aspects related to the impact of Russia’s
aggression on women and children.

In closing, I would like to express how proud I am
of our United Nations teams, both inside Ukraine and
in neighbouring countries. The work that they do is
indispensable. I would also like to salute the remarkable
resilience of Ukrainian doctors, nurses, teachers and
social workers, especially women, who have been at
the forefront of the response. I was personally deeply
impressed by the care that they provide to children and
families. I visited an underground maternity ward in
Lviv that is staffed 24/7 by a team of tireless women,
assisting births amid air raid alerts.

Women and children make up the majority of
internally displaced persons and refugees who left the
country in an attempt to survive. Often, they become
vulnerable to the risk of gender-based violence,
exploitation and trafficking. Very often, during
evacuation, even with clearly marked signs announcing
that they are civilians and unarmed, carrying children,
they are brutally killed by Russian troops.

Local women’s organizations are mobilizing grassroots networks to care for the most vulnerable, even
in the darkest of circumstances. Their courage and
commitment are a light in the dark. Most of all, I would
like to entreat all those with the power to end the war to
actually use that power. The lives and future of millions
of children hang in the balance.
6/30

Russian strikes hit a railway station in Kramatorsk,
where civilians, mostly women, children and the elderly,
were waiting for a train to evacuate them. In a city
where our colleagues, women’s rights activists, put so
much effort into promoting the spirit of resolution 1325
(2000), Russian strikes hit maternity wards, children’s
hospitals and kindergartens and the theatre building
in Mariupol, where women and children sheltered,
despite the clearly marked signs warning that children
were inside, visible from the sky. It is a city that has
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9013

always connected us with sisters and colleagues from
the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.

in occupied territories and are cut off from assistance,
connection and everything else.

We have received calls from women in Mariupol
informing us about the forced deportation of civilians,
including unaccompanied children, by Russian troops
to Donetsk and, further afield, Russia. It is being called
an evacuation. Women have been deported under
the threat of being raped and killed. Women in local
administration and self-government bodies are also
exposed to threats of being kidnapped, tortured and
killed.

We receive calls to the national hotlines operated by
La Strada-Ukraine. Today there have been nine reported
cases of rape by Russian soldiers in the temporarily
occupied towns and villages, involving approximately
12 women and girls — children. Reports are coming
in from Kyiv, Kherson and Chernihiv oblasts from the
survivors themselves and witnesses. The women and
girls were raped by a group of occupiers multiple times
in front of their family members and other people.
The lives of the survivors, their children and family
members were threatened. These are real cases, real
people and real facts.

The head of the village of Motyzhyn, in Kyiv oblast,
Olha Sukhenko, was found dead, together with her
husband and son, after being taken by Russian troops
who occupied the village. They were severely tortured
and killed because she stayed with her community and
performed her duties, organizing support, medicine and
food for people. The deputy of the Zaporizhzhya oblast
administration, Leyla Ibragimova, was kidnapped from
her home. The director of a kindergarten in Kyiv oblast,
Larysa Osypenko, was killed by the occupiers because
of her profession. The Russian troops said, “You should
not raise Nazis”. This tragic list of crimes committed by
thousands of ordinary Russian soldiers, claiming that
they did not know where they were, can be continued.
Women are important actors of peace and security
in Ukraine, and their contribution during the war is
truly incredible. Together with activists, volunteers
and journalists, they have also become the target of the
occupiers. Ukrainian volunteer Yulia Payevska, who
for many years saved the lives of people in occupied
Russian territories in eastern Ukraine, was captured by
Russian troops while organizing assistance for civilians
in Mariupol. A video shows that she was forced to ask
that a solution be found to the situation. At this time,
there is no information about her condition or current
whereabouts.
Women prisoners of war are exposed to torture,
including sexual violence. They are undressed in front
of groups of males, harassed and shamed. Two female
journalists were kidnapped in Zaporizhzhya oblast and
another was killed near Kyiv while performing their
professional duties.
Women and girls are particularly vulnerable to
sexual violence and rape during wartime. A number
of incidents and cases have already been reported.
Unfortunately, that is just the tip of the iceberg. Many
survivors remain under threat to their life. They remain

We see people who are extremely traumatized,
in fear for their life and not ready to talk about what
happened. Those who somehow manage to escape to a
safer place are too traumatized to report what happened.
They need support and therapy and time to recover
first. We know that many of those cases will hardly,
or even never, be disclosed, unfortunately, as many of
those who suffered have already been killed by Russian
invaders. We know and have seen these things, and we
want Council members to hear our voices telling them
that violence and rape are now being used as a weapon
of war by Russian invaders in Ukraine.
At the same time, the war also shows the important
role that women play as they stand up for Ukraine in
the process of restoring peace and strengthening and
developing the country and its democracy. We do not
want the Council to look at us only as the victims of
the Russian military aggression. Women in the peace
and security sector — volunteers, activists, journalists
and human rights defenders — are an integral part
of progress and development in Ukraine. We have
knowledge, skills, expertise and strength, but we need
to be saved and protected now.
We call on all members of the Security Council,
international institutions and Governments to stop the
war and demonstrate their solidarity with concrete and
practical actions to find and use the tools necessary
to stop the Russian aggression and ensure that their
decisions are not blocked or ignored. We call on
members to ensure the security of the children, women
and men of Ukraine.
The President: I thank Ms. Cherepakha for her
briefing and for joining us today.

22-314127/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): We are honoured by your presence here with
us today, Mr. President, and are thankful to the United
Kingdom for leading today’s debate.
I thank our briefers from UN-Women and UNICEF
for their remarks and for the work that their teams
are doing on the ground. I, too, visited Romania and
Moldova and saw their teams on the ground working
with vulnerable people. And I would especially like to
thank Ms. Cherepakha for being with us today and for
sharing the voices of women and children in Ukraine.
She is the first civil society briefer that we have had
brief us on this issue in an official Council meeting.
When men such as President Putin start wars,
women and children get displaced, women and children
get hurt, women and children get raped and abused,
and women and children die. Since the start of Russia’s
unprovoked war against Ukraine, Russia has bombed
orphanages and maternity hospitals. We have seen
mass graves with dead children stacked on top of each
other. On Friday, a train station being used for civilian
evacuations, mostly women and children, was struck
by a Russian missile. Reporters from The Washington
Post saw at least 20 dead, including children. Limbs
and luggage were scattered everywhere. A maimed
dog shivered next to one of the dead. According to
the reporters, a large piece of missile on the scene had
chilling words written on the side. In Russian it said,
“for the children”. That is what Russia’s war looks like.
What is happening to women and children in Ukraine
is horrific beyond comprehension.
When I was in Moldova and Romania, I saw with
my own eyes some of the human toll of Russia’s brutal
war. I met with a few of the 11.6 million people who are
now displaced from their homes, representatives of the
largest refugee crisis in Europe since the Second World
War. The mass displacement includes over half of all of
Ukraine’s children — half of Ukraine’s children have
left behind their homes, their schools and often at least
one of their parents.
Meanwhile, 90 per cent of refugees from Ukraine
are women and children, and, as our briefers made
clear today, being a woman or a child adds additional
risk. Women in Ukraine are at an increased risk for
gender-based violence, including rape, sexual assault
and sexual exploitation. We know that anyone at risk
8/30

11/04/2022

before a war is at a heightened risk of being targeted
for physical and sexual violence during a war, and that
includes women and children, religious and ethnic
minorities, LGBTQI+ individuals and people living
with disabilities.
The Deputy Mayor of Ivankiv told reporters that
some girls are cutting their hair short in hopes of
avoiding rape by Russian troops. Family separations
leave girls in particular at increased risk for sexual
exploitation and trafficking. We have heard sobering
reports of traffickers targeting women as they seek
protection abroad. All of that is why the United States
initiative, Safe from the Start, calls on all humanitarian
actors to prioritize resources and programmes to
address gender-based violence from the onset. Given
everything we know about gender-based violence in
conflict and the accounts we are hearing, we cannot
wait for a lengthy assessment. We should not hold up
resources with the excuse of incomplete data. This is
an active crisis that grows worse by the day. We need to
start interventions immediately to prevent and respond
to gender-based violence now.
For the United States, the humanitarian efforts that
it is funding in and around Ukraine lift up networks for
survivors of gender-based violence in the country and in
neighbouring countries. We are supporting programmes
for child protection as well as for advocacy. We will
continue to support our partners in these efforts. For
example, we are highly supportive of UNICEF’s mobile
child-protection teams, and we are working in conflict
zones, such as Ukraine, to deliver life-saving supplies
and provide emergency social-work services.
Those horrific acts also remind us that we must
support efforts to prevent them from happening in the
first place, which means ensuring that women’s voices
and rights are always respected and elevated. And it
means ensuring that abusers against them and against
children are held to account. There must be pathways to
healing and access to justice for survivors.
Finally, I want to remind us all that women are
far from passive victims in this war. As we just heard
from the Executive Director of UN-Women, women
are playing critical leadership roles in Ukraine to
address the impact of the war. Some women are
valiantly defending their homes, their communities,
their country — including many women who have
been serving in the Ukrainian military since 2014.
Others are protecting their families and their children,
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

bringing them to safety. And still others are the ones
supplying food and shelter, water and medicine to those
in need. Women are the ones who will get Ukraine
through this humanitarian catastrophe, and women
must be consistently and meaningfully involved as
active participants and leaders in securing long-term
sustainable peace.
When I met with women in Moldova and Romania,
they all had different stories, but they all had the same
dream: to return to a peaceful Ukraine where they have
a say in their own and their children’s future. Let us
ensure women are a robust part of that peace process,
and let us hope that the day they have dreamed of
comes soon.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): We thank Lord Ahmad
for presiding over this meeting, which testifies to its
importance and timeliness.
The Russian aggression has not stopped. It continues
to cause undue pain and suffering to 44 million
people who did not ask for it. The relentless brutality
and destructive force of the actions of the Russian
army against civilians and vital civil infrastructure
in Ukraine is catastrophic. Unspeakable crimes have
been committed, and each day the various pieces of
the horror puzzle — grisly images of bodies charred
or run over by tanks; mass graves, torture chambers,
and interceptions confirming that Ukrainian prisoners
of war had been shot dead after being interrogated by
Russian soldiers; playgrounds riddled with bullet holes,
and kids’ shoes scattered among the rubble of a school
in ruins — are falling into place.
Everyone is suffering in Ukraine, but the situation
is particularly devastating for women and children.
That is why we called for today’s meeting, and what
we heard from the briefers, whom I thank, is appalling.
We were very pleased to listen to Ms. Cherepakha, and
all accounts coincide. We just do not yet know all the
horrible details.
Hundreds of thousands of women have been forced
to flee their homes. Others are fighting bravely to
protect their country or work under bombardment and
indiscriminate shelling as doctors, nurses and other
professionals, providing essential services to their
communities. We express our gratitude to all countries
for their big heart in helping Ukrainians fleeing the war.
Women and girls face heightened risks of genderbased violence, human trafficking, exploitation

S/PV.9013

and conflict-related sexual violence owing to
displacement. Their needs must be a priority in the
humanitarian response.
But the situation of children is even worse. As we
heard from Mr. Fontaine, since the start of the war,
two thirds of the total child population of Ukraine
have been forced out of their homes. Those still inside
the country, remain trapped in what has become a
national nightmare. And if all this were not enough,
some 121,000 Ukrainian children have reportedly been
forcibly deported to Russia. Save the Children reports
that since the start of the war, an average of 22 schools
have come under attack every single day in Ukraine.
Last October, the Security Council adopted resolution
2601 (2021), which urges all parties to cease attacks
and threats of attacks against schools. It was us.
Destroying
on
purpose
the
educational
infrastructure and making it dysfunctional for years to
come is simply criminal. Schools should be safe places,
free from any kind of violence, and learning during
conflict and crisis must be maintained, as it helps to
maintain a sense of normalcy and fosters resilience.
We know that mass displacement and refugee flows
always create conditions that could lead to human
trafficking and an acute child-protection crisis. We
commend UNICEF for the good work in providing
recreational activities and psychological support in
Ukraine. Blue Dot centres offer crucial counsel and
protection services. Some 150 children will never see
the end of war in Ukraine. They have been killed.
Hundreds more who have been injured will bear the
marks of this war on their bodies forever.
Children’s lives are always shaped by the behaviour
of adults, who themselves struggle in times of war.
They have the duty to provide care and protection and
ensure their upbringing. But how can a frightened
mother, holding her child, avoid passing on her worst
nightmare and fear that, all of a sudden, the child may
end up alone? How can one explain war to children
who, in a matter of hours, had to leave their family
environment, friends, pets and toys behind and who,
traumatized, are unable to sleep or eat? In their normal
life, children draw parents, houses and trees. The
Russian war has made Ukrainian children draw bombs,
tanks and weapons.
The civilian massacres carried out by Russian
forces have rightfully stirred world outcry. Russia
should have learned that a war cannot be won through

22-314129/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

massacres. During the wars in the Balkans in the
late 1990s, the crimes against innocent civilians in
Vukovar, Croatia, Srebrenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Račak, Kosovo, did not help any of the perpetrators
to win the war. This war will be no exception.
We hear public indignation about one recurring
question: why can the United Nations not do more to
stop Russia? That question is right, and the anger is
justified, because Russia, with its veto, has taken the
Security Council hostage, preventing it from delivering
security in Ukraine.
However, thankfully, there is more of the United
Nations that Russia cannot veto. We have met here 15
times in 10 weeks to expose Russia’s despicable deeds
and to show its isolation. Also, in a matter of a few
weeks, Russia has, in three crucial consecutives votes,
been put against the wall in the General Assembly,
which, in a remarkable and historic move, suspended
Russia from the Human Rights Council.
While deploring the Security Council’s inability for
reasons clear to all, we should be proud of the United
Nations for standing firm against the aggression and
for looking Russia right in the eye and saying that it
was wrong, and it will pay. Under international law,
a military commander is responsible for war crimes
committed by his troops. Lieutenant Colonel Azatbek
Omurbekov, the Russian commander involved in
the occupation of Bucha, will have to answer for the
accusations of rape, pillage and the murder of hundreds
of Ukrainian civilians and for such repugnant disregard
for human life. If the Kremlin thinks that it will benefit
from the tefal effect, it is wrong. Its crimes stick to its
face. A total of 5,600 investigations have been opened
so far by Ukraine’s Prosecutor General. Accountability
must be ensured.
Before anyone had the time to catch their breath
following the horrors discovered in Bucha and
elsewhere around Kyiv, a missile hit a train station,
where several thousand people were waiting to leave.
A missile with the vicious sign “For our children” was
sent to indiscriminately kill, including five children.
We were again told that it was not Russia.
Have we not had enough of that ridiculous
pattern when Russia commits a crime and attributes
it to someone else? Who was behind an attempt to
overthrow the legitimate Government in Montenegro?
Who was behind the aeroplane tragedy of Flight MH17, hit by a missile? Who carried out indiscriminate
10/30

11/04/2022

bombardments in Aleppo? Who poisoned the Skripals?
Who almost killed Navalny? Who is turning the world
upside down through a war of choice? All those crimes
lead to Russia.
We now know that the Russian army does not
attack civilians, except for residential areas, schools,
hospitals, theatres, kindergartens and train stations.
We also know that, for Russia, Ukrainian men, women,
girls and children do not qualify as civilians. They are
just a bargaining tool to achieve one man’s cynical goal,
in his humiliation and isolation, to force the hand of
Ukraine into unacceptable concessions.
Life expectancy in Ukraine is now at the Kremlin’s
will. It may decide whether one stays in one of those
shattered cities and starves. It may decide to kill one with
its missiles, which strike everything indiscriminately. It
may also offer the forced hospitality of a Russian camp.
As we speak about children, let me end with this
note. Reportedly, President Putin is a father. That is one
of those words that does not need defining. If I were
in the unlikely situation of talking to President Putin,
the only question that I would ask him is whether he
would have accepted that his daughters be in the same
situation as 11-year-old Yuri, who, terrified and forced
to leave his home, told reporters: “Every time there was
a shelling, my heart stopped.”
I urge that President Putin stop making hearts stop,
stop the shelling and the bombardments and order his
soldiers, still alive, to go home, to his home, to Russia.
As Pink Floyd blasted last week, “Hey, Hey, Rise
Up”. It is time for the Russians to come to their senses
and stand against this savagery.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Bahous, Mr. Fontaine and
Ms. Cherepakha for their briefings. They confirm
the deep concern that we have expressed since the
beginning of the Russian aggression.
We are still shocked by the abominable attack on
the Kramatorsk railway station on Friday, which could
constitute a crime against humanity, as Minister Le
Drian stressed. Indiscriminate attacks must stop.
France is gravely concerned about the increasing
number of allegations of sexual violence. Council
resolutions on sexual violence in conflict are binding
on all. We therefore support United Nations work on
the ground to establish the facts and responsibilities.
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Such abject violence cannot go unpunished. Moreover,
France calls for increased support for survivors of
sexual violence. In that regard, we condemn the
destruction of health facilities and its impact on access
to sexual and reproductive health. Attacks on hospitals
may also represent war crimes.
As we have heard, the war is also disrupting the
lives of Ukrainian children. The killing and maiming
of children will remain permanent stains on the
perpetrators, as will the attacks on schools. We call
on the Secretary-General to make use of the tools put
in place by the Council to protect children from grave
violations against them.
Furthermore, civilian populations are particularly
at risk in the context of forced displacement. We support
the efforts of the United Nations to prevent the threat
of trafficking. Given such aggression, with intolerable
consequences for the women and children of Ukraine,
France remains fully mobilized.
We call for an immediate cessation of hostilities,
a complete withdrawal of Russian troops from all
Ukrainian territory, as demanded by the International
Court of Justice, and full humanitarian access. Nearly
500 tons of humanitarian supplies were sent by France.
In addition, we announced an exceptional contribution
of €100 million to the humanitarian response. We
also set up a reception and support system in France
for Ukrainian women and children. Nearly 10,000
Ukrainian children who arrived in France have already
been able to attend school.
The fight against impunity must be vigorously
pursued. We already announced our support for the
investigation and documentation work being carried out
by the International Criminal Court, while respecting
its independence. An exceptional contribution of
€500,000 was also made to the dedicated fund. France
will continue to support all efforts to independently
investigate international humanitarian law and human
rights violations.
Finally, we support the full implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda in all
its dimensions. We commend the bravery of the
Ukrainian women on the front lines of the humanitarian,
political and military response in defence of their
country. We wish to recall that there can be no lasting
solution to the conflict without the full participation of
women.

S/PV.9013

We will continue to support Ukrainian women and
children for as long as necessary and will not relent in
our efforts to bring about peace.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I thank you, Sir, and
welcome your leadership of this Council meeting on
the important and timely discussion on the impact of
the war on women and children in Ukraine. I would
like to thank Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director
of UN-Women, and Mr. Manuel Fontaine, UNICEF’s
Director of Emergencies, for their respective briefings
on the situation. We are also grateful to Ms. Kateryna
Cherepakha, President of the civil-society group
La Strada-Ukraine, for the views she shared with
the Council.
The continued situation of instability and insecurity
in Ukraine continues to be a matter of deep concern
for Ghana. My delegation is particularly alarmed by
the situation of women and children, as well as of the
elderly, arising from the Russian Federation’s invasion
of Ukraine. Ghana strongly deplores the reported acts
of what are emerging to be widespread gross violations
of international humanitarian law in Ukraine. We
condemn the attack of 8 April on the train station in
Kramatorsk, which resulted in significant civilian
casualties, and commiserate with the bereaved families
and the people of Ukraine. We continue to be pained
by the horrifying images of war in Ukraine and by
the daily images of fright and despair in the eyes of
a people who, just a few weeks ago, lived normal and
stable lives.
In situations of war, women and children suffer a
disproportionate humanitarian impact, and the war in
Ukraine has been no different. Ghana is particularly
concerned by the situation of the children of Ukraine,
who are being scarred by the horrifying images of war.
Children should never go through such experiences and
accordingly must be protected by all parties in line with
applicable international law.
We note UNICEF’s report that approximately
4.3 million refugees have fled Ukraine into neighbouring
countries, with women and children making up 90 per
cent of the refugee population. We regret that 142
children have been reported killed, alongside 229
others injured. Without an immediate and unconditional
cessation of hostilities, those numbers will increase.
We therefore call upon the warring parties, especially
the aggressor State, to redouble all efforts for peace
in the interest of the women and children of Ukraine,

22-3141211/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

including women in need of assistance, who constitute
more than 54 per cent of the people in need from the
ongoing crisis.
Rising food insecurity and the lack of access to
essential social services in cities such as Mariupol,
Chernihiv, Sumy and Kharkiv have invariably
increased the burden of local women responsible for the
care of children, persons with disabilities and elderly
family members. The war has severely impacted social
cohesion, community security and the resilience of
local communities, especially for women and girls.
The destruction caused by the war, particularly due to
the use of explosive weapons with wide-area impact
in civilian-populated areas and targeted at medical
facilities, has created a profound health crisis with
women, girls and children bearing the greatest brunt of
such deprivations.
Women and young girls face an increased risk
of disruptions to life-saving sexual and reproductive
health services and access to specialized medication
and treatments. Ghana unequivocally condemns the
reports of trafficking, sexual and gender-based violence,
including rape, and exploitation. Such atrocities impact
negatively on the physical and psychological health of
the victims as well as on their general well-being, both
in the short term and over a longer-term period. We
therefore encourage humanitarian agencies to ensure
that identified victims are provided with the necessary
medical and psychosocial care to overcome the trauma
of abuse.
We underscore the need for accountability for all
alleged violations of international humanitarian and
criminal law and reiterate our call for an immediate,
independent and impartial investigation to establish the
facts of those offences and build the evidence to hold
the perpetrators of such atrocities to account.
The gender-related challenges of the war require the
prioritization of the needs of women and children and
the implementation of gender-responsive humanitarian
assistance. In that regard, women leaders at all
levels of society should be included in coordination
mechanisms and decision-making processes. In the
spirit of resolution 1325 (2000), we urge the parties to
consider including women in their negotiating teams
as a way of ensuring their meaningful participation in
diplomatic and political processes. It is important that
women be counted not only as victims of the war but
12/30

11/04/2022

also as key participants in the finding of a lasting and
durable solution.
In conclusion, we reiterate our call on the Russian
Federation to heed the repeated calls of the international
community to withdraw all its invading troops from
the internationally recognized borders of Ukraine
and pursue the path of dialogue and diplomacy. The
cessation of all hostilities and the maintenance of
effective and safe humanitarian corridors remain
fundamental to addressing the worsening humanitarian
conditions, especially the unbearable impact of the
conflict on Ukrainian women, girls and children.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish to welcome you, Sir, to the Council.
We are grateful for the briefings by the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Bahous; UNICEF’s
Director of Emergencies, Mr. Manuel Fontaine;
and Ms. Kateryna Cherepakha, whose civil-society
perspective reaffirms not only the vulnerability but
also the strength of Ukrainian women.
All the information available to us paints,
frankly, a bleak picture. The reality is that with each
passing day and as the conflict continues, tragedies
are increasing and humanitarian needs multiplying.
Mexico condemns the recent attack on the Kramatorsk
train station, in which dozens of civilians who were
waiting to be evacuated, including women and children,
regrettably lost their lives. Attacks against the civilian
population and civilian infrastructure are violations of
international humanitarian law and may constitute war
crimes. That train station is only a kilometre away from
a UNICEF humanitarian aid delivery operation, as we
have been informed. It is the same station through
which the supplies required to deliver such assistance
had been arriving.
Women and children in Ukraine are being hit the
hardest. They represent 90 per cent of the refugee
population and are at high risk of trafficking and
exploitation. UNICEF estimates indicate that nearly
2 million children have already crossed borders, and
many of them have done so alone — unaccompanied.
Those who have stayed with their families or are in the
process of being evacuated are at risk of falling victim
to the use of weapons with indiscriminate effects.
Furthermore, we cannot forget about the severe
short- and long-term impacts on mental health. The
traumas of war suffered by both minors and adults can
be serious and irreversible, particularly for the families
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

of those deceased, survivors of attacks, displaced
persons and refugees.
Damage to housing, educational and health
infrastructure further darkens the picture. Ukrainian
women have been the first to respond to the urgent
needs of their communities. The first-hand accounts of
doctors, nurses, psychologists and volunteers who care
for the most vulnerable segments of the population,
such as the elderly and disabled, exemplify solidarity
and, at the same time, attest to the most sensitive human
dimensions of the conflict that women are addressing.
We need for the United Nations system, in
particular, UN-Women and the Office of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Pramila Patten, to continue
to collect evidence, disaggregated data and gendersensitive analyses on the multiple dimensions of the
conflict, including especially sexual violence. All
information that can be verified must be verified. In
our capacity as a Chair of the Informal Expert Group on
Women, Peace and Security, we will convene a followup meeting to maintain the priority on this issue that
it deserves.
In addition to the disproportionate impact and
the toll borne by millions of women, it is imperative
to increase their participation in the political process.
Women must urgently be included in all possible avenues
of dialogue and negotiations. As in the rest of the world,
Ukrainian women are fundamental agents of change
and must fully, equally and meaningfully participate in
decision-making processes and peace negotiations.
In conclusion, I reiterate our call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities, unrestricted and unconditional
access to humanitarian aid and the search for a diplomatic
solution to the conflict without preconditions.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I take this opportunity to
welcome the President to this meeting. I would also
like to thank Ms. Sima Bahous, Executive Director
of UN-Women, Mr. Manuel Fontaine of UNICEF
and Ms. Kateryna Cherepakha of La Strada-Ukraine
for their briefings and insights on the impact of the
situation on women and children, particularly with
respect to education.
Women and children invariably suffer the most
in any armed conflict or military confrontation.
According to reports coming out of Ukraine, women
and children have been disproportionately affected and

S/PV.9013

form the bulk of the refugees and internally displaced
persons. More than 4.4 million people have moved to
neighbouring countries, and another 7.1 million are
displaced within Ukraine.
We commend Ukraine’s neighbouring countries
that have welcomed refugees from Ukraine, especially
for treating women and children with compassion and
dignity. As a country that has welcomed refugees over
centuries, India knows the importance and value of
treating them equally and with dignity and catering
to their needs and requirements. In this context, we
need to keep the gender perspective in mind and act
with sensitivity. We call for a victim-centred approach
to preventing and responding to sexual violence in
armed conflicts.
The impact of the situation on education of children
has also been severe. It has further aggravated the
pandemic-related challenges that children are already
facing. There are reports that more than 900 educational
facilities and schools have been either damaged or
destroyed in Ukraine. Let us neither forget that the
situation has also affected foreign students, including
Indian students. India facilitated the safe return of
22,500 Indian nationals, most of them students studying
in various universities in Ukraine. We are exploring
options to minimize the impact on our students’
education. We appreciate the accommodations made by
the Ukrainian Government for this academic year with
regard to medical students.
Even as we deal with the influx of refugees,
we continue to remain deeply concerned about the
worsening situation in Ukraine and reiterate our call
for the immediate end to hostilities. When innocent
human lives are at stake, diplomacy must prevail as the
only viable option. Since the inception of the Ukrainian
conflict, India has stood for peace, dialogue and
diplomacy. We believe that no solution can be arrived
at by shedding blood or at the cost of innocent lives,
especially those of women and children. It is in our
collective interest to work constructively both inside
and outside the United Nations towards seeking an
early resolution to the conflict.
Allow me to reiterate the importance of United
Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance
once again. Humanitarian action must always be guided
by the principles of humanitarian assistance, namely,
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence.
These measures should not be politicized. We continue

22-3141213/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

to emphasize to Member States that the global order
is anchored on international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and respect for the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of States.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank our briefers, in
particular our civil society briefer, Ms. Kateryna
Cherepakha. The sobering words that we heard this
morning leave us in no doubt as to the human misery
and suffering inflicted on the people of Ukraine by the
Russian Federation’s senseless and illegal war.
We have all seen the images. We have all seen the
grim realities of the war: a pregnant woman carried
on a stretcher from the ruins of a maternity hospital,
a young child on a train looking longingly at the
father who cannot board, bodies lying abandoned
in improvised mass graves, and people lying dead
following the indiscriminate attack against a train
station in Kramatorsk by the Russian Federation on
Friday. The latter attack against innocent lives, mostly
those of women and children, is yet another attempt to
close escape routes for those fleeing this unjustified war
and cause human suffering. Ireland strongly condemns
that and all other attacks against civilians.
Those are just glimpses of the suffering caused
by the Russian Federation’s war. They tell only part of
the harrowing experiences of women and children in
Ukraine. Theirs is a story of widespread displacement
and trauma, where they have faced extremely serious
risks of abuse, trafficking and exploitation. Reports
of sexual violence perpetrated by Russian soldiers,
including rape, proliferate, with bone-chilling
allegations that children are among those violated.
Conflict-related sexual violence can constitute
a war crime, and those responsible must be held to
account. Accountability must not only be for those
who physically perpetrate such acts, but also for those
military commanders who fail to take all necessary and
reasonable steps to stop them or fail to ensure that they
are investigated and prosecuted.
Ukraine’s displacement crisis deepens every
day. Of those who have fled the country, 90 per cent
are women and children. The large population of
older women, women with disabilities and those
of marginalized groups, including the Roma and
LGBTQI+ communities, are particularly vulnerable
in the conflict. Millions of women face impossible
decisions around evacuation. As their lives and families
are threatened, do women journalists stay to report? Do
14/30

11/04/2022

women health-care workers and those in care-giving
roles stay or go? Do women in the Ukrainian army who
choose to bring their children to safety return to defend
their country? So many are making the desperate yet
heroic choice to remain.
A child-protection crisis is emerging, as the number
of unaccompanied and separated children rises. We
have a responsibility to respond. The terror of war
and the trauma of family separation will have lifelong
effects on millions of Ukrainian children. We need to
mitigate these impacts, including through psychosocial
services and mental health support, health care and
education in emergency settings.
This month marks a year since every member of
the Council co-sponsored and agreed resolution 2573
(2021) on the protection of civilian objects. That
includes the Russian Federation. That day, we sent
to united message that strongly condemned attacks
against civilians and civilian objects. Twelve months
later, where is that unity on display in Ukraine?
Thousands of civilian objects, including hundreds
of schools and kindergartens, have been destroyed,
largely due to the use of explosive weapons in populated
areas. Attacks on schools are a grave violation. To rob
children of their education has profound impacts, not
only on their individual development, but on society
as a whole. The reverberations of this war reach far
beyond Ukraine’s borders. They will also reach beyond
this generation. This war will mark Ukraine for many
years to come. We all have a responsibility to support
Ukrainians long after this war has ended.
At this table, we have repeatedly called for it to end
and for the Russian Federation to withdraw its forces and
engage in true dialogue and diplomacy towards peace.
In any peace talks, we must have the direct substantive
inclusion of diverse women so they can influence the
course and outcome of negotiations. Without them, we
can have no hope for sustainable peace.
Let us not forget that Ukraine has been a society
where women were fully and equally participating
in public life. Targeting women through violence or
forcing them to flee to save their children’s lives is a
double abomination in a society that was realizing the
fruits of women’s participation. This war will undo
years of progress towards gender equality. As my
Mexican colleague referenced, Ireland is also focused
on those issues as a Chair of the Informal Expert Group
on Women, Peace and Security.
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

I conclude by stressing that gender equality is
not an aspiration reserved for a peaceful company of
countries and somehow too difficult or inconvenient for
countries in conflict. The evidence shows that women’s
participation in peace processes leads to better and
longer lasting agreements. The guns are still firing,
which is having a dire impact on women. The urgency
to ensure women’s active participation in ending this
conflict has never been greater. Yet it is because of their
deep-rooted participation that we are hopeful for the
future that the women of Ukraine can help to shape.

S/PV.9013

participation be ensured in any political process, talks
and negotiation relating to the future of Ukraine and
its people.

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank UN-Women, UNICEF
and Kateryna Cherepakha, from whom, again, the
Security Council has heard alarming assessments of the
consequences of Russia’s war.

Children’s lives and well-being are constantly
threatened by the ravages of war. They are traumatized
by violence, displacement and the destruction of
the places in which they live, learn and play. Their
future is at stake. Norway is alarmed by reports that
more than 60 per cent of Ukraine’s children are now
displaced as a result of Russia’s illegal invasion. We
call for the immediate cessation of attacks on and
threats of attack against schools, students and teachers,
in line with resolution 2601 (2021) and the Safe Schools
Declaration. We recall the obligation of parties to
conflict to facilitate the continuation of education.

We are deeply troubled by the atrocities committed
against civilians in places that have been held by Russian
forces, including credible reports of extrajudicial
killings of civilians. We condemn the missile attack
on the railway station in Kramatorsk. These atrocities
shock the conscience of humankind. The protection of
civilians and respect for human rights are not a matter
of choice. They are legal obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Yet the reality is that the women and girls of Ukraine
now face a drastically heightened risk of gender-based
violence, sexual exploitation, abuse and trafficking.

Norway supports the assessment by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights that
the ongoing violence by Russian forces raises serious
and disturbing questions about possible war crimes
or even crimes against humanity, grave breaches of
international humanitarian law and serious violations
of international human rights law. That underlines
the importance of the ongoing investigations into the
situation in Ukraine by the International Criminal Court
and by the Human Rights Council, and their work to
investigate all violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law.

Just last week, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo
briefed the Council on the disturbing reports of
conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated by Russian
forces, including brutal acts committed in front of
children (see S/PV. 9011). The sexual and reproductive
health and rights of women and girls have also been
severely diminished due to displacement and the
targeting and destruction of health facilities. For many,
including refugees, it means the net total loss of access
to essential, sometimes life-saving, assistance. Our
humanitarian response must therefore also be genderand age-sensitive to avoid and address protection gaps.

There is no doubt that the physical and
psychological wounds of this war will be felt for
generations. Once again, we call on Russia to cease its
attack on the Ukrainian civilian population and stop
this senseless war.

In the midst of intense warfare and calls for Russia
to end the violence and negotiate in good faith, there is
a tendency to forget that women are also on the front
lines in every way. Ukrainian women are among the
combatants fighting to defend their country. They
ensure the delivery of basic and life-saving services,
and they most definitely suffer the full consequences
of war. It is therefore imperative that their rights be
respected and that their full, equal and meaningful

Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to commend
the work of Ms. Bahous and Mr. Fontaine in Ukraine
and thank them for their briefings. I also thank
Ms. Cherepakha for her briefing.
As the conflict in Ukraine persists and we enter into
the seventh week of hostilities, Brazil remains deeply
concerned about the daily reports of gross violations
of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law. The images of violence against
civilians and the destruction of civilian infrastructure
are deeply disturbing.
The politics behind this or any other conflict should
not affect the obligations of all parties to fully respect
international humanitarian law. I believe there are no
divergences between Member States about the fact that

22-3141215/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the protection of children in armed conflict should be
a priority at all times, even when parties cannot find
common ground on the peaceful settlement of their
disputes. We continue to call on all parties and relevant
actors to work towards well-planned and agreed upon
arrangements on the ground that provide respite for the
civilian population, allow for civilians to leave conflict
zones in safety and for humanitarian assistance to reach
those in need, including and especially children.
Children should never be uprooted. Their physical
integrity and well-being should be a fundamental
priority for all Member States, especially in times of
conflict. Schools and medical facilities should never
be used for military purposes, nor should they become
the targets of direct attacks or indiscriminate and
disproportionate attacks. It is of utmost importance
to implement resolution 2601 (2021), on the protection
of education, co-sponsored by 98 Member States,
including Brazil. The Safe Schools Declaration also
provides important guidelines on that matter.
Moreover, it is key that women and children be
placed at the heart of peace negotiations to ensure their
protection from hostilities as well as the cessation of
attacks against civilian infrastructure. In particular,
resolution 2573 (2021) provides fundamental guidance
for the protection of objects indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population and should be duly
observed.
The reports of sexual violence are appalling;
they must be independently investigated and the
perpetrators brought to justice. Available evidence on
the psychological impact of sexual violence in conflict,
a crime that affects not only women and girls but also
men and boys, suggests that it is often lifelong and even
intergenerational.
Brazil reiterates its call on all parties to cooperate
with the Commission of Inquiry of the Human Rights
Council so that it can fulfil its mandate and provide
us with the necessary clarifications, including
by identifying, where possible, those responsible
for violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law.
In that regard, we welcome the participation of
UN-Women in the Commission of Inquiry with experts
skilled and experienced to investigate sexual violence,
abuse and exploitation in the context of war. We also
thank UN-Women for its efforts to obtain gender16/30

11/04/2022

sensitive data, which is essential to adequately address
the situation of women and girls in Ukraine.
UNICEF findings show that the ongoing conflict
has caused one of the fastest large-scale displacements
of children since the Second World War, a tragedy that
could have long-lasting consequences for generations
to come.
We worry that as more women and children are
forced into the condition of refugees or internally
displaced persons, they become more vulnerable to
crimes, including sexual violence and exploitation. All
efforts should be made to provide refugee children and
adolescents with essential services, including education
and mental-health services.
In conclusion, Brazil draws attention to the
importance of the work that has been carried out on the
ground to reach those most affected by the conflict and
in need of urgent humanitarian assistance, especially
women and children. We reiterate our call on all
parties to comply with their obligation to ensure free
and unimpeded humanitarian access that must comply
with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I listened
carefully to the presentations by all briefers. Women
and children are the most vulnerable to violence and
should be given priority protection in armed conflicts.
We call on the parties involved in the situation in
Ukraine to strictly abide by international humanitarian
law, effectively protect the personal safety of women
and children, respect and guarantee the civilian nature
and safety of facilities such as schools and hospitals,
and provide special care to women and children in
evacuation, rescue and medical assistance.
China deplores the killing and injuring of dozens
of civilians, including women and children, in the
attack on the Kramatorsk train station. The relevant
circumstances surrounding and the specific causes of
the incident must be investigated, and any claim should
be based on facts.
Since the conflict broke out, a large number of
Ukrainian women and children have taken refuge
in neighbouring countries. China thanks those
neighbouring countries and other countries for opening
their borders to them and providing them with safe haven
and humanitarian assistance. All refugees — regardless
of colour, race or religion — should receive the
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

necessary and equal protection under international
refugee law.
The humanitarian needs of Ukraine and
neighbouring
countries
remain
considerable.
International agencies such as the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UN-Women and
UNICEF should continue to mobilize and coordinate
international support for humanitarian assistance to all
those in need. The special needs of women and children
should be considered; targeted medical treatments,
psychological counselling and social services should
be provided to them; and the right of children right to
education should be ensured.
We are deeply concerned about reports that women
and children seeking asylum have been subject to
abduction, human trafficking and violence. We call on
international agencies such as UN-Women, UNICEF,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to strengthen
monitoring and support the countries concerned in
taking resolute measures to prevent women and children
from being harmed a second time.
Only by stopping the war as soon as possible can we
definitively solve the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine and
protect women and children from violence. Dialogue
and negotiation are the only way to peace. We urge
the parties involved to continue negotiations, strive to
overcome their difficulties and differences, create the
conditions for a ceasefire and make positive efforts so
that women and children can see the dawn of peace
at an early date. All other parties in the international
community should do more to facilitate dialogue and
negotiations and create the environment and conditions
necessary for progress in the negotiations.
I must point out that simply imposing sanctions and
sending weapons will not bring peace. The escalating
extensive and indiscriminate sanctions have triggered
a food and energy crisis and soaring prices for daily
necessities, which are being paid for dearly by the
entire world’s population, including the tens of millions
of women and children in Afghanistan, Yemen, the
Horn of Africa and the Sahel, who have become its
greatest victims.
China once again calls on all parties to exercise
restraint, adopt a responsible attitude and make
constructive efforts to properly resolve the crisis in
Ukraine and restore peace at an early date.

S/PV.9013

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to begin by welcoming and thanking you, Sir, for
presiding over this meeting. I would also like to thank
Ms. Bahous, Mr. Fontaine and Ms. Cherepakha for the
briefings and insights they shared.
When the Security Council adopted resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, more
than 21 years ago, it recognized the disproportionate
impact of conflict on women and girls. Women are
not only exposed to grave violations of international
humanitarian law but are also particularly vulnerable
to gender-specific risks.
However, the women and peace and security
agenda also recognized that women and girls are active
agents of peace who can drive efforts and provide
solutions. Their participation in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding, reconciliation and reconstruction must
be guaranteed, not only because of the impact the
conflict has on them but also because it has proved to
result in more sustainable and longer-lasting peace.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Ukraine, the
overwhelming majority of the 4.3 million people who
have fled to neighbouring countries are women and
children. There have been deeply disturbing reports
of conflict-related sexual violence and of persons who
have fallen prey to criminal organized gangs running
human- and sex-trafficking rings.
According to the World Health Organization, 89
health-care facilities across the country have been
impacted by attacks, undermining the right of women
and girls to access health care. That contributes to a
lack of critical maternity care for pregnant women,
both within Ukraine and for those fleeing abroad, as
the United Nations Population Fund has warned.
Finally, the conflict is disrupting children’s access
to education. Every child has a right to education, and
the lack thereof can further block their opportunities
and ability to contribute to Ukraine’s future. That risks
a generational effect.
Accordingly, the United Arab Emirates would like
to highlight three areas to support women and children
impacted by the conflict in Ukraine.
First, we see the ongoing negotiations between
the parties as a positive development, and we call on
them to guarantee women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in all peace efforts. It is imperative that
women’s leadership and participation take place not

22-3141217/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

11/04/2022

only at the end of the conflict, but also in the design and
implementation processes for its peaceful resolution.
Women have now been leading local reconciliation and
dialogue efforts for many years in eastern Ukraine.
Such efforts should not be forgotten. Rather, they
should be recognized, built upon and mobilized to drive
efforts towards peace.

There are continuing reports of violence and rape
against women and girls. The testimony of Mr. Fontaine,
of UNICEF, regarding the human trafficking networks
is alarming. Sexual violence against women and
trafficking in persons are unacceptable. It is essential
that independent and impartial investigations be carried
out to establish the facts and ensure accountability.

Secondly, sex-disaggregated data collection on
the impact of the conflict remains a valuable tool,
including in strengthening accountability for conflictrelated sexual violence. That can ensure that restorative
justice can be achieved.

As the war drags on, attacks on civilian
infrastructure, including health facilities and schools,
are significantly affecting people’s access to clean
water and primary and specialist health care. The
decline in routine immunization coverage raises
fears of the resurgence of some childhood diseases.
Similarly, massive population movements, the shortage
of supplies and the worsening sanitary conditions, as
well as a lack of space, represent conditions conducive
to the outbreak of epidemics.

Thirdly, a gender-responsive approach must be
implemented in all humanitarian efforts during and
after the conflict. That should include the voices of
women, who can inform the provision and delivery of
humanitarian assistance, services and programming
efforts with their needs at the centre. We also call on all
parties to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law, in particular the protection
of civilians, and to allow timely and unimpeded
humanitarian access.
I also want to highlight the disproportionate
consequences that this war has for women and children
around the world. From food insecurity to high
commodity prices, women and girls worldwide are
seeing their daily lives and their futures upended. Now
more than ever, we need concerted efforts to prevent
that from happening. The stakes are too high.
In conclusion, we reiterate our strong call for an
immediate cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine
to allow for constructive dialogue between the parties
and to end the suffering caused by this conflict.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your leadership in the
conduct of our work. I thank Ms. Sima Bahous and
Mr. Manuel Fontaine for their briefings. I also thank
Ms. Kateryna Cherepakha.
The devastating escalation of violence in Ukraine
threatens the safety of women and children, who
now represent the largest proportion of civilians
fleeing the war zones en masse or hiding in makeshift
shelters, often in inhumane conditions. The number
of displaced persons is increasing as the fighting
intensifies. It has now reached some 10 million,
including countless children who crossed the borders
of Ukraine unaccompanied.
18/30

This war must come to an end. Urgent action is
needed to address the critical needs of the civilian
population, especially women and children. We note
with interest UNICEF’s strengthening of its mobile
teams and its increasing supplies of essential goods
and services to alleviate the suffering and increase the
protection of children in conflict areas.
There is an urgent need to strengthen assistance
to women and children, including psychological and
emotional care and psychosocial support. Specific
protection mechanisms for women and children
must also be put in place to prevent the risk of
human trafficking.
I would like to reiterate my country’s appreciation
for the work of humanitarian workers on the front
lines in areas of fighting, sometimes risking their
lives to rescue and protect civilians. We call on the
parties to facilitate their access to all locations where
humanitarian assistance has become vital.
My country calls for a ceasefire and the opening
of humanitarian corridors in all places in order to
ensure the safe delivery of humanitarian aid. Until
humanitarian workers have access to those in need of
urgent assistance, people will continue to die, not only
from bullets but also hunger and disease.
I would like to reiterate my country’s appreciation
to Ukraine’s neighbours, which continue to mobilize for
the urgent reception of refugees. We encourage them to
extend the same welcome to all those in need without
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

distinction. We urge respect for their dignity and call
for the fair treatment of all those in need.
I would also like to reiterate the call to the parties
to engage in good faith in dialogue for a cessation of
hostilities. We call on the warring parties to comply
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law. The war must stop. It is unacceptable and
dehumanizing. It must cease immediately.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to today’s briefers for
the information.
We had no doubt that today there would once
again be many fabrications on the part of our Western
colleagues regarding what is now happening in Ukraine
in the light of the special military operation that we
are conducting. Their scheme of action has long been
clear to us, namely, to distort and denigrate the aims
of the special military operation, silence facts that are
inconvenient to them and promote the fabrications and
propaganda of Ukraine and of professional Western
consultants working for the Kyiv regime. All their
efforts perfectly fit the context of the information war
being waged against Russia, which is as intense as the
fighting on the ground.
Our Albanian colleagues set a new benchmark of
disinformation today. The Permanent Representative
of Albania today read out virtually an entire list of
crimes attributed to us without bothering to mention
that not one of them has ever produced any convincing
evidence. The presumption of innocence has clearly
long been completely defied.
Recently, the joint Western and Ukrainian fake
factory has reached a new level and started fabricating
and performing in the best traditions of the infamous
British-Syrian White Helmets. Everyone is still hearing
about the provocation in the town of Bucha in the
Kyiv region, unprecedented in terms of its cruelty and
clumsiness. That is still being propagated as a crime
allegedly committed by the Russian army despite
irrefutable evidence proving the staged nature of the
incident, which is only increasing. I will not dwell on
the details. We already briefed the Security Council on
the key issues last Tuesday (see S/PV.9011) after the
United Kingdom presidency did its utmost to prevent a
separate meeting on the provocation, in violation of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

S/PV.9013

I will simply say that, after a thorough analysis of
the actions of the Ukrainian Nazis, it is hard to shake
the sense of déjà vu. In 1944, the ideological forefathers
of the Kyiv radicals, acting in the best traditions of the
main Hitlerite propagandist, Joseph Goebbels, staged a
provocation with civilians that were allegedly brutally
murdered by the Red Army in the town of Nemmersdorf
in East Prussia. That was preceded by a letter circulated
among the major German newspapers, which described
in detail how best to present the so-called atrocities of
the Soviet soldiers.
Nowadays, newspapers are read less and less, and
such guidelines are appearing instead on social media,
without any substantial attempts to even conceal them.
Content creators are recruited as extras in crowd scenes
and given instructions on which aspects to focus on. In
other words, Goebbels would have been pleased with
the ambition of his Ukrainian heirs. However, they
were betrayed by the quality of their performance. The
staged events in Nemmersdorf, aimed at creating myths
of mass murders and rapes allegedly committed by the
Red Army, were subsequently convincingly debunked
by various experts, and the town became synonymous
with crude propaganda stunts, just like the one carried
out in Bucha.
However, the Bucha provocation last week was
overshadowed by another organized by Ukrainian
Nazis in Kramatorsk, which for the time being is still
under their control. That constitutes a classic false-flag
operation. I shall dwell on it in more detail, especially
as many speakers mentioned it today. On 8 April, from
the vicinity of the town of Dobropillia, which is located
45 kilometres south-west of Kramatorsk, Ukrainian
armed forces launched a strike with a Tochka-U tactical
missile at the Kramatorsk railway station. More than 50
people were killed, including five children. Ninety-eight
wounded people were taken to hospitals in Kramatorsk,
including 16 children, 46 women and 36 men.
Why are we so sure that the Ukrainian army is
responsible for the attack and not the Russian military,
as was immediately portrayed by the Western media
and as some of our colleagues claimed today? There
are several reasons, three of which I shall mention now.
First, the Russian army does not possess Tochka-U
tactical missile systems. They are obsolete and were
replaced a long time ago by Iskander missiles and are
actively used only by the Ukrainian army.

22-3141219/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Secondly, the pictures taken by eyewitnesses shortly
after the strike and before the arrival of Ukrainian
propagandists made it possible to accurately determine
not only the type of missile, but also the direction from
which it was launched. That area is still under the
control of Ukrainian troops for the time being.
Thirdly and finally, the serial number on the
Tochka-U missile can easily be identified from those
same images. It belongs to the SH-915 series. Missiles
from the same series were used to repeatedly shell the
cities in Donbas. There are fragments of those missiles
bearing the same serial numbers. The same type of
missile was used on 14 March by the nineteenth missile
brigade of the Ukrainian armed forces in an attack on
the centre of Donetsk. Twenty-one Donetsk residents
were killed on the spot, and another 36 were wounded.
The horrific footage of that strike is still being passed
off by the Western media as the shelling of Kyiv.
The provocation in Kramatorsk was also
unsuccessful for the Kyiv regime. However, the
Ukrainian propagandists are clearly trying to learn from
their mistakes and work better. They are trying very
hard. In recent days, we have transmitted information to
the United Nations with regard to certain provocations
being prepared.
There is the staged discovery of mass graves in
the town of Ragovka, near Kyiv. Western journalists
arrived in the city of Kremennaya with the objective of
reporting on the provocation prepared by the Ukrainian
army of a supposed shelling by the Russian army of
ambulances transporting patients.
In the town of Belogorovka, a chlorine reserve on
the territory of the water canal has been mined. The
plan is to blow it up when national militia units of the
Luhansk People’s Republic approach the town.
In the city of Irpin, in the Kyiv region, a provocation
is being prepared using the same scheme as in Bucha
and Nemmersdorf. Members of the Ukrainian security
forces intend to transport the bodies of civilians killed
by artillery shelling from the hospital morgue on
Polevaya Street to the basement of a building on the
eastern outskirts of the city.
Then, in the Pushcha-Vodytsya forest area, the
Ukrainian security forces will organize a staged
incident with the shooting and destruction of a supposed
Russian intelligence group that came from Irpin to kill
witnesses of alleged Russian war crimes. At the same
20/30

11/04/2022

time, the bodies of Russian soldiers taken prisoner
and then tortured and killed by Ukrainian nationalists
will be placed in the forest as so-called indisputable
evidence. We expect to see video footage of that staged
event circulated by Western media.
Just today, the Russian Ministry of Defence
confirmed that Western media have been invited
to report on a staged event in the town of SeredynaBuda, in Sumska oblast, previously under the control
of Russian forces. In the town of Nizhne Sirovatka,
near Sumy, bodies are being transported to a building
basement. The staging of the so-called atrocities by
the Russian army is being conducted by British film
directors. I wish to recall that Russian forces left that
town three weeks ago. Those reports are coming from
residents of these towns and are clearly not indifferent
to the aims of our military operation.
Moreover, I cannot neglect to mention reports
from residents of Odesa of large numbers of Ukrainian
soldiers dressed in Russian military uniforms in the city.
It seems that a bloody large-scale provocation — more
precisely, a false-flag operation — is also being
prepared in the city.
I would ask my colleagues to remember that we
warned about such events.
The provocations that have already been planned
and carried out, combined with the nationalists’ nowfamiliar practice of using the civilian population as
human shields, are all the more appalling owing to the
inhumane attitude towards the fate of the people of
Ukraine and are a testament to the Ukrainian Nazis’
complete disregard for the norms of morality and
international humanitarian law. As we have repeatedly
stated, Russia does not wage war against Ukrainian
civilian populations.
Since today’s meeting also concerns the topic
of women and peace and security, I feel duty-bound
to offer some remarks in that regard. As it applies to
Ukraine, of course, the situation has also been coloured
with ideology and provocations. We see a clear desire
to portray Russian soldiers as sadists and rapists,
just as there were attempts to portray the victorious
Soviet soldiers in Second World War as sadists and
rapists in their time. We see that neither the goals nor
the Russophobic nature of the propaganda methods
inherited by Ukraine has changed.
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

S/PV.9013

However, the reality is quite different. Despite
the attempts made to distort the truth, even Western
audiences occasionally learn about the brutal torture
of peaceful civilians, including women, by sadistic
members of Ukrainian nationalist battalions. For
example, what we saw in the building of elementary
school 18 in Mariupol, which had long been held by
the Nazi Azov Battalion, shocked even seasoned
soldiers — on the floor in the corner of the basement
lay the body of a woman with her hands cut off, her face
mutilated, and a swastika burned onto her stomach. It
is noteworthy that some in Ukraine and in the West
continue to pass off those horrifying and previously
published photographic pieces of evidence as proof of
crimes committed by the Russian military.

operation. That Ukraine already has its own symbols,
including women. For example, few people were
indifferent to the widely circulated video clip on social
media of Ukrainian soldiers entering a village. An
elderly grandmother mistook them for Russian soldiers
and brought out a red Soviet victory flag. She greeted
them with kind words about how long she has waited to
be liberated.

Ukrainian society has consistently been under the
influence of nationalists for at least the past eight years.
That is why Ukrainian women, unfortunately, are being
presented in a rather strange — and I would even say
savage — light. That is best illustrated by the patriotic
video that has been actively disseminated on social
media in recent days. In it a western Ukrainian actress,
chanting patriotic slogans and cursing Russia, cuts the
throat of a tortured Russian soldier with a sickle. The
only thing that the video brings to mind is the terrorist
members of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), which also disseminated videos in which they
slit the throats of their victims.

We want to believe that nothing happened to the
grandmother, as her heroism and courage have already
inspired many people. I also want to believe that she
will be liberated very soon and will be able to safely
take the red flag out of the house on Victory Day,
which is sacred to all of us, to honour the memory of
her parents and those who liberated Ukraine from the
Nazis without fear that someone will trample it.

It is sad that Ukraine has plumbed the depths of
such unbridled cruelty to the point of blindly rivalling
ISIL radicalism and extremism. That only further
convinces us of the imperative of, and lack of alternative
to, conducting Russia’s special military operation. The
operation is necessary for the future of Ukraine as
well as the security of not only Russia but also all of
Ukraine’s neighbours.
I highly doubt, for example, that peaceful Poles are
able to feel safe when the organizers of the Volhynia
massacre, which took the lives of tens of thousands of
their compatriots in 1943, are now revered as national
heroes in Ukraine. I am talking about peaceful Poles,
not about the Polish authorities who have been blinded
by Russophobia and whose policies have long since lost
touch with common sense.
I would like to conclude on a more optimistic
note. There is, of course, another Ukraine that is
being given another chance for peace and genuine
good-neighbourliness thanks to our special military

To their credit, the soldiers did not hurt her; quite to
the contrary, they gave her a bag of food. However, in
exchange, they took away the flag and began to trample
it. After having realized her mistake, the grandmother
defiantly returned the food and demanded the return of
the banner, for which her parents fought. After that, the
clip cuts off.

Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank the UnderSecretary-General and Executive Director of UNWomen, Sima Bahous; the Director of the UNICEF
Office of Emergency Programmes, Manuel Fontaine;
and Ms. Kateryna Cherepakha for their briefings.
I also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representatives of Ukraine and the countries affected
in the region.
We would not be here having this discussion but
for the armed breach of the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine by the Russian Federation. We
must once again observe and condemn the continuing
disregard for international law and the Charter of the
United Nations and the anarchic, dangerous world
that has resulted. Kenya further condemns the recent
bombing of the train station in Kramatorsk, where more
than 50 people were killed as they attempted to flee
the war.
This war is causing massive civilian suffering.
We do not have an accurate count of the lives lost to
violence, but they must be in the thousands. We have
no statistic for the incidents of rape and other forms
of sexual violence against girls and women, but it is
certain that the number is high and rising. We know
that the overwhelming majority of refugees who

22-3141221/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

have fled Ukraine are girls and women, and we also
know that each one of them in their own special way
has had their life shattered by the war. We know that
such forced human movement and family separations
increase the potential for sexual abuse, exploitation and
human trafficking.
We must commend all the individuals, institutions
and Governments that are helping in every possible
way. We especially thank those United Nations entities,
including UN-Women, the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Population Fund and other agencies, for
their reports highlighting the key areas of concern for
Ukrainian women and girls. More than that, we thank
them for the actions that they are taking to help women
and girls fleeing and trying to survive the war. We also
applaud today the brave women of Ukraine who are
fighting for peace and their country. We recognize with
admiration the women who are leading in Government
and civil society in pushing us all towards a peaceful
resolution of the war.
In the past year, our delegation has been a member
of the Security Council. We have spoken regularly
about women and peace and security. Most often it has
been to applaud the role of women as peacebuilders and
urge their participation in decision-making at all levels.
Today I urge that we let the full weight of the suffering
of women in Ukraine settle into our minds. Perhaps
then we will have the will as the Security Council and
the international community to achieve a ceasefire
and the boldness of vision to undertake a diplomatic
dialogue that can provide lasting security in Europe
and globally.
The victims of whom I am speaking are fleeing
bombs and bullets overwhelmingly fired by young men
on the orders of their older male superiors. Those men
are themselves dying in large numbers, leaving their
mothers, sisters and daughters to mourn them.
On both sides of the violence of this war are
women — the ones suffering the effects of the war in
Ukraine and the mothers of the soldiers in the Russian
Federation who must wait in agony, wondering if their
sons will return home or if they have been involved in
attacks on civilians. No one knows a greater agony than
the grieving mother of a fallen soldier or the grieving
mother of a soldier who has returned home from a
campaign that has featured atrocities.
22/30

11/04/2022

Mothers on either side of the war are suffering
from the dangers and atrocities being carried out on
their children and by their children. It is therefore
exceedingly inappropriate that in the public reporting
of the negotiations for a ceasefire, we see few women
and mothers at the table. We urge all relevant actors
in the ongoing negotiations and those that follow to
ensure the inclusion of women as participants and
decision-makers. The same should be the case for
all institutions and operations that are responding to
this war.
We call for humanitarian corridors to be established
and protected. We urge humanitarian actors to make
certain that their operations have the ability to aid
women and girls, particularly those who are survivors
of rape and other forms of gender-based violence. If the
war continues much longer, it will harm the food and
energy security of many millions around the world. It
will destroy livelihoods, increase poverty and cause
economic crisis.
For a global community barely starting its recovery
from the coronavirus disease pandemic, the war in
Ukraine is a damaging blow. The result will be early
deaths, political instability and the escalation of
other conflicts. The humanitarian and developmental
response to that suffering must leave no country or
region behind. In this regard, Kenya continues to urge
the Secretary-General to rally the United Nations,
the major economies and international financial
institutions to design instruments that offer the most
vulnerable countries, particularly in the global South,
needed support.
I conclude by once again reaffirming Kenya’s
lasting support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Ukraine.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
May I begin, first of all, by joining others in
thanking our briefers for their insightful, expert and
deeply thoughtful contributions. My thanks go to
Ms. Sima Bahous of UN-Women, Mr. Manuel Fontaine
of UNICEF and, of course, Ms. Kateryna Cherepakha,
who gave us direct insight into the situation on the
ground in Ukraine. In doing so, it reminds me that
the Geneva Conventions contain numerous provisions
that afford special protection to women and girls as
civilians in conflict zones. Yet what we see today
with our own eyes, and as today’s detailed briefings
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

testify, is harrowing evidence of how women and girls
are suffering.
Mr. Putin’s invading forces are absolutely
oblivious to even the most basic tenets of the Geneva
Conventions — the absolutely essential distinction
between civilians and combatants. Today, sadly, we
have once again heard Russia trying to deflect from the
facts and the reality on the ground and muddy the waters
by what can be described only as quite extraordinary
statements, even lies. Yet what is true — what is
a fact — is that Russian attacks on civilians and
residential areas have been truly barbaric.
What we have seen shine through this — as a
real beacon — is the Ukrainian people themselves.
Ukrainian women have demonstrated incredible
fortitude and the real resilience of the Ukrainian
people. Indeed, that was reflected in the engagement
our own Prime Minister had in Ukraine recently. Like
the experiences the representatives of UNICEF, UNWomen and the United States recounted, when I visited
Poland — and I am pleased that the representative of
Poland has joined us today — I had the opportunity
to see the strength and support of the Polish people
and the incredible welcome being given to refugees
fleeing the conflict, but also the resilience of Ukrainian
women — predominantly women, as we have heard in
many statements today — who are crossing the border.
They are being forced to cross the border because they
want to protect their children who accompany them.
We have also met and seen female members
of Parliament who, because they cannot sit as
parliamentary members, have resorted to taking up
firearms to defend themselves and their people. We
have seen incredible courage from civic leaders refusing
to leave their communities and heard countless and
absolutely incredible, untold stories of heroism across
Ukraine, as women have stood up to Russian forces.
Many are armed with little more than patriotism, their
own courage and resilience and a formidable sense
of injustice.
Emerging reports have painted a deeply disturbing
picture, including of alleged rape and sexual violence,
within Ukraine’s borders. The violence and exploitation
do not end there. Beyond the country’s borders, as we
have heard again today, displaced Ukrainian women
and girls face heightened risks of trafficking — a point
made by the representative of UNICEF. They also face
sexual exploitation by criminal gangs.

S/PV.9013

The mounting evidence of war crimes in Ukraine
surely compels us, as the international community, to
come together to do more and stand with Ukraine and
those who have faced such unspeakable violence. The
vote recently to suspend the Russian Federation from
the Human Rights Council was proof of our collective
will to do just that (General Assembly resolution ES11/3). We must now work ceaselessly to investigate
these crimes and to hold Mr. Putin, Russia and the
forces of Russia to account. That is why the United
Kingdom has worked closely with partners to refer this
illegal invasion to the International Criminal Court and
establish a commission of inquiry through the Human
Rights Council and a mission of experts through the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Ukraine’s women, as many women around the
world continue to do today, helped build that open,
democratic, free Ukraine — a society that, for some
reason, Mr. Putin fears. The participation of Ukrainian
women at all levels, as we heard today from our
colleagues from Ireland and Kenya, among others,
will be central if we are to build sustainable and
lasting peace. Any peace settlement must also reflect
the disproportionate impact of this conflict — this
war — on the girls and women of Ukraine.
In conclusion, today’s Security Council discussion
and meeting is a rallying call to us all, the international
community, to recognize the impact of this illegal
war on the very basis of international law and the
very foundation on which this institution, the United
Nations, is based, as well as the actual Charter of the
United Nations itself. It is an illegal war on the women
and children of Ukraine. Ultimately, we must come
together and act together to hold Russia to account for
these crimes.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Before giving the floor to the representatives of
countries that are not members of the Security Council,
I give the floor to the representative of Albania who has
asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I listened carefully to our
Russian colleague. I would just like to highlight three
short points.
First, we do not come here to create propaganda. We
all know where the propaganda comes from nowadays,
and it is certainly not from this Chamber.

22-3141223/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Secondly, what we say in this Chamber is factchecked and corroborated. Facts and truths are not up
for discussion, even when we do not like them.
Thirdly, if we are here to talk about these painful
issues, it is because of Russia’s actions, including this
aggression. Continuing to claim that there is no war of
aggression in Ukraine is equal to continuing to claim
that the world is flat. We know that there are people
who believe it, but that does not make it true.
Finally, the only true threshold here is the appalling
degree of unspeakable crimes we are discovering in
Ukraine, which has not been seen in Europe for decades.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): I recognize the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Sima Bahous; the Director
of the UNICEF Office of Emergency Programmes,
Mr. Manuel Fontaine; and Ms. Kateryna Cherepakha, of
La Strada-Ukraine. I also recognize the representative
of Putin’s regime in the permanent seat of the Soviet
Union, although a more appropriate seat for the Russian
Government’s representatives would seem to be at a
trial for the war crimes committed in Ukraine, since
today’s lies from Putin’s representative predictably
contained everything but the kitchen sink.

11/04/2022

as adopted, reads as follows: “Maintenance of peace
and security of Ukraine”. It is neither “on Ukraine”, as
purposefully manipulated by the Russian diplomat, nor
any other linguistic fantasy of the Russian Mission. In
fact, it is not the first time that the Russian Mission has
hoped to take advantage of the fact that the majority
of delegations do not speak Russian. That was the case
in the most recent meeting of the Security Council on
Ukraine (see S/PV.9011), when Ambassador Nebenzia
tried, and failed, to quote an interview conducted
in Russian.
The language used for the title is exceptional for
conflict-specific issues, which mostly refer to situations
in specific countries or questions concerning them. It
is an acknowledgement of the fact that the peace and
security of Ukraine have been violated from abroad
and that the Security Council will remain seized of the
matter until they are restored.
Along with the letter dated 28 February 2014 from
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2014/136) concerning the threats to the
territorial integrity of Ukraine due to Russia’s attempted
annexation of Ukraine, the new agenda item will serve
as a framework for the Security Council’s actions in
response to the Russian aggression against Ukraine.

As one says these days here in New York, we know
Russians are lying because their lips are moving. There
is nothing to write home about, as the Russian comrade
has not even shown himself out of the Chamber after
that embarrassment of an intervention. The lights are
on but nobody is home at the Russian Mission.

We may defeat Russia militarily in Ukraine
sooner than we may de-occupy Crimea. That is why
I hope — and I am sure — that the Russian proposal
to remove the letter of 2014, which is basically about
Crimea, will not be supported by the necessary number
of Security Council members.

George Orwell believed that totalitarianism and the
corruption of language were closely connected. Now I
have to put my earphones on to listen carefully to the
Russian interpretation of the next couple of sentences.
It is an important development that the Security
Council is now addressing the issue of the Russian
war against Ukraine under a new agenda item, entitled
“Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine”. I
would like to thank those Security Council members
that supported its introduction.

On 24 March, an overwhelming majority of the
States Members of the United Nations adopted General
Assembly resolution ES-11/2, entitled “Humanitarian
consequences of the aggression against Ukraine”. They
demanded in particular in that resolution that civilians,
including humanitarian personnel, journalists and
persons in vulnerable situations, including women and
children, be fully protected. Russia voted against that
resolution, thereby openly showing that it considers
civilians, including women and children, to be
possible targets.

I find the interpretation that I have heard quite
satisfactory. What I find not satisfactory at all is how
the Russian diplomat, in his statement on the adoption
of the agenda item, used the Russian language to
impose a different concept of reality. The agenda item,

Since the beginning of its invasion, that Russian
approach has proved to be true almost on a daily
basis. Just last week, in the presence of the President
of Ukraine, the Security Council addressed the
massacre committed by Russian troops in the city of

24/30

22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Bucha and other towns and villages in the Kyiv region
during the period of occupation in March (ibid.). Over
the past week, a number of foreign officials, United
Nations representatives and foreign journalists have
visited the crime scenes. Shock and outrage were the
main responses of those who saw those killed and
tortured, who listened to those raped and robbed.
The investigation has just started, but the futility of
Russia’s shameless attempt to deny responsibility is
clear to everyone.
Unfortunately, Russia persists in adding newer and
newer items to the list of its war crimes and crimes
against humanity in Ukraine. On 8 April, Russian
missiles hit the Kramatorsk railway station, where
almost 4,000 civilians, mostly elderly persons, women
and children, were waiting for evacuation trains from
the war zone. More than 50 people, including five
children, were killed. More than 100 were wounded,
many of them severely.
I will not develop Russia’s false theory that Russia
does not possess Tochka-U missiles, including because
Russia has deployed many Tochka-U’s in the territory
of Belarus.
It speaks volumes that Russian attempts to conceal
the traces following the strike were similar to those
that Russia resorted to after shooting down Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 in 2014. Initial triumphant
Russian propaganda reports — this time about hitting
a concentration of Ukrainian troops in the Kramatorsk
railway station — were deleted immediately after
information on the real outcomes of the strike appeared.
Instead, the regular fake narrative of Ukrainians killing
one another was again activated. It will neither persuade
others nor help Russia to escape responsibility. The
world’s trust in Russia and its diplomats is as dead as
a doornail. The investigation will establish all who are
responsible, and they will be brought to justice.
The scope of atrocities that Ukrainian women and
children are suffering now has not been seen in the
region since the end of the Second World War. Like
its Nazi predecessors, Russia has launched a policy of
extermination of our entire people. Russian soldiers
have been allowed by their superiors to kill everyone
who identifies themself as Ukrainian, regardless of
who they are.
The very modest, preliminary and incomplete
figures recorded by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights include 245 women

S/PV.9013

killed, as of 7 April. The sex of 831 adults killed is as
yet unknown. According to our Government sources, at
least 183 children were killed and 342 wounded.
That toll of casualties, outrageous in itself, does not
include the victims in Mariupol. It is impossible so far
to establish how many women and children were killed
or injured there.
In an attempt to cover up the killings of thousands of
civilians in that besieged Ukrainian city and to prevent
Bucha-like publicity, Russian troops are reported to
be deploying mobile crematoriums to burn the dead
bodies of civilians. Again, the historical associations
are easily traceable.
The inhuman cruelty of the Russian invaders
has turned the lives of millions of Ukrainian women
and children into a horrific nightmare. Fleeing from
“Russian liberators”, more than 4.3 million refugees
have left Ukraine. A total of 6.5 million people have
become internally displaced persons, the overwhelming
majority of whom are women and children. That is the
largest displacement in Europe since the twentieth
century’s 1940s.
The safety of women refugees remains a matter of
concern. We should focus on how to protect them from
sexual violence and trafficking in either labour or sex
exploitation schemes, as well as on how to ensure the
physical and psychological recovery of victims.
In that regard, I would like to report that a dedicated
web page, safewomen.com.ua, with information on how
to protect Ukrainian women and children from human
trafficking was recently launched in Ukraine.
The briefer from Ukraine provided examples of
appalling cases of the targeted repression of female
officials and female activists in the occupied territories.
The execution of Ms. Olha Sukhenko, the head of
the village of Motyzhyn, Kyiv region, along with her
husband and son, is just one such example.
The entire scope of the humanitarian consequences
of the occupation of the Kyiv, Chernihiv and Sumy
regions has yet to be established. At the same time, the
existing data already serve as a reminder of the extreme
vulnerability of women and children in a situation
of war.
The withdrawal of Russian troops has revealed
evidence of unimaginable suffering, with killings,
unspeakable torture and sexual violence, including

22-3141225/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

rape and mutilation. For instance, the Prosecutor’s
Office is now investigating a case that happened in
Brovary district, Kyiv region, when a Russian soldier
killed a local resident and then repeatedly raped his
wife in their private house. The suspect’s identity has
been established.
The Prosecutor General’s Office of Ukraine,
in cooperation with pre-trial investigation agencies
and health-care facilities, is now launching a special
mechanism of documentation of cases of sexual
violence by Russian soldiers against Ukrainian women.
Prosecutors and investigators are also closely cooperating
with human rights defenders and non-governmental
organizations that provide the affected women with
medical and psychological support.
I would like to reiterate the message delivered by
my President to the Security Council a week ago. We
are ready for cooperation with international institutions
to ensure a full and transparent investigation. It is
also important that United Nations entities, including
UN-Women and UNICEF, address such issues and
ensure the comprehensive monitoring of the situation
of women and children in the case of Russia’s war
against Ukraine.
I would also like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the fact that the invaders have already taken
more than 121,000 children out of Ukraine. Moreover,
Russia is reported to have drafted a bill to simplify and
accelerate the procedure for the adoption of abducted
Ukrainian children, both orphans and those who have
parents and other relatives. Most of those children were
abducted from Mariupol to Donetsk and the Russian city
of Taganrog. Such actions flagrantly violate article 7 of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and article 49
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.
Ukrainian women have always been an
indispensable part of the solution of crises and conflicts.
The unprovoked and unjustified war waged by Russia
has highlighted that role in Government, business and
civil society.
Since 2014, Ukraine’s women have been
increasingly engaged in the women and peace and
security agenda, guided by resolution 1325 (2000)
and Ukraine’s commitment to a gender equality
policy. Ukraine was the first of the world’s countries
to adopt a national action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
26/30

11/04/2022

security, under wartime conditions. Ukraine has now
adopted its second national action plan up until 2025.
Ukraine’s female activists have been active
in promoting initiatives aimed at supporting the
Ukrainian army, strengthening public awareness and
preparedness regarding war-related emergencies.
The Ukrainian Government and local communities
have been working together. The Ministry of Social
Policy and the Government Commissioner for Gender
Equality Policy established a network of advisers in all
Ukrainian regions to ensure a gender-sensitive response
to all situations, including such emergencies.
Ukraine’s women are proactive at all levels of
community action, community local governance
and local humanitarian responses. Many senior
Government positions are held by women, and they are
promoting full accountability for the war crimes now
being committed.
Ukraine’s women have been actively contributing
to Ukraine’s security as members of the army and
law enforcement, peacebuilders and human rights
and women’s rights defenders. They seek meaningful
inclusion in all processes to restore Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and to bring peace
back to Ukrainian soil.
Let me conclude with another letter that was made
public in Ukraine several days ago. A nine-year-old boy
wrote to his mother on the occasion of International
Women’s Day:
“Mama, this letter is my gift to you on
[International] Women’s Day, of 8 March … Thank
you for the best nine years of my life. Many thanks
for my childhood. You are the best mama in the
world. I will never forget you. I wish you good luck
in heaven. I wish that you get to paradise. I will
try to behave well to get to paradise, too. Kiss you,
your Tolya”.
That was by a nine-year-old boy from the town
of Hostomel, Kyiv region. His mother was killed by
Russian soldiers when they tried to escape from the
occupied town by car. The boy stayed in the vehicle
until local residents were able to rescue him and take
him to a shelter.
Such letters should not have to be written. If they
are, it means that something has gone terribly wrong,
including here at the United Nations. It means that its
mechanisms for maintaining international peace and
22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

security are not working properly and should be fixed.
But can they be fixed while Russia is allowed to use the
rights of a permanent member?
If we are not able to stop the Kremlin, more and
more children will become orphans, and more and more
mothers will lose their children. Today it is Ukraine;
tomorrow it will be somewhere else. The Kremlin
must be stopped for the sake of future generations to
save them from the scourge of war, both in Ukraine
and throughout the world, as the Charter of the United
Nations envisages.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom, especially Ambassador Dame Barbara
Woodward, for having organized this important and
timely briefing and for shedding light on the situation
of women and girls in Ukraine in the aftermath of
Russia’s aggression. I would like to thank the excellent
briefers for their insights and, most importantly, for all
their work in supporting Ukrainian women and girls.
All
conflicts
and
humanitarian
crises
disproportionately impact women and girls. Not only do
they suffer from the direct military consequences, but
they are also victims of instability, human trafficking
and sexual violence. That is especially true right now in
Ukraine, as we have heard.
The number of people who have fled Ukraine since
Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression began
on 24 February has risen to more than 4.5 million.
Nearly 2.6 million of those refugees have arrived in
Poland. The overwhelming majority of those trying to
leave Ukraine are women and children — according to
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, they account for as many as 90 per cent
of those fleeing the country. They also constitute the
majority of internally displaced persons.
Displaced women and children with no contacts or
help are at higher risk of trafficking and other forms
of abuse. They are physically and psychologically
weakened, unfamiliar with their new surroundings and
highly vulnerable to becoming the victims of criminals.
That is true for both refugees and internally displaced
persons. Reports are emerging of sexual violence by
Russian soldiers against Ukrainian women and girls
who are fleeing the country.

S/PV.9013

It is crucial to address the unique needs of women
and children crossing the borders. Polish authorities
have put measures in place in all border crossing areas
and reception centres to control who has direct access
to refugees. Those measures include identifying and
registering the names of those accessing reception and
accommodation centres and the names and registration
plates of those with whom refugees leave sites. There
are also information materials available for people
from Ukraine crossing the Polish-Ukrainian border
in Ukrainian, Polish and English, in both paper and
electronic format.
Once they are in a safe haven, the importance
of refugees’ access to the labour market becomes a
priority. Employment is a way not only to support
themselves and their families but also to regain a sense
of security. Last month, Poland enacted a law allowing
Ukrainian guests to legally live and work in the country
for at least 18 months, with full access to the State
social protection system of health care and schooling.
In addition, a Ukrainian citizen may also apply for a
residence permit for another three years.
The Polish Government is working together with
municipalities as they struggle to find long-term
housing, jobs and school placements for our Ukrainian
guests. Given the fact that refugees are predominantly
women with children, we are exploring ways to support
the integration of women into the labour market. One
such example is the care sector. Considering that the
majority of refugees are women with children, because
men stayed in or returned to Ukraine to defend their
country, a major challenge is to provide nursery and
kindergarten care. There are also programmes in place
to assist women in finding employment in sectors where
men are traditionally overrepresented.
In the capital city of Warsaw alone, there are
100,000 refugee children, 15,000 of whom are already
enrolled in schools. For the entire country, that number
is approaching 200,000. Children from Ukraine have
the right to attend Polish schools on the same basis as
Polish nationals. We offer different opportunities for
children. Some newcomers are enrolling directly in
Polish schools, especially in smaller towns. Poland is
also establishing classes with all Ukrainian children
and teachers who have also just arrived. Those children
will follow Ukraine’s curriculum and be taught in
Ukrainian. Ukrainian higher education students also
have the opportunity to continue their education at
Polish universities.

22-3141227/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Patients evacuated from oncological wards are being
admitted to hospitals worldwide thanks to the initiative
of the Polish First Lady, undertaken in cooperation with
her counterparts and members of royal families. The
First Lady also recently visited the relevant agencies
within the United Nations system here.
It must also be stressed that refugee children, just
like all children around the world, are already dealing
with the mental health challenges posed by almost two
years of isolation due to the pandemic. Now, having
left the warm comforts of home — not to mention their
fathers, who stayed in Ukraine to fight — any progress
towards pre-pandemic normalcy has been cruelly
interrupted. We are offering psychiatric, psychological
and other mental-health social services to help
Ukrainian refugees. However, their needs are growing
every day, and we cannot help everyone without active,
concrete, coordinated and immediate assistance from
the international community, including the United
Nations system.
Women are not only victims in this crisis; they are
also carrying their families, their communities and their
nation through it. We want to pay tribute to Ukrainian
women who have joined the pro-European protest
movement in large numbers and have since played a
powerful role in Ukrainian civil society, including
by directing relief efforts. Women-led organizations
have helped to fund and supply the Ukrainian military
and provide medical care, food and social services
to the large internally displaced population. Women
volunteers represent the majority of humanitarian aid
and service providers in Ukraine, which are often the
first on the ground to provide humanitarian assistance
and deliver life-saving supplies. I also wish to pay
tribute to the civil-society organization La StradaUkraine, whose President we heard speak earlier.
Ukrainian women represented in Government are
playing a key role in developing policies that will be
crucial in mitigating the effects of war in the aftermath
of the conflict. So while there is war, there is also hope
and solidarity. In many cases, such hope and solidarity
have women’s faces. Let them prevail.

11/04/2022

would first like to thank the briefers for their insightful
contributions.
At the outset, let me reiterate Romania’s strong
condemnation of the completely unjustified and
unprovoked military attack by the Russian Federation
against Ukraine, as well as the reported atrocities
committed by the Russian armed forces in a number
of occupied Ukrainian towns that have now been
liberated. Romania reiterates its strong support for
Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders
and remains committed to assisting Ukraine and the
Ukrainian people.
The day of 24 February 2022 will remain one of the
darkest in history since the end of the Second World
War. The aggression has sparked massive displacement,
forcing more than 11 million people to flee their homes.
Every day we are witnessing women and children,
older persons and persons with disabilities fleeing their
homes, their hometowns and their homeland, seeking
help in neighbouring countries. Every day we hear the
incredible and tragic life stories of women and children
fleeing to save their lives, leaving behind their fathers,
husbands and sons.
As we closely monitor the devastation and immense
suffering, the international community must also
maintain its focus on the continued reports of horrific
violations and abuses of human rights.
The military actions of the Russian Federation
disproportionately affect the most vulnerable. Children
continue to be killed, wounded and deeply traumatized
by the violence all around them, while women and girls
face an even higher risk of various forms of genderbased violence. Ukrainian women and children crossing
international borders are more exposed to the risk of
human trafficking, including online.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.

Romania has been at the front line as one of the
largest receiving countries for Ukrainians fleeing
the terror since the beginning of the war. Alongside
its allies and partners, Romania is trying to find the
best solutions to help the population in need, be it on
the territory of Ukraine or as refugees on Romania’s
territory. We also support the Republic of Moldova,
which is facing a massive influx of Ukrainian refugees.

Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania welcomes the
initiative to hold a meeting dedicated to the participation
of women in achieving peace and security in Ukraine. I

The humanitarian response set up by the
Government of Romania is structured in two stages: the
emergency response to the humanitarian crisis covering

28/30

22-31412

11/04/2022

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

the urgent needs at border-crossing points, humanitarian
transports and the transport of refugees to temporary
accommodation places and the structural stage of
developing protection mechanisms. As we approach
the second phase of the intervention, the Government
has set up six working groups that have the role to
design inclusion and protection-policy measures in the
following areas: health, education, labour, housing,
vulnerable persons, children and youth. Each working
group develops sectorial action plans, in collaboration
with experts from the corresponding Ministries, United
Nations agencies and representatives of civil society.
The response to all the human suffering has been
swift and all-encompassing. We have seen national
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), international
NGOs and United Nations institutions, as well as simple
Romanians from all across the country offering help, be
it in food supplies, transportation or accommodations
in their own homes.
Between February 10 and April 10, more than
700,000 Ukrainian citizens entered Romania; 80,000
are currently in our country. At the same time, between
February 10 and today, almost 4,400 Ukrainian citizens
applied for asylum in Romania. Those citizens benefit
from all rights provided by Romanian legislation.
Throughout the process, asylum seekers can
benefit from accommodation in the centres of the
General Inspectorate for Immigration, if they so
wish, as well as from measures of material, financial,
medical assistance, specialized psychological and legal
counselling, access to the labour market and cultural
adaptation activities. Complementarily, asylum seekers
can also benefit from the support of international and
non-governmental organizations. Ukrainian citizens
receive free medical care and appropriate treatment for
emergencies through the national emergency medical
care system.
With regard to children, I would like to underline
that all Ukrainian children on the territory of Romania,
including those who do not apply for a form of protection
as provided by the law on asylum, have the right to
receive education in Romanian schools in the same
conditions as Romanian pupils. They have the right
to receive free accommodation in boarding schools, a
food allowance, school supplies, footwear, clothing and
textbooks. They are examined in medical school offices
and, if they have not received a vaccine, they can access

S/PV.9013

the national vaccination scheme through the national
programme of the Ministry of Health.
I would also like to mention that, with the support of
UNICEF and in partnership with the relevant Romanian
institutions, as well as local NGOs, Blue Dot centres
have been set up at several border-crossing points to
provide psychological and legal support and counsel
to families and unaccompanied minors arriving in
Romania. Separated families are also helped to reunite.
Conflicts disproportionately harm women and
girls. We are seeing that every day in the eyes of women
and children who cross our borders, fleeing Ukraine
because of the Russian military aggression. We do our
best to help them overcome these difficult times with
dignity. We stand up for our values; we stand united for
those who are suffering.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Ms. Leendertse (Germany): I too would like to
thank you, Sir, for organizing this briefing and Executive
Director of UN-Women Sima Bahous, Mr. Fontaine of
UNICEF and Ms. Cherepakha of La Strada-Ukraine for
their important contributions to this meeting.
The consequences of Russia’s aggression against
Ukraine with regard to the situation of women and
children are nothing but shocking. The horrible pictures
of bodies of civilians lying dead on the streets from
Bucha and Irpin are engraved in our memory. Among
them were the bodies of women and girls who have
become victims of sexual violence and rape by Russian
soldiers and mercenaries. Some reports suggest that the
bodies of killed women and girls were burned or run
over by the perpetrators, trying to cover their deeds.
Those and other crimes against women and girls,
as well as other civilians, in dozens of Ukrainian cities
will not be left unanswered. Germany fully supports
the important work of the Human Rights Monitoring
Mission in Ukraine, and the Human Rights Council
has set up a commission of inquiry that will investigate
those and other cases. We fully support the opening of
an independent investigation by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Karim Khan, and will
provide further assistance if needed. Germany will
actively contribute to ensuring that perpetrators are
brought to justice. It is important that all accountability
mechanisms take into account the gender dimension of
the Russian aggression against Ukraine.

22-3141229/30

S/PV.9013

Maintenance of peace and security of Ukraine

Like in other conflicts, this war is impacting
women and men differently, and it is often those who
are already marginalized and face intersecting forms
of discrimination who suffer most. We therefore have
to ensure that women participate fully, equally and
meaningfully in decisions concerning humanitarian
assistance and their refugee situation, as well as
peacebuilding, reconstruction, recovery and possible
post-conflict scenarios, and that all measures are
gender-responsive.
Russia’s aggression has caused one of the worst
refugee crises in Europe since the Second World War.
As the vast majority of those fleeing Ukraine are
women and children, they are at risk of falling victim
to criminal activity, as many speakers have noted.
It is crucial to protect women and children to the
greatest extent possible. In that regard, we commend in
particular the work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF.
The disruption of education is a deeply aggravating
factor, endangering the well-being of children who

30/30

11/04/2022

often arrive exhausted, traumatized and malnourished
in countries of destination. More than half of Ukraine’s
children have been displaced by the war. Additionally,
more than 750 schools in Ukraine have been damaged
since the beginning of the conflict, denying thousands
of children access to education. We commend
UNICEF’s efforts to provide children of families
fleeing the violence with education kits and help repair
damaged schools and kindergartens. We also support
the important work of the UN-Women Women’s Peace
and Humanitarian Fund in Ukraine and Moldova that
was referred to earlier by Sima Bahous.
In conclusion, Germany reiterates its full solidarity
with Ukraine, including its sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, and we renew
our urgent call on President Putin to stop this war
immediately, end the indescribable human suffering
and withdraw Russian troops from Ukrainian territory
fully and unconditionally.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-31412
