United Nations

A/RES/60/20

General Assembly

Distr.: General
6 January2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 November 2005
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/60/515)]

60/20.

Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its thirty-eighth session

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity and common interest and to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission on the work of its thirtyeighth session, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
_______________
1

05-48874

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixtieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/60/17).

A/RES/60/20

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its thirty-eighth session;1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and approval of a draft
convention on the use of electronic communications in international contracts; 2
3.
Also commends the Commission for the progress made in its work on a
revision of its Model Law on Procurement of Goods, Construction and Services, 3 on
model legislative provisions on interim measures in international commercial
arbitration, on a draft instrument on transport law and on a draft legislative guide on
secured transactions;
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
4.
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, and in this
regard appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate
their legal activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts
and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
5.
work of the Commission concerned with technical assistance in the field of
international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical assistance programme;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
assistance activities in Azerbaijan, Brazil, China, Ethiopia (for the Common Market
for Eastern and Southern Africa), Serbia and Montenegro, Slovenia, South Africa
(for the Association of Law Reform Agencies of Eastern and Southern Africa) and
Thailand;
(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the seminars and briefing missions to take place, and appeals to
Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, to the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical assistance programme of the Commission and
to cooperate and coordinate their activities with those of the Commission;
Takes note with regret that, since the thirty-sixth session of the
6.
Commission, no contributions have been made to the trust fund established to
provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members of the

_______________
2
3

2

Ibid., chap. III and annex I.
Ibid., Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum (A/49/17 and Corr.1), annex I.

A/RES/60/20

Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, 4
stresses the need for contributions to the trust fund in order to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, and reiterates its appeal to Governments, the relevant bodies of the
United Nations system, organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary
contributions to the trust fund;
Decides, in order to ensure full participation by all Member States in the
7.
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the sixtieth session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
Recalls that the responsibility for the work of the Commission lies with
8.
the meetings of the Commission and its intergovernmental working groups, and
stresses in this regard that information should be provided regarding meetings of
experts, which bring an essential contribution to the work of the Commission;
Also recalls its resolutions on partnerships between the United Nations
9.
and non-State actors, in particular the private sector, 5 and in this regard encourages
the Commission to further explore different approaches to the use of partnerships
with non-State actors in the implementation of its mandate, in particular in the area
of technical assistance, in accordance with the applicable principles and guidelines
and in cooperation and coordination with other relevant offices of the Secretariat,
including the Global Compact Office;
10. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with the
General Assembly resolutions on documentation-related matters, 6 which, in
particular, emphasize that any reduction in the length of documents should not
adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the substance of the
documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the mandate and work of
the Commission in implementing page limits with respect to the documentation of
the Commission;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue providing summary records
of the Commission’s meetings relating to the formulation of normative texts;
12. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the conventions emanating
from the work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and, to this end, urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to those conventions;
13. Takes note with appreciation of the preparation of digests of case law
relating to the texts of the Commission, in particular a digest of case law relating to
the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 7
and a digest of case law relating to the Model Law on International Commercial
Arbitration of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, 8 which

_______________
4

Resolution 48/32, para. 5.
Resolutions 55/215, 56/76 and 58/129.
6
Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1489, No. 25567.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17), annex I.
5

3

A/RES/60/20

will assist in dissemination of information on those texts and promote their use,
enactment and uniform interpretation;
14. Welcomes the Commission’s decision to hold, in the context of its fortieth
session in 2007, a congress on international trade law in Vienna, with a view to
reviewing the results of the past work of the Commission as well as related work of
other organizations active in the field of international trade law, assessing current
work programmes and considering topics and areas for future work, and
acknowledges the importance of holding such a congress for the coordination and
promotion of activities aimed at the modernization and harmonization of
international trade law;
15. Notes that 2006 will mark the thirtieth anniversary of the adoption by the
Commission of the Arbitration Rules of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law, 9 used worldwide in the settlement of disputes concerning
international trade and investment, and in this regard welcomes initiatives being
undertaken to organize conferences and other similar events to provide a forum for
assessing the experience with the Rules, as well as discussing their possible
revision;
16. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their
multilingual development, maintenance and enrichment, 10 commends the
Commission’s restructured website in the six official languages of the United
Nations, and welcomes the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and
improve its website in accordance with the applicable guidelines.
53rd plenary meeting
23 November 2005

_______________
9

United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.V.6.
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3, 55/222, sect. III, para. 12, 56/64 B, sect. X, 57/130 B, sect. X,
58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61-76, and 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76-95.
10

4
