General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

52

-----------------------

1. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to convene as early as possible in I 973, under
the auspices of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, a conference of plenipotentiaries to
consider and adopt a convention or any other multilateral legally binding instrument on a code of conduct for liner conferences;
2. Decides to establish, also under the auspices of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, a Preparatory Committee for the United Nations
Conference on a Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences, consisting of forty-eight members to be appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Developments 4 with the same
distribution between the diff crent regional areas as
was established for the fourth session of the Working
Group on International Shipping Legislation, with the
addition of two members from each regional area;
3. Also decides that the Preparatory Committee
shall prepare the draft of a convention or any other
multilateral legally binding instrument on a code of
conduct for liner conferences for submission to the
conference of plenipotentiaries referred to in paragraph
1 above;
4. Decides further that the fir,t session of the Preparatory Committee should be convened as early as
possible and that the final session should be held at
least two months before the conference of plenipotentiaries;
5. Recommends that the Preparatory Committee
should take into consideration, as a basis for its work:
(a) The draft code of conduct for liner conferences
annexed to resolution 66 (IH) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development:

(b) The report of the debates on this subject by
the Fourth Committee of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development at its third session, 85 including an informal exchange of views on the
draft code of conduct for liner conferences and a summing-up by the Chairman of that Crn1mittee;
( c) The report of the secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development entitled Regulation of Liner Conferences/n
(d) The report of the Working Group on International Shipping Legislation on its third session.~.

2 I 15th plenary meeting
19 December 1972
84 The Preparatory Committee will be composed of the
following States: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, c,_echoslovakia, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, German Democratic Republic, Germ;iny, Federal Republic of, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Indi'.l, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq. Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan,
Madagascar, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Philippines. Poland. Romania, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Thailand. Uganda. Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzar1ia, United Slates of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yugoslavia w1d Zaire.
8 ~ See Procecdinrts of tlie U11it<'d Nations Conferenc<' 011
Trade and Dcvelopmc11t, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.IT.D.4).
annex VI.D.
8 6 United Nations publication, Sales N,1.: E.72.ILD. l3 and
Corr. I.

87 TD/B/C.4/93.

3036 (XXVII).

SpPcial measm·«·s in favour of
the least developt•d among the developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Having consiciercci the report of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development on its third
session 88 and the report of the Trade and Development
Uoard for the period from 22 September 1971 to 25
October 1972, ~~
Bearing in mind the joint statement by eight socialist countries at the twrnty-fifth sL"ssinn of the
General Assembly concerning the Second United Nations Development Decade and social progrcss 90 and
their declaration at the third session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Dcvelopment, 01
Conscious that the production capacity and trade
flows of the least developed among the developing
countries have been and continue to be extremely low,
and that it is urgent for the commercial policy measures
which arc applied to all developing countries to be
supplemented by liberal and considerably larger contributions of financial and technical ;1ssistancc for tit,
least developed countries, in order lo eliminate the
existing bottle-neck in their economy .1t the production
level,
Recognizing that the relevant provisions of resolution 62 (lll) of 19 May 1972 adopted by the United
Nations Conference on Trade and n~·vclopment 9 ~ and
of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade"': must be
applied in practice as soon as possible,
1. Endorses resolution 62 (III) unanimously
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session;
2. Requests the specialized agencies concerned and
other United Nations bodies, as well as the regional
economic commissions and the United Nations Economic and Social Office at Beirut, to initiate and accelerate the implementation of their action programmes
in favour of the least developed countries in the areas
within their competence and to submit periodic reports
on the matter to the General Assemblv throu!!,h the
Economic and Social Council;
•
~
3. Also requests aL! States members of the United
Nations ConfcrencL· on Trade ;111d lkvelopmcnt, especially developed countries, to implement urgently the
special measures in favuur nf the kast developed countries contained in Conference resolution 62 (III) and
to continue to review the measures they have taken in
favour of these countries, as well a, ivavs and means
of carrying out those measures, and !,) 1mwide information to the Senetar_y-General of the l Jnited Nations
Conference, on Trade and Development 011 actions
taken in connexion with the considcratinn and implementation ot thL' recommendations nf the Conference,
SR See Procccdinis of the United !\'a1io11., C,>11{cu·11ce 011
Trade and Dcv,·lopmen/, Third Session. vol. I, J?cport and
Annexes !United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.Il.D.4).
,n Official Records of the (;,•neml Assembl\', Twc111r-sevn11/i
S1·ssio11, SurplcmPnt No. 15 ( A/8715.IRev.1).
!IO Ibid_, Twent,· filth .'ic.,s1<111, A1111ncs. ;igcnda itc1n 42. docu-

11,ent A/8074.
111 See Proceedings of the United Nutions C,mferen,·c on
'frade and Dei·c/opment, Third Session, vol. I, Rf'['or/ and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Saks No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex VIII.G.
!12 Jhid.
11 ~ Resolution 2626 (X)(V).

Resolutions adoptNI on the reports o_f__'lie Second Comm_ittee_-_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

t<) enable him to submit periodic reports to the Trade

and Development Board.
2 I I 5th 11/enary meeting
19 December 1972

:\037 ( X'\. VII). Chari Pr of the t•eonomie rights
and 1]utiP~ of ~talP!-1

The General Assembly,
Havin~ considered the report of the United Nations
Confcre~cc on Trade and Development on its third
session, 94
Decides to enlarge the composition of the Working
Group on the Chartc~ of the Economi~ Rights and
Duties of States established under resolutrnn 45 (III)
of 18 May 1972 of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, 9 " and authori~es t~e Secr~tary-Gcncral of the Conference to appomt mne additional members, in consultation with Governments of
member States.
] 1 I 5 th plenary meeting
19 December 1972

3038 (XXVII). Dissemination of information and
mohilization of public opinion regarding
prohl1•1ns of trade and development

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind paragraph 84 of the International
Devclu 11mcnt Strnteg:y for the Second United Nations
Development Decade/'; relating to the mobilization of
public opinion,
Recalling its resolution 2800 ( XXVI) of 14 December 1971, regarding the dissemination of information and the mobilization of public opinion relative to
the review and appraisal of progress in the implementation of the International Development Strategy,
Noting with satisfaction resolution 43 (III) of 17
May 1972, 97 in which the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development proposed a series of specific measures for the dissemination of information and
the mobilization of public opinion relative to problems
of trade and development,
Noting aha agreed conclusion 89 (XII) of 20 October 1972, 98 adopted on the subject by the Trade and
Development Board at the first part of its twelfth session,
Convinced that improvement in the dissemination of
information and the mobilization of public opinion,
particularly among young people, would be an important factor for greater awareness of the general
problems of development and would thus promote the
increased efforts required in the sphere of interna~4 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade "nd Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication. Sales No.: E.73.II.D.4).
!l5 fbid., annex I.A.
HG Resolution 2626 (XXV).
!J7 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes <United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
!i8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyseventh St'ssion, Supplement No. 15 (A/8715/Rev.1), part one,
annex I.

tional co-operation for development and the success of
the International Development Strategy,
1. Decides to institute a World Development Information Day with the object of drawing the attention
of world public opinion each year to development problems and till'. necessity of ~trcngthcning international
co-operation to solve them;
2. Further decides that the date for this day shall
coincide in principle with United Nations Day, 24
October, which is also the date on which the International Development Strategy for the Second Nations
Development Decade was adopted in 1970;
3. Invites the Tracie and Development Board to
study at its fifth special session, devoted to the review
and appraisal of the Second United Nations Development Decade, the preliminary report of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, 11 " as well as the interim
report requested of the Secretary-General of the U nit~d
Nations Conference on Trade and Development 111
agreed conclusion 89 (XII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations to prepare, for the fifth special session of the
Trade and Development Board, a detailed report elaboratin~ the elements outlined in his preliminary report;
5. ~Further invites the Secretary-General o( the
United Nations to indicate in the detailed report mentioned in paragraph 4 above what measures he is c~msidering, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution
43 (II]) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, to strengthen the informatiC?n services of the Conference and to regroup them, 111 close
liaison with the Office of Public Information, in particular the Centre for Economic and Social Information and other United Nations information sources, in
an information unit responsible for giving wider publicity to the debates and decisions of the Conference
concerning problems of trade and development and to
the objectives of the International Development Strategy
of concern k• the Conference;
6. Requests the Trade and Development Board at
its fifth special session to outline a programme of
events for World Development Information Day in
1973 and to make specific proposals to that end;
7. Requests the Economic and Social Council at its
fiftv-fifth session, taking into consideration the report
of the Trade and Development Board on its fifth special sc:,sion, to draw up a programme of events for
World Development Information Day in 1971.
2 l l 5th plenary meeting
19 nc,emher 1972

:10;19 (XXVII). External debt servtcmg hv the
devPloping countriPi;1

The General A ssemf1ly,
Mind! ul of the purposes set forth in Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which specifics that the
United Nations should promote higher standards of
living, full employment. and conditions of economic and
social progress and development,
Recalfing its resolutions 2170 (XXI) of 6 December
1966, 2415 (XXTJI) of 17 December 1968 and 2807
(XXVI) of 14 December 1971 concerning the need
n9 A/8893.
