S/PV.8283

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8283

rd meeting
Monday, 11 Jun 2018, 3.10 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Djédjé
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Michon
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Ms. French

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2018/530)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-17828 (E)
*1817828*

S/PV.8283

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Special report of the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations
on the strategic review of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2018/530)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/530, which contains the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.

11/06/2018

Let me first turn to the situation on the ground. With
the second consecutive dry season without large-scale
fighting now behind us, the security situation in
Darfur during the reporting period remained stable
overall. Fighting between the Government and rebel
groups remains confined to parts of the mountainous
Jebel Marra area, where the Sudan Liberation ArmyAbdul Wahid (SLA/AW) maintains a presence.
Intermittent clashes that started in March continued,
with Government forces putting pressure on SLA/AW
strongholds in the Jebel Marra. Offensive attacks by the
rebel group were largely limited to ambushes — likely
an attempt to obstruct the progress of Government
forces. The verification of these incidents has proved
challenging owing to access restrictions placed on the
Mission and the humanitarian community. The clashes
have caused civilian displacements the extent of which
is only partially verified. We regret that the fighting
has again caused hardship for the civilian population,
and we call on the Government to give UNAMID and
our humanitarian partners access to protect and assist
those affected.
Intercommunal violence remained low, consistent
with the previous reporting period, with a marginal
increase in the number of incidents. These included
confrontations in the area of Graida, South Darfur,
where fighting over land ownership between the Fallata
and the Misseriya, as well as between the Fallata and
Massalit, resulted in deaths and injuries.

Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the special report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the
strategic review of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2018/530). I
will also provide an update on the latest developments
in Darfur.

Violence against internally displaced persons
(IDPs) , including attacks on IDP camps and reports of
forced evictions, remains a concern. Allegations were
received from IDPs in the area of Kass, South Darfur,
of harassment by Rapid Support Forces to force them
off of public lands and buildings. Confrontations in
the Khamsa Dagaig, Ardayba and Jedda IDP camps in
Central Darfur between 21 and 23 May resulted in a
number of IDPs being killed and injured.

Today’s meeting comes as the Mission is finalizing
a year-long process of reconfiguration, which saw 11
team sites closed and a shift towards peacekeeping in
the Jebel Marra and peacebuilding in the rest of Darfur.
As we reflect on the situation on the ground and the
needs of the Darfuri population now and in the future,
we should consider how the United Nations system as
a whole, in partnership with the African Union (AU),
can best address those needs. The special report that is
before us today points a way forward as we adapt to the
changing reality in Darfur.

Efforts to reinvigorate the stalled peace process
continued, with a meeting between the Government
of the Sudan and the non-signatory movements in
Berlin on 16 and 17 April to discuss a pre-negotiation
framework. While talks stalled over the creation of
new and independent implementation mechanisms for a
subsequent peace agreement, parties agreed on all other
elements of the proposed pre-negotiation framework.
For the first time, the non-signatory movements
accepted the principle of negotiating on the basis of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

2/12

18-17828

11/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The conflict in Darfur has changed, and to best
serve the Darfuri people, UNAMID must change with
it. The peacekeeping mission should be directed to
the area where it is most needed, namely, at the site
of continued conflict in the Jebel Marra. In the rest of
Darfur, the United Nations system should leverage the
capabilities of the agencies, funds and programmes
best suited to tackling the problems that remain there.
Now is the time to plan for the future of the United
Nations and African Union support to Darfur by closely
linking the drawdown in peacekeeping to the build-up
in peacebuilding and development.
This linkage, between focusing peacekeeping
efforts on the one hand and increasing peacebuilding
and development capacity on the other, is at the heart of
the special report before the Council today. The report
presents two central concepts that would work hand in
hand over a two-year time frame: first, a peacekeeping
concept, which focuses on the most precarious areas
where the protection of civilians, humanitarian support
and the mediation of local conflict remain a necessity
to further the peace process; and secondly, a transition
concept, which, in collaboration with the United
Nations country team, aims to bridge the transition
from peacekeeping to early recovery and development.
Within the peacekeeping concept, UNAMID
would focus its activities on three strategic priorities:
first, protecting civilians, monitoring human rights
and facilitating humanitarian assistance; secondly,
mediation between the Government of the Sudan and
non-signatory armed movements on the basis of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur; and thirdly,
local-level mediation to address intercommunal or
other local conflict. The area of operations would be
reduced to 13 team sites in the greater Jebel Marra and
the mission headquarters would move from El Fasher to
Zalingei, Central Darfur. The supercamp in El Fasher
would be downsized and continue to serve as a logistics
hub, while all other team sites and supercamps outside
of the new area of operations would be closed. Overall,
the force strength would be reduced from 8,735 to 4,050
military personnel, and the police component would be
reduced from 2,500 officers to 1,870.
The whole-of-system transition concept focuses on
addressing the critical drivers of conflict and preventing
relapse. To operationalize this, four substantive areas
have been identified to enable the Government, the
United Nations country team, civil society partners, as
well as international actors to carefully and responsibly

S/PV. 8283

prepare for the Mission’s envisaged exit: first, the
rule of law, including police; secondly, resilience and
livelihoods, including durable solutions for IDPs and
host communities; thirdly, immediate service delivery
to IDPs; and, fourthly, human rights. UNAMID would
support the establishment of joint UNAMID-United
Nations country team liaison offices in each Darfur
state capital, except Zalingei, with the country team
leading work tailored to the needs of each state.
The two linked concepts in the special report provide
a road map for whole-of-system support to long-term
peace and stability in Darfur. For this to be realized, it
is essential that longer-term funding arrangements be
in place and that we raise voluntary contributions, use
funding from the assessed budget during the transition,
and work closely with the Peacebuilding Support
Office to access funding. We rely on the support of our
partners to bring that vision to life.
The situation in Darfur has changed radically
for the better since the height of the conflict, and the
needs of the people have changed with it. The special
report that is before the Council is a recognition that
the international community must adapt its support
accordingly. What it proposes is a way to draw on the
capabilities of the entire United Nations system, in
partnership with the AU, to better tailor our work to the
reality on the ground. As the United Nations refocuses
its support on Darfur, it will need the committed
backing of the Government of the Sudan, the United
Nations country team and humanitarian partners, as
well as the troop- and police-contributing countries and
the members of the Council, to navigate the significant
changes. We thank the Council for its continued support
as we work to achieve peace and stability for Darfur,
and security and development for its people. We believe
that, working together, this new approach can help
establish a future of United Nations and AU support to
Darfur that will help to improve the lives of the Darfuri
people now and in the long term.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his useful briefing, as
well as his active and personal involvement together
with his African Union (AU) Commission counterpart
Ismail Chergui in the review process of the African

18-178283/12

S/PV.8283

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We thank both the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the AU Commission for the special
report (S/2018/530), which certainly provides us with
an analysis of the conflict, highlighting the current
security situation and conflict-drivers in Darfur,
the political and humanitarian situation, as well as
the development needs critical for avoiding a relapse
into conflict.
We have all said time and again that the overall
security situation in Darfur remains generally stable.
Intercommunal violence has decreased significantly
and there has been a continuous improvement in
humanitarian access across Darfur. That has also been
confirmed by the report on the joint strategic review
of the African Union and the United Nations. The visit
of the AU Peace and Security Council also resulted in
similar observations. That is why the Chairperson of the
AU Commission and the Secretary-General are arguing
that improvements in the overall security situation in
Darfur have created the conditions for UNAMID to
prepare its exit after over 10 years in the Sudan.
Of course, the root causes of the conflict in
Darfur remain largely unaddressed, but UNAMID no
longer represents the appropriate tool to address those
remaining challenges. The strategic review clearly
states that the situation in Darfur can be characterized
no longer as an armed conflict between Government
forces and non-State actors, but as lawlessness and
criminality, aggravated by a protracted humanitarian
crisis, problems related to human rights and the lack
of development. In that context, the transition from
peacekeeping to sustaining peace and the role of the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund, highlighted by the strategic review, is indeed
very appropriate.
We believe that there is certainly a need for a
paradigm shift in our approach to dealing with the Darfur
situation. The Sudanese Government has demonstrated
its political will to sustainably address the challenges
in the region. It has also exerted many efforts to address
the challenges the Sudan as a whole is facing. What
is expected from the international community is to
intensify efforts in assisting the Government’s efforts
and to help in relieving the suffering of the people
of Darfur.
The American engagement with the Sudan is a case
in point, and we are seeing how it has contributed to
4/12

11/06/2018

developments not only in Darfur, but also in other issues
of peace and security. But engagement is not the only
solution. The Sudan needs immediate and substantial
financial support, and I take this opportunity to thank
Sweden for taking the lead in changing the approach
in that regard. I hope that will be emulated by other
partners as well.
The Government is exerting efforts to find a
durable solution to the high number of internally
displaced persons (IDPs), without which sustainable
peace in Darfur cannot be ensured. I am sure we all
appreciate the fact that the challenges with regard to
IDPs, particularly that of land and providing basic
services, are huge and will not be addressed by the
efforts of the Government alone. It requires significant
assistance from the international community, which, so
far, has been very meagre, save for modest assistance
from a very few countries.
The Government is also trying to fill the void that
could be created by the closure of some of UNAMID’s
team sites by putting in place law enforcement and
rule of law institutions, such as courts and police
stations, that address issues related to the security of
the communities. Unfortunately, those efforts have
been similarly constrained by the lack of capacity
and resources. The weapons-collection campaign
has contributed considerably to the mitigation of
intercommunal violence. That is an effort worth
supporting, given its immediate impact on the return
of IDPs and their long-term implications for stability
in Darfur.
The enormous gains registered in Darfur can
be ensured only through sustained financing for the
development efforts of the Government. That is why
we are asking for a change of approach from the
international community towards the Sudan. As the
report on the joint strategic review rightly observes,
“We have invested too much in Darfur over the last
decade and a half to risk it backsliding into conflict
due to a lack of resources” (S/2018/530, para. 70).
It is only through investment in recovery and
peacebuilding efforts that we can avert the possibility
of conflict relapse in Darfur. We hope that the request
from the President of the Republic of the Sudan,
expressing his interest in the Sudan’s being declared
eligible to receive funds from the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, will be accepted. The AU Peace
and Security Council has also supported that request,
18-17828

11/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and since members of the Peace and Security Council
are coming to New York next month, we hope that
they will engage the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission on the matter.
The other important aspect that needs a paradigm
shift is the approach to the Darfur peace process. We
see no reason for the Council not to have a unified
position on Abdul Wahid and his group. He is totally
uninterested in any peace process. We have been
briefed for quite some time, and have regrettably failed
to take any action in that regard. The bottom line is
that he should not be allowed to hold the peace process
hostage. He should face the appropriate measures for
his destructive role.
Although the remaining rebel groups have also
not shown any interest in ensuring peace in Darfur,
it is a public secret that those groups are engaged in
criminal activity in Libya and South Sudan, amassing
huge resources. The lack of commitment on the part
of the rebel groups definitely emanates from that fact
and appropriate pressure must be applied in order to
change their calculations. Otherwise, those groups will
pose a problem not only to the Sudan, but to the entire
region and the larger international community as well.
They should not be allowed to benefit from their illegal
activities in Libya and South Sudan, using the Darfur
peace process as a pretext. If they continue in their
refusal to meaningfully participate in the peace process,
the Council should deal with them as transnational
organized criminal groups, and not as Darfuri rebels.
Finally, we support a whole-of-system approach
to Darfur, as jointly recommended by the SecretaryGeneral and the AU Commission Chairperson, as well
as to peacekeeping activities in the most precarious
areas where the protection of civilians, humanitarian
support and mediation of local conflict remain
necessities to further the peace process, while also
investing substantively in peacebuilding, recovery
and development all over Darfur to further the peace
process there. We also support the redefined priorities
of UNAMID, based on that whole-of-system approach.
We hope that it will be taken into account in renewing
the mandate of UNAMID.
Finally, we support the extension of the mandate of
the Mission for another 12 months, and we look forward
to engaging constructively in the upcoming negotiations.
Mr. Djédjé (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Мy
delegation thanks Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for the quality

S/PV. 8283

of his briefing on the special report of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on the strategic review
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2018/530). The report informs
us of the developments and challenges in Darfur to
bring peace and stability to the region.
Мy delegation welcomes the weapons-collection
campaign and the gradual redeployment of State power
that have led to an improvement in the security situation
throughout Darfur. However, it must be noted that the
situation remains worrying in Jebel Marra, where
armed groups associated with the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid faction continue to carry out
criminal and destabilizing activities. Côte d’Ivoire
therefore calls on the international community to do
its utmost to halt the actions of those armed groups,
which could undermine the gains made in the area of
security. Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the extension of
the unilateral ceasefire of hostilities by the Government
of the Sudan and certain armed groups, and urges them
to commit themselves further by signing a permanent
ceasefire — a precondition for a definitive end to
the crisis.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, my
delegation notes that two major challenges remain,
in particular the issue of internally displaced persons
and the effects of climate change on the population’s
resilience capacity. With regard to the issue of
internally displaced persons, besides the lack of
infrastructure and limited access to basic social
services, problems related to land management and the
use of natural resources continue to prevent internally
displaced persons from returning home freely, safely
and with dignity. In that regard, my delegation is of the
view that the comprehensive implementation of land
management provisions, such as those stipulated in the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, will help to bring
about a permanent settlement to the land tenure issue.
Côte d’Ivoire encourages the Sudanese Government
to redouble its efforts to settle the land management
issue. We also call on the international community to
provide financial support to the Sudanese Government
so as to enable the various committees established
in accordance with the Doha Document to continue
activities that ensure the well-being of the people
of Darfur.

18-178285/12

S/PV.8283

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

My delegation is concerned about the negative
impact of climate change on agriculture and livestock
farming, both of which help to improve food security.
We call on the international community to meet the
funding needs of the 2018 Humanitarian Response Plan
for the Sudan.
At the political level, Côte d’Ivoire deplores the
fact that some armed groups have not signed the Doha
Document, which is having an adverse impact on the
peace process in Darfur and on the implementation of
the Document’s provisions. My country shares the view
of the Secretary-General with regard to the importance
of making a greater effort to encourage such groups to
take part in the peace process, based on the provisions
of the Doha Document, which is the only viable path to
peace in Darfur.
Côte d’Ivoire congratulates the Sudanese
Government on the progress that has led to a considerable
improvement in the security situation and improved
stability in Darfur, despite the current challenges.
My delegation welcomes the progress made on the
operational concept of UNAMID, which is focused on
peacekeeping in Jebel Marra and on achieving stability
and peacebuilding elsewhere in Darfur. It also notes
the findings of the strategic review of the Mission
conducted with the African Union Commission and
calls for the diligent implementation of the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations.
My delegation supports in particular the
recommendations on defining common priorities
and implementing relevant joint activities, in close
cooperation with the United Nations country team
within the framework of the transition. In the light of
its experience in the area of peacebuilding and the vital
support of the United Nations country team in Côte
d’Ivoire, my country maintains that such collaboration
could provide the right solutions and conditions required
to bring about a viable end to the crisis and UNAMID’s
exit. Its withdrawal should be gradual in order to ensure
that the protection of civilians is not jeopardized.
In addition, my delegation underscores the
importance of providing the necessary funding to the
country team to ensure the long-term implementation
of rapid recovery, development and peacebuilding
activities. Moreover, Côte d’Ivoire shares the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with
regard to the importance of reforming the security
sector, in accordance with the Doha Document and the
6/12

11/06/2018

principles outlined in the African Union Framework
on Security Sector Reform. As the Secretary-General
has stated, the implementation of the recommendations
will help to stabilize Darfur and bolster post-conflict
reconstruction efforts.
Once again, my country calls on the international
community to assist the Sudanese Government in its
efforts to provide an effective response to development
challenges in Darfur, in particular in the areas of
health, education and access to basic social services.
In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire supports the request of the
Sudanese Government for financing from the United
Nations Peacebuilding Fund in order to implement the
priorities outlined for the transition period.
In conclusion, my country calls on the Sudanese
Government, UNAMID, the United Nations country
team, the African Union, as well as all development
partners to work together for a lasting return to stability
and to prevent renewed conflict in Darfur.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and his entire team for their comprehensive and
detailed briefing.
We in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea welcome
the positive outcome of the joint efforts of the
Government of the Sudan, the African Union and the
United Nations. Their invaluable contribution to the
peace process has led to a considerable reduction in the
number of clashes between the Sudanese Government
and Darfur rebel groups and better protection for the
civilian population in Darfur. Such conditions have
enabled the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur to prepare to exit the area after
more than 10 years of intense conflict. We thank all
stakeholders that have contributed to the situation, in
particular the Governments of Qatar, Germany and
the United States as the main sponsors of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We invite all parties
to the conflict to cease hostilities and adhere to the
Doha Document.
Generally, it all points to a security situation that
appears to be more stable. We hope that such stability
can be sustained with the main aim of restoring peace
and fostering direct, earnest and inclusive dialogue. In
the light of such progress, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea commends the efforts of the Sudanese
Government and urges it to continue to work to restore
18-17828

11/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

normalcy and protect civilians, in particular the
most vulnerable.
We would like to underscore the progress made
with respect to the confiscation of weapons. Weapons
alone do not kill, but let us not fool ourselves — they
help considerably. It is therefore important to establish
a security sector in accordance with the guidelines set
by the African Union Framework on Security Sector
Reform. The trafficking and proliferation of small
arms and light weapons are key factors contributing
to insecurity and instability in the Central African
subregion, threatening the present and future of our
young people and our ability to build civil, functional
and modern societies. It is an issue that affects us directly
and we intend to address it during our membership of
the Council.
Despite the progress that has been made, it is clear
that the process is incomplete and that much remains to
be done. That is why we will continue to support and
commend the approach adopted by the African Union
and the United Nations to coordinate efforts, which
we hope will soon result in a positive outcome for the
Sudanese people. We would like to underscore that
while we commend efforts to develop an exit strategy,
we recommend that it be consensus-based, gradual,
flexible and realistic, in line with developments
on the ground, bearing in mind that the conflict is
inter-ethnic in nature and spurred by competition for
scarce resources in the area and clashes over lands on
which those resources are found. We believe that this
is another issue that must be resolved in order to end
the conflict. That is why we welcome State efforts in
eastern Darfur to establish a mechanism that would
determine and formalize land ownership rights through
the courts. We would like to see progress in that area.
Lastly, we would like to underscore our concerns
about the serious humanitarian situation currently
affecting more than 1 million people. Many of the
displaced now endure famine exacerbated by the
adverse impact of climate change and are in dire need of
food assistance. We therefore call on the international
community and the Security Council to work together
to adopt measures to resolve the horrific situation.
We believe that including the situation in Darfur
on the agenda of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission, as requested by the Government of the
Sudan, would be a good way to do so. We intend to
support that request during the next annual meeting
of the Peace and Security Council of the African

S/PV. 8283

Union and in the Security Council in July. We will
work with our colleagues to address those issues in
the upcoming mandate-renewal resolution. As our
Ethiopian colleagues stated, we hope the mandate will
be extended.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his comprehensive briefing
on the strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We
take this opportunity to commend the work that the
mission is carrying out on the ground. We welcome
the conclusions that the African Union and the United
Nations mention in the strategic review with respect
to the overall improvement in the security situation
in Darfur, which should make it possible to readapt
UNAMID and prepare for the withdrawal of the mission
in the next two years.
It is clear that the weapons-collection campaign and
the deployment of security forces that the Government
of the Sudan has conducted in recent years to ensure
stability in the area have made it possible to create the
necessary conditions for stability. It is vital to continue
to cooperate with these initiatives so that peacebuilding
activities can be carried out in a sustainable manner.
We also must promote the institutional capacity of the
security forces as well as the rule of law in the area
and make structural adjustments in the security sector
that will dovetail with prevention and reconstruction
activities following the conflict. We welcome the
decision of both the Government and armed groups
to unilaterally extend the ceasefire to all areas of
operations until 30 June and 6 August, respectively. It
is imperative, however, that at this stage steps be taken
to ensure that a permanent ceasefire is agreed.
The political situation clearly remains one of
the main challenges. We welcome the efforts of the
Government to promote the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and stress that the only
possible solution to the situation in the area is through
a political process that addresses the root causes of
the conflict, mainly conflicts over natural resources
and land ownership. In this regard, we welcome the
initiatives launched by United Nations agencies and
programmes and to assess the progress that has been
made in terms of land ownership.

18-178287/12

S/PV.8283

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We also highlight the fact that efforts must be
made to resolve differences on the Doha Document
and urge the non-signatory movements to enter into
a constructive dialogue with the Government so as to
bring about a definitive cessation of hostilities. We
reiterate that it is important for the Security Council to
consider the measures necessary to bring pressure to
bear on those that are undermining the peace process.
However, and despite the progress made in the
Sudan, the humanitarian situation there remains a
significant challenge. The living conditions of internally
displaced persons is extremely concerning, and the
cooperation of the international community is urgent in
order to ensure the implementation of the humanitarian
response plan for the Sudan developed by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID,
we commend the progress that has been made with the
successful culmination of phase one and with phase
two under way. We are pleased to note that the planned
withdrawal of UNAMID from certain sites has not led
to negative consequences. We stress the good relations
between the Government and UNAMID and urge them
to increase their cooperation so that the mission can
carry out its work without impediment.
In general terms, we believe that the strategic review
of UNAMID accurately reflects the current situation
and the short-, medium- and long-term challenges in
Darfur. We support the repositioning of the priorities
of the mission to focus more closely on support for the
political process, which is particularly important, and
to promote activities that will prevent conflict from
breaking out again and address comprehensively the
root causes of the conflict.
Mine-clearance activities, particularly the clearing
of explosive remnants of war, are essential to ensure
the safe return of internally displaced persons to their
homes and ensure the future safety of the mission.
It is clear that in order to ensure success in this new
phase, funding mechanisms must be created in order to
prevent the recurrence of conflict. Here the cooperation
of the international community will be vital to
promoting sustainable development in Darfur, building
the capacities of the country team and ensuring the
successful withdrawal of the Hybrid Operation.
Finally, we take this opportunity to express our
gratitude to and acknowledge the outstanding work done
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
8/12

11/06/2018

Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo; UNAMID; the United Nations
country team; and the members of African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel with a view to bringing
about sustainable peace and development in Darfur.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting and also to thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing
on the strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and
for the work he is carrying out along with his team.
Although what he has told us indicates that there has
been a significant improvement in the security situation
in Darfur, we must, however, express our concern at the
threats posed by certain militias that remain active to
the return of internally displaced persons to their places
of origin. The international community must redouble
its efforts to address humanitarian needs and to protect
the human rights of the more than 2 million internally
displaced persons in the Sudan. Specifically, in order
to bring about such return and, ultimately, sustainable
peace in Darfur, there is a pressing need to build
police capacity, promote the rule of law and provide
basic services such as water, food and health care. To
that end, over and above the achievement of relative
stability, there must be a commitment of all parties
to the conflict and the broadest possible participation
of the population in order to effectively deal with the
root causes of the crisis, promote inclusive institutions
that are able to resolve disputes and mitigate the threats
posed by climate change. We regret that despite the
efforts of the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel, it has still not been possible to reach agreement
with the armed groups that are not signatories to the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.
We regret also that the Property Claims and
Restitution Committee of the Voluntary Return and
Resettlement Commission was not able to complete
its work because of a lack of funding. We stress
that the distribution of land and natural resources,
including water, remains the main cause of conflict
between communities, particularly since global
warming is worsening the situation and leading to
increased desertification.
We welcome the fact that the phased withdrawal of
UNAMID from its team sites has not led to a reduction
in security in those areas. However, it is of concern that
there has been a reduction in the capacity to monitor
18-17828

11/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the humanitarian and human rights situation there. It
is also concerning that, as a result of the handover at
the team sites to formed police units, the current police
strength of only 140 officers is not sufficient to serve
the camps and support individual police officers.
Peru supports the proposed substantive investment
in peacebuilding, recovery and development in Darfur
in order to continue to promote the peace process.
We believe that the presence of the African Union
and the United Nations must adapt to the current
needs of the population. We therefore support the
new mission concept, which involves readjusting
UNAMID’s priorities in order to transition towards
withdrawal over a two-year period. In order to achieve
this goal, we would like to cite three elements key to
building sustainable peace in Darfur, including the
return of displaced persons to their places of origin
on the basis of a permanent agreement on a cessation
of hostilities between the Government and armed
groups, the full implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur and financial support from the
international community.
First, there must be fluid communication and
cooperation between UNAMID and the United
Nations country team, with a view to implementing
the stabilization and peacebuilding strategy agreed
upon by the Council. Secondly, we must ensure local
capacity-building and inclusive institutions in order to
provide security and judicial services and to promote
sustainable development. And finally, progress
must be made gradually, assessing the impact on the
population of the phased withdrawal of UNAMID. We
must avoid a rushed exit, which would undermine the
relative stability we have gained. On the other hand,
we hope that the withdrawal of the mission reflects the
attainment of sustainable peace.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We join others in
expressing our appreciation to Under-SecretaryGeneral Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation supports the recommendations of the
special report (S/2018/530) and would like to make the
following observations.
We are encouraged by the continuing improvement
in the security situation in Darfur, as well as the
overall reduction in intercommunal clashes and
criminal activities. The arms collection campaign
and the deployment of Government security forces
have contributed to the improved security situation.

S/PV. 8283

They have consolidated the Government’s authority in
Darfur and have created acceptable conditions for the
exit strategy of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
However, there is still insufficient progress in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur. My delegation welcomes the extension of
unilateral ceasefires by the Government and other
parties, and underscores the need for a permanent
ceasefire agreement to create an environment
conducive to peace talks. We call on all parties in
Darfur to meaningfully participate in an inclusive
political process led by the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel and supported by Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo. Otherwise, the Security
Council will need to consider appropriate measures
to increase the pressure on those who undermine the
peace process.
With regard to the upcoming extension of
UNAMID’s mandate, we would like to note the
progress in implementing phases one and two of the
reconfiguration of UNAMID and the absence of the
reported adverse impact of the drawdown. These
positive developments allow for UNAMID’s further
drawdown and its repositioning, which should prioritize
support for the peace process. It should also focus
on addressing the root causes of conflict, including
poverty, lack of basic services, drought and massive
harvest failures and on providing a durable solution for
internally displaced persons through existing planning
documents, including the UNAMID-United Nations
country team integrated strategic framework.
Like many others, above all the three African
members of the Security Council, we therefore support
the proposal for a whole-of-system approach for Darfur
with a new concept for UNAMID and a transition clause
providing a solution with a two-year frame through four
priority areas. Our delegation also supports the idea of
developing an action plan based on the provisions of the
Doha Document. The success of this concept, aimed
at preventing relapse and preparing for the mission’s
exit, will require a greater investment by the United
Nations system delivering as one United Nations. That
is necessary in order to streamline operations to meet
the greater demand in the light of the personnel and
resource constraints. The Government’s continued
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union, and its increased efforts aimed at improving
the effectiveness of land management, provisions of

18-178289/12

S/PV.8283

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

access to basic services, ensuring the right of return
and restitution of property, as well as increasing the
presence of police and rule-of-law institutions in the
areas of return are also critical.
Finally, we underscore the importance of the
development of a resource-mobilization strategy
that will ensure the long-term financial support for
sustaining peace in Darfur.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for his valuable briefing on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). I
wish to deliver the following remarks.
First, on the situation in Darfur, we welcome the
continued security stability in Darfur, as was mentioned
by Mr. Lacroix, as well as the positive impact of the
weapons collection campaign and the reduction of
intercommunal violence, despite some fighting on in
the Jebel Marra area where Abdul Wahid Nour militias
of the so-called the Sudan Liberation Army are present.
We welcome the efforts of the Sudanese Government to
ensure security and stability throughout Darfur.
Turning to the rule of law, including security and
judicial institutions, it is this area that is most in need of
capacity-building for consolidating peace by anchoring
justice and human rights. We reaffirm the importance
of the support of UNAMID to the local Sudanese
capabilities in this area.
Regarding the political process, Kuwait continues
to believe that the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
remains the cornerstone for discussions with all
non-signatory parties. The Doha Document remains
decisive in evaluating UNAMID’s performance.
Secondly, with respect to the exit strategy, we
welcome the contents of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/530) concerning the exit of UNAMID from
Darfur. We would like to see more discussions among
the Government of the Sudan, Member States and the
Secretariat over the course of this month to set out a new
mandate for the exit strategy, in line with the League of
Arab States decision taken during its Jerusalem summit
in April, which supports UNAMID’s exit strategy
for Darfur. The next two years will give the Council
the opportunity to make UNAMID’s mandate better
tailored to reflect the needs on the ground, based on the
Doha Document.
10/12

11/06/2018

Turning to support for the Sudan, one common
element to be discerned our consideration of the various
reports and the Secretariat’s briefings is the need to
assist that country in meeting its humanitarian needs or
to increase financial and moral support for sustaining
development there, with the aim of achieving our main
goal of sustaining peace.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reaffirms its
readiness to cooperate with the United Nations and
the Sudanese Government and to support their efforts
to strengthen stability in Darfur and to tackle the
root causes of the conflict so as to ensure that it does
not recur.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Sudan.
Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate your country, Mr. President, on
presiding over the Council this month. I would also
like to congratulate your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Poland, for her wise and effective
conduct of the Council’s work over the past month.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing, as well as the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) Commission for their report (S/2018/530),
which is before us today.
It has been a year since the Council adopted
resolution 2363 (2017), which announced the start of
the implementation of the exit strategy of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) from Darfur and its reconfiguration
to conform, qualitatively and quantitatively, with
developments on the ground. The situation has been
progressing daily in all areas, particularly security
and humanitarian. Those were the priorities of the
UNAMID mandate.
That progress has been reflected in more than eight
successive reports over the past year. They have all
underscored the progress achieved in Darfur. A number
of the Council’s members have also taken note of that
fact during their visits to Darfur on various occasions.
That proves the authenticity of the resolution and its
contents, as set forth in the provisions guiding the
18-17828

11/06/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

start of UNAMID’s exit strategy, while negotiating the
decision to extend UNAMID’s mandate by the end of
this month. I would like to draw the Security Council’s
attention to the following facts and information.
First, the Government of the Sudan intends to
continue all activities to promote lasting peace and
stability in Darfur.
Second, we will continue to implement the
weapons-collection campaign, which has demonstrated
its effectiveness by alleviating tensions and disputes
and by stabilizing the security situation in all states
of Darfur.
Third, we reaffirm that the issue of internally
displaced persons will remain a top priority for the
Government of the Sudan in the upcoming period. As
the Security Council knows, the projects announced
earlier by the Government underpin three elements that
require the assistance of the international community
in order for us to implement them. They all require
vast material and human resources. We look forward
to the genuine support of the international community
in that regard.
Fourth, we will pursue such exemplary cooperation
among the Sudan, the AU and the United Nations, in
particular the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Field Support. We would like to
underscore that the Peacebuilding Fund is also engaged
in promoting the current peacebuilding phase.
Fifth, the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
remains the only agreed political framework for
addressing the political issue. The Government of the
Sudan is therefore striving to implement its provisions
on the ground. In cooperation and coordination with
the sisterly State of Qatar, the sponsor of the Doha
Document, the Government is looking at ways and means
to implement the remaining provisions. In addition, we
are cooperating with the High-level Independent Panel
of the African Union and other partners to include
the non-signatories in the peace process. We must
emphasize that the international community should
pressure the armed groups that have not signed the
Doha Document to join the political process.
Sixth, we underscore that the Government of the
Sudan will continue to cooperate and coordinate with
UNAMID in the upcoming period in order to enable
the mission to smoothly fulfil its mandate and carry
out its tasks. We will cooperate with the United Nations

S/PV. 8283

country team in the Sudan, which, we hope, will receive
the necessary financial and human rights support to
discharge the duties entrusted to it by UNAMID.
Seventh, we must maintain our efforts to extend the
State’s control in Darfur and to deploy more police units
and rule of law institutions in all five states of Darfur.
The current situation in Darfur speaks for itself.
It proves the fact that peace has become tangible
throughout Darfur, even in the small pockets under
the control of the rebel Abdul Wahid movement.
Popular sentiment supports full reconciliation and
sustained peace.
The Government of the Sudan is fully aware of the
needs in the upcoming period, including the various
social cohesion and development programmes, as well
as the need to address the root causes of the conflict.
We once again emphasize the need for the international
community to provide the assistance necessary to
implement such programmes by means of direct
support or through the various United Nations agencies
or its country team in the Sudan. In that regard, we call
on donor countries to fulfil their previous pledges and
commitments. We would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for having agreed to provide the necessary
support through the Peacebuilding Fund. We also thank
friendly and sisterly countries for their ongoing support
to our people in Darfur.
We take this opportunity to call for unity and
consistency among all mechanisms set up by the
Council to help the Sudan to bring about lasting peace
in Darfur. The follow-up to the implementation of
resolution 1591 (2005) on imposing targeted sanctions
must be consistent with the Security Council resolve
to restore normality, as provided for in resolution 2363
(2017). In that regard, we propose a reduction in the
number of experts and the lifting of the military ban in
Darfur. There are two options with regard to the listed
individuals, namely, either to delist them from the
sanctions list or to list the rebel Abdul Wahid Nour in
implementation of the resolution, which warned about
his designation on the sanctions list.
The current situation is testament to the importance
of empowering the Sudanese armed forces to lead and to
have full control of entire Darfur region, thereby filling
the gaps left following the withdrawal of UNAMID.
That is why it is imperative to lift the arms embargo
imposed on Darfur as soon as possible.

18-1782811/12

S/PV.8283

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, we commend the comprehensive and
concerted efforts made to conclude the peace process in
Darfur. We once again welcome the new peacebuilding
era, which will bring development and thus an end to
the conflict. My delegation thanks UNAMID for its
efforts in various areas, and peacekeepers for their
sacrifices over the past years. We would also like to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries. We
reiterate our Government’s readiness to cooperate with

12/12

11/06/2018

all regional and international partners on UNAMIDrelated matters until the last of its components leaves
my country after having brought about peace and
stability in Darfur.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

18-17828
