A /68/PV.73

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

73rd plenary meeting

Wednesday, 29 January 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)

with agenda item 14, at its 50th plenary meeting, on
11 November 2013, and adopted resolution 68/18, at its
59th plenary meeting, on 4 December 2013.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations

I now give the floor to the representative of
Hungary to introduce the draft resolution A/68/L.36.

Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/716)

Mr. Körösi (Hungary): The history of the
Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics is
closely related to the part of the world I come from,
in particular to Hungary, and the time of democratic
transition, when the production of appropriate and
reliable data became apparent. In response to the
demand, the Conference of European Statisticians
developed and adopted the Fundamental Principles
of Official Statistics, in 1992. After the adoption of
the very same set of Principles by the United Nations
Statistical Commission, in 1994, they became known
as the United Nations Fundamental Principles of
Official Statistics. The Statistical Commission session
in 2011 reviewed the Principles and agreed that no
revision of the 10 principles was necessary; only the
preambular part was slightly revised. On 24 July
2013, the Economic and Social Council endorsed the
Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics as they
were first adopted by the Statistical Commission
almost 20 years ago. The Economic and Social Council
recommended them further to the General Assembly
for endorsement.

The President: In document A/68/176, the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that 18 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.
I would like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A Member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the General
Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or
exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it
for the preceding two full years”.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
takes note of the information contained in document
A/68/716?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/68/L.36)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 9, jointly

Why do we need the Principles to be reconfirmed
in a General Assembly draft resolution? The post2015 agenda will require a data revolution to make
sure that we can evaluate progress. Statisticians view
such a revolution as a combination of the application

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-22023 (E)

*1422023*

A/68/PV.73

of national circumstances and a reliance on data of
good quality that are accessible, reliable, user-friendly
and supportive of the implementation of sustainable
development.
Hungary, which currently chairs the Statistical
Commission, took on the role of bringing the attention
of the General Assembly to the Fundamental Principles.
Consultations were held in December 2013 with
Member States, which confirmed that the Fundamental
Principles of Official Statistics should be adopted by
the General Assembly as agreed in prior years.
Hungary thanks the numerous sponsors for their
support of draft resolution A/68/L.36.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.36, entitled
“Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Gettu (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those representatives listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/68/L.36: Argentina, Montenegro, the
Republic of Moldova and San Marino.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/68/L.36?
Draft resolution A/68/L.36 was adopted (resolution
68/261).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
9.
Agenda item 11 (continued)
Sport for peace and development: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Solemn appeal by the President of the
General Assembly (A/68/710)
The President: I shall now read out the President’s
solemn appeal.
“The ancient Greek tradition of ekecheiria, or
Olympic Truce, born in the eighth century B.C.,
serves as a hallowed principle of the Olympic

2/3

29/01/2014

Games. In 1992, the International Olympic
Committee renewed this tradition by calling upon
all nations to observe the Truce.
“Through its resolution 48/11 of 25 October
1993, the General Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce from the seventh day
before the opening to the seventh day following the
closing of each Olympic Games. This appeal was
renewed in the Millennium Declaration.
“In the 2005 World Summit Outcome, our
leaders emphasized that ‘sport can foster peace
and development’ and encouraged the General
Assembly to foster a dialogue and agreed proposals
for a plan of action on sport and development.
“On 3 November 2005, the General Assembly
held a plenary debate on the agenda item entitled
‘Sport for peace and development’ and also adopted,
with universal support, resolution 60/8, entitled
‘Building a peaceful and better world through sport
and the Olympic ideal’, deciding to consider this
item every two years in advance of each Summer
and Winter Olympic Games.
“To this end, on 6 November 2013, the
General Assembly adopted resolution 68/9. In that
resolution, the Assembly urged Member States
to observe the Olympic Truce individually and
collectively, within the framework of the Charter
of the United Nations, during the period from the
seventh day before the start of the XXII Olympic
Winter Games, on 7 February 2014, until the
seventh day following the end of the XI Paralympic
Winter Games, on 16 March 2014.
“The Olympic movement aspires to contribute
to a peaceful future for all humankind through
the educational value of sport, in particular youth.
The Games will bring together athletes from all
parts of the world in the greatest of international
sports events as a means to promote peace, mutual
understanding and goodwill among nations and
peoples — goals that are also part of the founding
values of the United Nations.
“As an expression of these common objectives,
the International Olympic Committee has decided
to fly the United Nations flag at Olympic Park.
The United Nations system and the International
Olympic Committee have strengthened their
mutual cooperation and support through joint

14-22023

29/01/2014

endeavours in such fields as human development,
poverty alleviation, humanitarian assistance, health
promotion, HIV and AIDS prevention, child and
youth education, gender equality, peacebuilding
and sustainable development.
“I welcome the leadership of Olympic and
Paralympic athletes in promoting peace and human
understanding through sport and the Olympic
ideal, and the commitment made by various States
Members of the United Nations to developing
national and international programmes that promote
peace and conflict resolution and the Olympic
and Paralympic values through sport and through
culture, education and sustainable development.
“As President of the General Assembly at
its sixty-eighth session, I solemnly appeal to all
Member States to demonstrate their commitment
to the Olympic Truce for the 2014 Sochi Olympic
and Paralympic Games, and to undertake concrete

A/68/PV.73

actions at the local, national, regional and world
levels to promote and strengthen a culture of peace
and harmony based on the spirit of the Truce.
Referring to the original tradition of the Olympic
Truce practised in ancient times, as described in
resolution 68/9, I also call upon all warring parties
of current armed conflicts around the world to
boldly agree to true mutual ceasefires for the
duration of the Olympic Truce, thus providing an
opportunity to settle disputes peacefully.”
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of the solemn appeal in connection with the
observance of the Olympic Truce?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
11.
The meeting rose at 3.15 p.m.

14-220233/3
