General All84mlhly-Thirtieth SeNion

4

Rights of the Palestinian People: .AFGHANISTAN, CuBA, CYPRUS,
GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, GUINEA, HUNGARY, INDIA, INDONESIA, LA.o PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, MADAGASCAR,
MALAYSIA, MALTA, PAKlSTAN, ROMANIA, SENEGAL, SIERRA LEONE,
TUNISIA, TURKEY, UKRAINIAN SovmT SoCIALIST REPUBLIC and
YUGOSLAVIA.

3385 (XXX). Admission of 111&-(;omoros to
membership in the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Havin8 received the recommendation of the Security
rouncil of 17 0ctober 1975 th~t the Comoros should
be ·a.dmitted to membershi,p in the United Nations, 14
Having considered the application for membership of
the Comoros, 15
Reaffirming the necessity of respecting the unity and
territorial integrity of the Comoro Archipelago, composed of the islands of Anjouan, Grande-Comore,
Mayotte and Mohéli, as emphasized in resolution 3291
(XXIX) of 13 December 1974 and other resolutions
of the General Assembly,
Decides to admit the Comoros to membership in the
United N ations.
2402nd plenary meeting
12 November 1975
3386 (XXX). Reporl of the International
Atomie Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
H aving received the report of the Intemational Atomic
Energy Agency to the General Assemhly for the year
1974/1975 and the addendum thereto, 16
A ware that the statement of the Director General of
the Intemational Atomic Energy Agency of 12 November 1975 17 provides additional information on the main
developments in the Agency's activities,
Recognizing that in the course of 1975 it was made
abundantly clear that further measures should be taken
towards the full realization of the goal of an intemational non-proliferation policy,
l. Takes note of the report of the Intemational
Atomic Er.ergy Agency and of the addendum thereto;
2. No tes that the annual report of the lnternational
Atomic Energy Agency will henceforth be based on the
calendar yt:ar for ,the purpose of simplifying the evaluation of programme implementation;
3. W e/comes the action taken by the Intemational
Atomic Energy Agency to increase further the 1evel or
the target for voluntary contributions to ilie general
fuoo of $5. 5 million m 1976 ,and the oontiinuing increase
of total contributions of member States towards the
realization of targets;
4. Notes with appreciation the iincreased and continuing emphasis which the lntemational Atornic Energy
Agency places in its technical as~istance programme on
the introduction of nuclear power and its teohnology in
14 Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 22, document A/10302.
111 A/10293-S/11848. For the printed text, see Ofjicial Records
of the Security Council, Thirtieth Y ear, Supplement for October, November and December 1975.
16 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report,
1 July 1974-30 June 1975 (Vienna, July 1975) apd corrigendum and addendum; transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by notes of the Secretary-General (A/10168 and
Corr.1 and Add.1).
17 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Ses.sion, Plenary Meetings. 2403rd meeting, paras. 2-40.

developing countries for the peaceful needs of these
countries, in particular the series of training courses on
nuclear power project planning and implementation;
5. Notes with satisfaction the intensification of work
of the Intemational Atornic Energy Agency, in accordance with its statute, in the fields of reactor safety and
reliability, the disposal of radio-active waste, the safeguarding and physical protection of nuclear facilities
and materials, and the oomprehensive studies of fuel
cycle facilities, including the possibility of establishing
regioool. fuel cycle sefVlioes;
6. Commends the lnternational Atornic Energy
Agency for its implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 2829 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971 and
3213 (XXIX) of 5 November 1974 regarding nuclear
explosions for peaceful purposes and, in µiis connexion,
for establishing the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Nuclear
Explosions for Peaceful Purposes to identify possible
applications of peacefuJ n),!clear explosions and to study
safety, environmental and economic aspects as well as
the, legal implications and the procedures for assistance
in oarrying out peacefuJ. explooion projects;
7. Urges ali States to continue to co-operate with
the lntemational Atomic Energy Agency and to take ali
necessary measures to enhance the recognized efforts of
the Agency in the fulfilment of its tasks in ithe various
fields of the peaceful uses of atomic energy;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to·the
Director-Gdrteral of the Intemational Atomic Energy
Agency the reoords of the thirtieth session of the General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
2403rd plenary meeting
12 November 1975
3391 (XXX). Restitution of works of art
to eountries vietims of expropriation
The General Assembly,
A ware of the paramount aims of the United Nations
and particularly of its faith in fundamental human rights
and in the dignity and worth of the human person,
Recalling ,the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 18
Recalling the Convention on the Means of Prohibiting
and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer
of Ownership of Cultural Property, adopted by the
General Conference of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization at its sixteenth session, on 14 November 1970, 19
Recalling General Assembly resolution 3187
(XXVIII) of 18 December 1973 conceming the restitution of works of art to countries victims of expropriation, in which the Assembly, ínter alia, invited the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the United
Nations Educational, Scieati:fic and Cultural Organization and Member States, to subrnit a report to the Assembly at its thirtieili session on the progress achieved,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 2º
Noting with interest the steps taken by certain States
towards the restitution of works of art to countries
victims of expropriation in accordance with resolution
3187 (XXVIII),
18 Resolution 1514 (XV).
19 United Nations Educational,

Scientific and Cultural Organization, Records of the General Con/ erence, Sixteenth Susion, vol. I, Resolutions, pp. 135-141.
20 A/1O224 .

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Stressing that the cultural heritage of a people conditions the flowering of its artistic values and its over-all
development, which are tokens of its authenticity,
Convinced that the promotion of national culture can
enhance a people's ability to understand the culture and
civilization of other peoples and thus can have a
favourable impact on intemational co-operation,
l. Affirms that the prompt restitution to a country of
1ts objets d'art, monuments, museum pieces and manuscripts by another country, without charge, is calculated
to strengthen intemaitional co-operation inasmuch as it
constitutes just reparation for damage done;
2. Recognizes in this connexion the special obligations incumbent upon those countries which had access
to such valuable objects, either through particular claims
or on other pretexts, as a result of their rule over or
their occupation of a foreign territory;
3. Calls upon all States concemed to protect and
safeguard the works of art whioh are still in Territories
under their domination;
4. Invites Member States to ratify the Convention on
the Means of Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit ilmport, Export and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural
Property, adopted by the General Gonference of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization in 1970;
5. Looks forward to the meeting of the Commibtee
of Experts to Study the Question of the Restitution of
Works of Art., established by the United Nations Educationa], ScientHic and Cultural Organization, to be held
at Cairo early in 1976, aind expresses the hope tha,t the
Committee will adopt adequate measures for the restitution of works of art to countries victirns of expropriatioo;
6. Calls upon those States concerned which have not
already done so to proceed to the restitution of objets
d'art, monume:nts, museum pieces, manuscripts and
documents to their countries of origin, such restitution
being calculated to strengthen intemational understanding and co-operation;
·
7. Invites the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and Member States, to submit a report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
progress achieved.
2410th plenary meeting
19 J\{ovember 1975
1

3395 (XXX). Question of Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having co~dered the question of Cyprus,
H aving heard the statements in the debate and taking
note of the report of the Special Political Committee,21
Noting with concern that four rounds of talks between
the representatives of the two communities in pursuance
of Security Council resolution 367 (1975) of 12 March
1975 have not yet led to a mutually acceptable
settlement,
Deeply concerned at the continuation of the crisis in
Cyprus,
Mindful of the need to solve the Cyprus crisás without
further delay by peaceful means in accordance with the
purposes and principies of the United Nations,
1. Reaffirms the urgent need for continued efforts for
the effeotive implementation in all its parts of General
· .11 Otlic:ial Records of the Gen~ral A~embly, Thlrtleth Seanon, A.nne:xes, agenda ítem 125, d ~ i i .A/10351.º

5

Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November
1974 endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution
365 (1974) of 13 December 1974 and, to that end,
2. Calls once again upan all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and nonalignment of •the Republic of Cyprus and to refrain
from ali acts and interventions directed against it;
3. Demands the withdrawal without further deliay of
ali foreign armed forces and foreign military presence
and personnel from the Republic of Cyprus, and the
cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs;
4. Calls upon the parties concemed to undertake
urgent measures to facilitate the voluntary retum of ali
refugees to their homes in safety and to settle all other
aspects of the refugee problem;
5. Calls for the immediate resumption in a meaningful and constructive manner of the negotiations between
the represootiatives of the twp communities, under the
auspices of the Secretary-General, to be conducted
freely on an equail. footing with a view to reach~ng a
mutually acceptable agreement based on their fundamental and legitimate rights;
6. Urges all parties to refrain from unilateral actions
in contravention of resolution 3212 (XXIX), including
cbanges in the demographiic struoture of Cyprus;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue bis
role in the negotiations between the representatives of
the two communities;
8. A lso requests the Secretary-General to bring the
P!esent resolution to t_he '.attention of the Security Counctl and to report on 1ts 1mplementation as soon as appropriate and not later than 31 March 1976;
9. Calls upan ali parties to continue to co-operate
fuhly with the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus;
10. Decides to remain seized of this question.
2413th plenary meeting
20 November 1975
3412 (XXX), Co-operation between the United
Nations and the Organization of African
Unity

The General Assembly,
Recalling ali its previous resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization., of
African Unity, including in particular resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Govemment of the
Organization of African Unity at its twelfth ordinary
session, held at Kampala from 28 July to 1 August
1975,22
.
Taking into account the important statement made
by ithe current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads
of ~tate ·and Govemment of the Organization of African
Umty at the 2370th plenary meeting of ,the General
Assembly on 1 Ootober 1975,
IVoting with satisfaction the continued efforts of the
Organization of African Unity ,and die Unitecl Nations
the specializ.ed agencies and other organizations withi~
the United Nations system to help solve the serious
problems which priincipally affect southem Afrioa,
A ware of the urgent oeed to give increased assistance·
to the victims of coloniallsm, racial discrimination and
112 A/10297, anncx II.
