S/2004/709

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 September 2004
Original: English

Letter dated 2 September 2004 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 12
December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I have the honour to convey the attached report
on the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
covering the period from 1 January to 30 June 2004.
I should be grateful if you would bring this to the attention of the members of
the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-49909 (E) 080904

*0449909*

S/2004/709

Annex
Letter dated 30 July 2004 from the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the
European Union to the Secretary-General of the United Nations
In accordance with the statement by the President of the United Nations
Security Council of 12 December 2002 (S/PRST/2002/33), I attach a report on the
activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
covering the six months from 1 January to 30 June 2004. I propose to provide the
Security Council with a written update on the progress of the European Union Police
Mission every six months as appropriate. I would be grateful if you would transmit
this report to the President of the United Nations Security Council.
(Signed) Javier Solana

2

S/2004/709

Enclosure
Report of the Secretary-General and High Representative for the
Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union on
the activities of the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina covering the period from 1 January to 30 June 2004
Introduction
The European Union Police Mission (EUPM) is the first operation undertaken
under the European Security and Defence Policy. It was initiated as a follow-on
mission to the United Nations International Police Task Force (IPTF) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
This report is the third update by the Secretary-General and High
Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the European Union
to the United Nations Security Council on the activities of the EUPM and covers the
period from 1 January to 30 June 2004.
Status
As at 30 June 2004 EUPM numbered 879 personnel of whom 476 are seconded
police officers, 67 international civilians and 336 Bosnia and Herzegovina national
staff. Twenty-four EU member States participate in EUPM (426 police officers)
together with nine non-European Union contributing States (50 police officers).1
Following the sudden and tragic death of the first Head of Mission,
Commissioner Sven Frederiksen, on 26 January 2004, Commissioner Kevin Carty
from Ireland was appointed as Head of Mission by the Council and started his duties
on 1 March 2004.2
Mandate and programmes
The European Union Police Mission began operations on 1 January 2003 with
a mission to establish sustainable policing arrangements under Bosnia and
Herzegovina ownership in accordance with best European and international practice,
thereby raising current Bosnia and Herzegovina police standards.3 It is a nonexecutive mission and achieves its objectives through mentoring, monitoring and
inspecting police managerial and operational capacities of the police forces of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The European Union Police Mission conducts its activities through co-location
alongside the commanders of the various police forces at medium and senior levels.
Based on the four strategic priorities (police independence and accountability,
organized crime and corruption, financial viability and sustainability, institutionand capacity-building at management level), the Mission’s seven core programmes
__________________
1 The nine non-European Union contributing States are Bulgaria, Canada, Iceland, Norway,

Romania, the Russian Federation, Switzerland, Turkey and Ukraine.
2 Council of the European Union decision of 23 February 2004 on the appointment of the Head of

Mission/Police Commissioner of the European Union Police Mission (2004/188/CFSP).
3 Council of the European Union Joint Action of 11 March 2002 on the European Union Police

Mission (2002/210/CFSP), annex, Mission Statement for EUPM.

3

S/2004/709

(five thematic and two institutional), subdivided into some 43 projects, continued to
be implemented during the reporting period.
The Police Steering Board, consisting of the top stakeholders of the police
forces,4 and its working groups continued to mature over the last six months and
showed increasing effectiveness in assessing the needs, designing and approving
projects, and evaluating their implementation. The chairmanship has been
successfully handed over to the Mission’s local counterparts, with EUPM still
fulfilling the role of a secretariat for the Board.
Notable achievements in relation to the Mission’s seven programmes during
the reporting period include the following:
Crime police (Programme One). From the start of EUPM the importance of
major and organized crime has been recognized and highlighted. EUPM has
introduced an intelligence-led approach to policing that has been recognized as
fitting best European practice and is enabling Bosnia and Herzegovina to fight major
and organized crime more effectively and coherently. Crucial to this has been the
development of the National Intelligence Model, which has been introduced
countrywide. It has become increasingly effective at lower levels (public security
centre, canton, entities) and the information gleaned at this level will flow upwards
to feed the newly created State Investigation and Protection Agency (SIPA) (see
below). Intelligence and the use of the 4x4 system5 is an important start but it needs
to be used effectively. To this end good progress has been made in the fine-tuning of
the Criminal Investigation Departments (CID) in the different police forces.
Standardizing the CID system across the entities and Brcko District has paved the
way for the State-level agencies (SIPA, State Border Service (SBS) and Interpol
working under the umbrella of the Ministry of Security to work more effectively
with these lower-level bodies.
Together with other stakeholders, EUPM set up a free crime hotline, called
Krimo Lovci (Crime Catchers) in March 2004. Citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
can now, free of charge and anonymously, report any crime to local police officers
monitored by EUPM. Bosnian citizens have already taken advantage of this
opportunity: in the first three months, on average, 19 calls a day have been received.
Many of the calls resulted in arrests, recovery of property and criminal charges. The
crime hotline is therefore adding significantly to the generation of usable
information and its full integration into the intelligence network will only further
enhance its value.
Criminal justice, now police education and training (Programme Two).
This programme was aimed at finalizing the establishment of the State judicial
police and the two court police forces at entity level. Fourteen months after the
Mission’s start most of the projects covered by the programme were successfully
concluded. The supervision of the newly established bodies has now been placed
under Programme One (Crime police).
__________________
4 The Bosnia and Herzegovina Police Steering Board comprises the Director of SIPA, the Director

and Chief of Service of SBS, the Director of Police of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republika Srpska Police Director, the Brcko District Police Chief and the
EUPM Head of Mission.
5 A method of identifying the quality and source of information provided to or obtained by the
police for use in the intelligence field.

4

S/2004/709

In close consultation with local authorities, a new programme focusing on a
police education and training system has been launched. The subject holds strategic
importance as it affects the sustainability of the police forces in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. A harmonized police education system needs developing alongside the
process of police restructuring in order to support and consolidate the overall
institution-building efforts. In this context, harmonizing and streamlining the
institutional assets of police training centres will ensure suitable coordination.
Internal affairs (Programme Three). Seven professional standards units (in
cantons 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10) and nine public complaints bureaux (in cantons 1, 2,
3, 6, 7, 8 and 10, in the Brcko District and in Republika Srspka) were established.
Police administration (Programme Four). EUPM mentoring is helping the
police to create their operational budget lines within the Ministry of the Interior
budgets, through constant monitoring and training on strategic budget planning.
Closely related to financial sustainability, a number of police bodies have started
implementing financial plans to rationalize the use of resources so as to produce
budgetary savings.
Public order and security (Programme Five). Major public events guidelines,
aimed at defining a number of principles deemed necessary to prevent serious crowd
disturbances during major public events, have successfully passed the Steering
Board procedures and are now being implemented.
State Border Service (Programme Six). The State Border Service has
continued to robustly enforce its mandate. During the reporting period, for the first
time, four persons indicted for war crimes were arrested by SBS while attempting to
cross the border. Those arrests constitute an additional step in the development of
the State Border Service as a modern and effective border police. In addition, the
State Border Service has intensified its cooperation with SFOR and other entitybased police forces. They now conduct regular joint border operations. A new law
providing SBS a more solid basis is currently under discussion.
State Investigation and Protection Agency (Programme Seven). This
programme saw significant developments in the reporting period. In order for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to meets its international obligations to fight major and
organized crime, money-laundering, drugs and arms trafficking, the powers of the
existing State Information and Protection Agency6 needed to be expanded.
After five months of work in close cooperation between the Office of the High
Representative and EUPM, as well as with local stakeholders in the Consultative
Task Force, a package of laws was submitted to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Council of Ministers on 4 February 2004. On 11 March 2004 the Council of
Ministers approved the SIPA legislative package before sending it to the
Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina for approval. The package of
laws gave SIPA executive powers and enhanced responsibility for key areas in the
fight against organized crime.
Technical amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Criminal Procedure
Code and Law on Civil Service were also necessary to harmonize those laws with
the other SIPA laws. All laws were adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of
__________________
6 The new law on SIPA changed its name from State Information and Protection Agency to State

Investigation and Protection Agency.

5

S/2004/709

Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period and have now come into effect
or will do so shortly.
Police restructuring
A functional review commissioned by the European Commission on the
current police structures and finalized at the end of May concluded that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has too many levels of policing and identified a number of different
options for the restructuring process. Regardless of which model of policing is
finally chosen, it is clearly evident that many elements of police management and
administration need to be centralized and standardized. New systems for the
management of human and financial resources must be identified and implemented.
This upcoming police restructuring will therefore be totally compatible with the
current EUPM programmes.
Considerable work by the Office of the High Representative in close
coordination with EUPM in preparing a mechanism to address those imminent
questions was performed during the reporting period. The Chairman of the Council
of Ministers, Adnan Terzic, called for a Police Restructuring Commission in May
2004. The High Representative/European Union Special Representative, Lord
Ashdown, undertook the provision of an international Chairperson. The official
launch of the Commission is due early in July. The High Representative/European
Union Special Representative has made it clear that, owing to the failure of the
Republika Srspka authorities and the Republika Srspka Ministry of the Interior in
particular to arrest persons indicted for war crimes and the failure of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to join the NATO Partnership for Peace, the task of the Commission
will be to produce recommendations for a single and effective police structure for
the whole of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
EUPM will continue to be fully engaged in the restructuring process alongside
the local authorities. The EUPM Commissioner will serve as a member of the
Commission, while the Mission will second personnel to the Commission’s
secretariat. The work of the Commission should be completed by 31 December
2004.
Challenges
It should be noted that the implementation of the Mission’s programmes
continues to be hampered by the issue of legal challenges to the outcome of the
UNMIBH/IPTF certification process. During the reporting period, challenges before
local courts upon the dismissals implemented by local ministries, subsequent to
decisions issued by IPTF, have continued. This period also saw some verdicts in
favour of the plaintiffs. Pursuant to the Security Council presidential statement,7 the
Office of the High Representative and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
of the Secretariat continue to hold talks on the way forward with a view of finding a
satisfactory solution.
Outlook
As the European Union Police Mission enters the second half of its mandate, it
will continue apace with the implementation of its programmes.
__________________
7 S/PRST/2004/22 of 25 June 2004.

6

S/2004/709

Following developments during the first half of its mandate, notably the
establishment of SIPA as a law enforcement agency, the formation of the Police
Restructuring Commission and the need for increased EUPM engagement in
assisting the local authorities’ fight against organized crime, additional resources
will continue to be allocated to these key areas of police development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is foreseen, at this early stage, that EU engagement in these areas
may be required after 2005, in order to implement the results of the Police
Restructuring Commission and further assist the development of SIPA and the
capacity of Bosnia and Herzegovina to fight organized crime.
The arrival of a military component of a European Security and Defence
Policy mission at the beginning of 2005, as a follow-on to SFOR (see Security
Council resolution 1551 (2004)), will further increase European Union coherence
and cooperation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As part of the European Union’s
comprehensive approach towards Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUPM will play a
notable part, especially in relation to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities’ fight
against organized crime, under the coordination of the European Union Special
Representative, with the substantial support of the delegation of the European
Commission, in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s path towards membership in the
European Union.

7
