A/63/PV.85

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

85

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 3 June 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Cujba
(Republic of Moldova), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 107 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/63/L.8/Rev.1)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly held the debate on agenda item
107 jointly with agenda items 44 and 112 at the 51st
plenary meeting, on 17 November 2008. Members will
also recall that the Assembly adopted draft resolutions
A/63/L.27, A/63/L.25/Rev.1 and A/63/L.64, at its 51st,
68th and 73rd plenary meetings, respectively.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Nauru, who will introduce draft resolution
A/63/L.8/Rev.1.
Ms. Moses (Nauru): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific small island developing States
represented at the United Nations, namely the
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Palau,
Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the Marshall
Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga,
Vanuatu, and my own country, Nauru.
It is a great honour for me to be here today to
introduce our draft resolution, entitled “Climate change
and its possible security implications”, contained in
document A/63/L.8/Rev.1. Since the issuance of the

document, the following delegations have joined us as
sponsors: Afghanistan, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Barbados, Belarus, Belize, Benin, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, Comoros, Dominica,
Gabon, the Gambia, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Kiribati,
Madagascar,
Mauritius,
Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, the United States of America and
Uruguay.
During the course of the past year, the sponsors
of this resolution have involved the international
community in extensive discussions on the security
implications of climate change. We appreciate very
much the support we have received from the members
of the international community. Our particular
gratitude goes to our fellow sponsors, and to Indonesia,
which helped find a compromise text that will advance
the international discussions on the matter of climate
change and its possible security implications. In the
light of the introduction of draft resolution
A/63/L.8/Rev.1, we hereby withdraw draft resolution
A/63/L.8, entitled “Security and climate change”.
We also thank the Like-Minded Group and the
other participants active in the informal negotiations.
They have all helped to enrich the discussion on this
issue and have been instrumental in constructing this
text.
Our special thanks goes out to the President of
the General Assembly for his help in advancing our
issues and for convening this groundbreaking meeting

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-35766 (E)

*0935766*

A/63/PV.85

of the Assembly. We stand here at a historic moment —
a confluence of firsts. This is both the first draft
resolution for the Pacific small island developing
States (Pacific SIDS) and the first General Assembly
draft resolution on the security implications of climate
change.
To understand the backdrop of the draft
resolution, I wish to briefly talk first about the Pacific,
a region that has been relentlessly threatened by the
adverse impacts of climate change.
The islands of the Pacific SIDS range from
Nauru, the world’s smallest island nation, which covers
only 21 square kilometres, to Papua New Guinea, the
second largest island in the world, which covers about
309,000 square kilometres. Tuvalu, made up of four
reef islands and five true atolls, is only 26 square
kilometres. Tuvalu is the fourth smallest country in the
world and only one tenth the size of Washington, D.C.
There can be no doubt that most of our islands are very
tiny indeed.
The vulnerability of our islands results from the
small size of our homelands, coupled with the volume
of the great ocean that surrounds us. Scientists have
predicted that that ocean will continue to rise at an
increasing rate. The Pacific Ocean, in which we have
lived for centuries, will eventually leave little of our
homelands behind if urgent action is not taken.
May I reiterate the sentiments of the SecretaryGeneral at the meeting of the Pacific Forum leaders in
Niue, expressed in a statement delivered on his behalf,
that “climate change is not science fiction … it is real
and present”.
While it is anticipated that most nations will
ultimately suffer the adverse effects of climate change,
small island States, including the Pacific SIDS, are
already grappling with dire and immediate impacts
today. The impacts on our nations include the
inundation of coastal areas, where the majority of our
people live, the submergence of islands, loss of
freshwater supplies, saltwater intrusion, flooding,
drought, damaged crops and failure of agriculture,
diminution of biodiversity, destruction of critical
infrastructure, and a substantial increase in the
incidence of serious diseases. In many cases, those
impacts will ultimately render Pacific island nations
uninhabitable, destroying our unique and ancient
cultures.

2

As the rest of the world continues to debate the
security implications of climate change, for our
peoples the problem is astoundingly real. And whilst
some countries may have the resources to mitigate and
transfer their people to safety during times of natural
disaster, we do not have that luxury. Our citizens,
literally, have nowhere to run. Communities on
drowning islands throughout the Pacific are faced with
a looming homelessness crisis due to rising sea levels.
For some, the only viable option is to migrate. While
many have already relocated, more are expected to
follow as more of our islands eventually submerge.
Let us imagine a country submerging as a whole;
let us consider its territorial sovereignty, its population
and its Government. Those are fundamental
considerations, which, under international law, define
one’s status as a State. Some of our Pacific countries
are in danger of losing their populations and their land
as a whole. They will cease to be States.
Never before has a United Nations Member State
disappeared. Now we are faced with the threat of
losing many owing to the adverse effects of climate
change. Let us consider a country that has been deeply
affected by severe drought, can no longer sustain itself
because its hydropower is non-operational and its
drinking water non-existent, and can no longer produce
crops to feed its people. Let us consider a country that
has too often been washed over by floods and affected
by other natural disasters that have taken away every
bit of hope that they have for their future. It is
important to realize that there will come a time when
no amount of aid will be able to insulate countries from
the impacts of climate change. We will all suffer
sooner or later. No country is immune to the impacts of
climate change, and the smallest of the SIDS will be
the first.
Clearly, the survival of States, their sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and the impact on their
neighbours are matters of international peace and
security. The melting of glaciers and the warming of
the atmosphere and the oceans will have wide-ranging
effects. Droughts, floods and other forms of extreme
weather will become more frequent, threatening food
supplies. Plants and animals that cannot adjust will die
out. Sea levels are rising and will continue to do so,
forcing hundreds of thousands of people in coastal
zones to migrate.

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

Recent climate studies have shown that the pace
of climate change is increasing and that the effects are
sometimes worse than predicted. In only the past four
years, scientists have revised predictions of an ice-free
summer Arctic Ocean from 2105 to 2070 to 2039 to
2013. Terrifyingly, some climatic studies have begun to
suggest that the worst-case scenarios of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change may be
too conservative. These trends indicate that we may be
facing a climate emergency far sooner than we thought.
Addressing the security implications of climate change
is overdue and the time to act is now.
Against that background, let me now introduce
the draft resolution.
The draft resolution is simple and genuine. First
and foremost, it refers to the security implications of
the adverse impacts of climate change, which are
already being felt in our region. Resettlements are
already under way in the Pacific. The adoption of the
draft resolution will prove that we are seriously
concerned not only about the global environment but,
more importantly, about the survival of whole
populations and the existence of their lands, from
which they derive their sense of belonging and identity.
The draft resolution looks at the adverse effects
of climate change in a holistic manner. It points to the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Second Committee,
as well as to the purposes of the United Nations
enshrined in Article 1 of our Charter. It further
reiterates the roles of the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council. The draft resolution also recalls the relevant
United Nations frameworks in the field. The United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
the Barbados Programme of Action, the Mauritius
Declaration, the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States, and the 2005 World Summit Outcome
(resolution 60/1) provide the framework for the draft
resolution.
The preambular part of the resolution closes
simply with a factual statement, namely, that the
adverse impacts of climate change, including sea-level
rise, could have possible security implications. As I
have pointed out, those implications are already being
felt in our islands.

09-35766

The draft resolution then invites all relevant
organs of the United Nations to intensify their efforts
in considering and addressing climate change. Read in
connection with the third preambular paragraph, it
becomes obvious that the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council need to increase their
efforts to address sustainable development issues as
they relate to climate change. It is also clear that the
Security Council has the responsibility to look at the
security aspects, a view that we fully endorse.
Finally, the draft resolution calls for a
comprehensive report to be submitted to the General
Assembly at is sixty-fourth session on the possible
security implications of climate change. It is
particularly important that this report be based on the
views of Member States and of the relevant regional
and international organizations. The report will be the
first of the Secretary-General to collect information on
the security implications of climate change. We see the
report as a critical first step as we move forward on
this issue.
The disappearance of Pacific Islands is now
projected to happen within our lifetime if we continue
with business as usual. Conflicts are already being
exacerbated by the adverse effects of climate change
and matters will only become worse. The planet will
not wait patiently for further debates on the political
aspects of this subject.
We are of the firm view that the adverse impacts
of climate change have very real implications for
international peace and security. We believe that the
time is now opportune for all the organs of the United
Nations to work collectively within their mandates and
to intensify their efforts. The lives of real people from
real places are at stake. The future survival of real
generations, the continuation of real cultures and the
security of belonging to a real homeland are being
threatened.
Given the importance of the issue, it is my hope
that A/63/L.8/Rev.1 will be adopted by consensus.
The Acting President: We will now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position before action is taken on the draft
resolution, may I remind delegations that explanations
of vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should
be made by delegations from their seats.

3

A/63/PV.85

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): I have the honour to address the Assembly
on the subject of draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1,
entitled “Climate change and its possible security
implications”, upon which we are about to take action.
I speak on behalf of the following delegations:
Bahrain, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Ecuador,
Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Kuwait,
Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Yemen and my own
country, Nicaragua.
In this regard, I am pleased to announce that our
delegations have decided to join the consensus on the
adoption of this draft resolution, which is the product
of long and intense negotiations and cooperation
between Member States.
Our group believes that draft resolution
A/63/L.8/Rev.1 is a compromise text that retains the
common objective and unity of purpose of the
universal membership of the General Assembly on
issues related to climate change and that deals with the
important subject of the possible security implications
of climate change.
As we stated during the negotiations, we believe
that, in the context of the issues dealt with in this draft
resolution, it is vital that Member States promote
sustainable development while adhering to the Rio
principles, particularly the principle of common but
differentiated responsibilities, and fully implementing
Agenda 21 and other commitments undertaken at the
Rio, Johannesburg and other relevant United Nations
conferences.
In addition, we believe that these concerns and
challenges are more profound and threatening than
ever, because of the failure to fulfil the various
commitments undertaken and the lack of political will
to take concrete action in this regard. Therefore, we
urge the developed countries to shoulder their legal,
historical and moral responsibility to, inter alia, reduce
their greenhouse gas emissions. We also urge them to
fulfil their commitment to providing predictable
financial resources and to transferring the necessary
technology for confronting new threats and challenges,
while ensuring that such technology is eco-friendly.
We reaffirm the unique role of the negotiating
framework of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and of the Kyoto

4

Protocol and the role of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council in dealing with
sustainable development issues, including climate
change and its associated challenges. We emphasize
that draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1 recognizes that the
role of the Security Council is limited only to the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
conformity with the United Nations Charter.
Our group shares the point of view and the
concerns expressed in the letter dated 12 April 2007
from the Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Cuba addressed to the President of the
Security Council on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (S/2007/203) and in the letter dated
16 April 2007 from the Permanent Representative of
Pakistan addressed to the President of the Security
Council on behalf of the Group of 77 and China
(S/2007/211), on the occasion of the open debate of 17
April 2007 on the item entitled “Energy, security and
climate” (see S/PV.5663). In this respect, we
emphasize that the Council must fully observe and
comply with the mandate spelled out for it in the
Charter and with its proper relationship with the
General Assembly.
We are looking forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on the possible security implications
of climate change, which should be based on the views
of Member States and of relevant regional and
international organizations. We therefore request that,
in preparing his report, the Secretary-General take into
account the views we expressed in document A/63/L.30
in addition to any further notifications by our Member
States on the subject.
Given the aforementioned facts, it is absolutely
undeniable that the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council are exclusively
responsible for the course of action to be taken
regarding the possible security implications of climate
change. With this understanding, our group formally
withdraws the amendments presented in document
A/63/L.30.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position before action is
taken on the draft resolution.
Draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1 is entitled
“Climate
change
and
its
possible
security
implications”. Before proceeding to take action on the
draft resolution, I should like to announce that, since

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

the submission of draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1, the
following countries have become sponsors of the draft
resolution: the Bahamas, Ghana, Kiribati and Nigeria.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 63/281).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Metela (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Montenegro; as well as
Armenia, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine align themselves with this declaration.
The European Union warmly welcomes the
adoption of resolution 63/281, entitled “Climate
change and its possible security implications”, and
wishes to express its appreciation for the hard work
and extraordinary effort made by the Pacific small
island developing States in initiating the resolution and
bringing the process to a successful conclusion. The
European Union is pleased to note that a large number
of countries have joined as sponsors. The sponsors of
the resolution represent all regional groups and levels
of development, demonstrating the global recognition
of the challenge before us. The European Union would
also like to take this opportunity to express
appreciation for the spirit of compromise and
flexibility demonstrated by all delegations during
negotiations, allowing us to reach this landmark result
today.
The European Union strongly believes that a
global response to climate change is a critical element
of international relations and will be increasingly so in
the coming years, including in its security dimension.
The risks posed by climate change are real and its
impacts are already taking place. As this has become a
global problem, the European Union advocates a
multilateral response. The United Nations system must
obviously play a pivotal role in that response. The
adoption of this text is also a reminder of the urgent

09-35766

need for common action to fight climate change. The
European Union, in this sense, remains firmly
committed to reaching an ambitious global climate
agreement at the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Copenhagen six months from now.
The impact of climate change on international
security is a problem not of the future but already of
today, and one that will stay with us. Climate change is
already affecting the security of nations and
populations around the globe. Even if progress is made
in reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases, weather
patterns have already changed, global temperatures
have already risen and, above all, climate change is
already being felt everywhere, undermining livelihoods
and fostering instability. There is growing evidence
that the effects of climate changes can exacerbate and
catalyse processes leading to tensions and eroding
institutions.
The Security Council held its first debate on
climate change and its implications for international
security in 2007. The European Union is convinced
that now is the time again to focus the attention of the
international community on security risks related to
climate change in the multilateral arena.
For some countries, climate change is an
immediate threat to survival. A number of small island
States already face significant threats to their territorial
integrity due to receding coastlines and the
submergence of whole areas of their territory. The
plight of these States warrants the special attention of
the world community. That is one of the reasons why
the European Union supported the resolution proposed
by the Pacific small island developing States from the
very first draft.
However, the European Union also sees climate
change as a universal threat that will create new
security dynamics and risks in all regions — between
States and within States — by intensifying conflicts
over depleting or scarce resources, by causing
economic damage and adding pressure to critical
infrastructure, and also by amplifying or triggering
environmentally induced migration, thus increasing
pressure on international governance.
Therefore, many of the most vulnerable
developing States and regions will face significant
additional challenges to achieving stability and
sustainable development. New threats to human

5

A/63/PV.85

security will emerge. The European Union’s own
external policies have evolved to take into account the
new security dynamics unleashed by climate change.
As the security implications of climate change are
clearly of a global nature, affecting developed and
developing countries alike, the European Union
believes that, by adopting the resolution on climate
change and its possible security implications, the
United Nations membership has made a first important
step towards considering and addressing security risks
related to climate change.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
comprehensive report, which will help us to understand
and analyse various aspects of this complex issue, and
to the attention that the relevant organs of the United
Nations will devote to climate change and its security
implications.
Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the Group of Arab States to express their views on
resolution 63/281.
The Arab Group believes that the developing
countries — and in particular the least developed, the
African, the landlocked developing and the small
island developing countries — are those most severely
impacted by climate change. The Arab Group joined in
the consensus adoption of the resolution, entitled
“Climate
change
and
its
possible
security
implications”, and stresses the following points.
The maintenance of international peace and
security is the responsibility first and foremost of the
Security Council pursuant to its mandate under the
Charter, with due consideration for the role of the
General Assembly under resolution 377 (V) of
3 November 1950. The overlap between the roles of the
Security Council and the principal organs of the United
Nations is in contradiction to the purposes
andprinciples of the Charter and may undermine their
respective mandates and the rights of the
Organization’s membership.
Climate change has an ineluctable effect on
sustainable development and its three main pillars:
economic development, social development and the
protection of the environment. It should be addressed
in a comprehensive manner. Climate change is of
central importance to sustainable development.
Promoting sustainable development is the primary

6

responsibility of the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and their relevant subsidiary
bodies, including the Commission on Sustainable
Development, and the United Nations Environment
Programme. A binding multilateral climate change
agreement exists: the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol.
In none of this is any role envisaged for the Security
Council.
We believe that it is important for all Member
States to promote sustainable development by adhering
to the Rio principles, in particular that of shared but
differentiated responsibility, to work towards full
implementation of Agenda 21 and to fulfil
commitments with respect to the provision of financial
resources, technology transfer and capacity-building
for developing countries, as pledged at the Rio,
Johannesburg and other relevant United Nations
conferences in the economic and social sphere.
The Arab Group affirms that the Framework
Convention on Climate Change provides the
appropriate forum for addressing climate change and
considering the measures needed to address climate
change in accordance with the principles set out in the
Convention. The developed countries must take urgent
steps to honour their pledges to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, in accordance with the Kyoto Protocol.
Those countries that have not yet done so should
accede to the Protocol as soon as possible and actively
participate in the Copenhagen Climate Change
Conference to be held in December.
The Arab Group aligns itself with the letters sent
by the chairmanship of the Group of 77 and China
(S/2007/211) and the presidency of the Non-Aligned
Movement (S/2007/203) addressed to the President of
the Security Council on the occasion of the Council’s
open debate on energy, security and climate held on
17 April 2007.
We stress that, in keeping with the resolution
adopted today, the report of the Secretary-General
should take into consideration the views of Member
States and regional organizations with respect to
climate change. We stress too that today’s resolution
should not undermine the jurisdiction or mandates of
the bodies or organizations responsible for addressing
climate change.
Mr. Mérorès (Haiti): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the 14 States members of

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). The States
members of CARICOM, in solidarity with the group of
Pacific small island developing States (SIDS) Group
joined as sponsors of draft resolution A/63/L.8/Rev.1,
on climate change and its possible security
implications.
CARICOM shares with other small island and
low-lying costal States an acute awareness of the
reality of the impacts of climate change. The incidence
and intensity of natural disasters and other climaterelated impacts have increased significantly in recent
times. The group therefore considers that there is need
to increasingly expand understanding and appreciation
of the impacts of climate change and to address its
attendant challenges in a coordinated, resolute,
effective and sustainable manner.
Since SIDS disproportionately bear the brunt of
the climate change challenge, CARICOM welcomes
the resolution’s reaffirmation of the Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States, the Mauritius Declaration
and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States.
In combating the formidable challenge posed by
climate change, small island developing States
especially stand in need of all possible understanding
and support. The possible security implications of
climate change provide an additional emerging and
disconcerting dimension of the challenge. Indeed, for
many of our countries, climate change poses an
existential threat — a threat to our very survival. An
urgent and comprehensive approach is needed,
involving the full participation of all States. For this
purpose, our countries attach high importance to the
process in train under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and welcome the
reaffirmation of the Convention as the key instrument
for addressing climate change.
The resolution raises a sense of deep concern that
the adverse impacts of climate change, including sea
level rise, could have possible security implications.
We take this opportunity to thank the Pacific small
island developing States for bringing the issue formally
for consideration within the context of the United
Nations.

09-35766

We recognize that there might be different
perceptions as to the nature and scope of the challenges
highlighted by the resolution. In that regard, we
anticipate that the comprehensive report to be provided
by the Secretary-General can provide a platform for the
further consideration of the issue at the sixty-fourth
session of the General Assembly. CARICOM hopes to
contribute its own views and perspectives to the report
and to future debates on these questions.
CARICOM members have participated actively
and constructively in the protracted negotiations on the
resolution that the Assembly has just adopted, and we
therefore join in commending the Assembly for having
adopted it by consensus.
Mr. Natelagawa (Indonesia): Among the many
issues which demand a united common response from
Member States, including from the General Assembly,
is the challenge of climate change. Over the past two
years, leading up to the Bali Climate Change
Conference, held in December 2007, we have seen that
the General Assembly can play a crucial role in
promoting unity of purpose on this issue. It is in that
light that my delegation welcomes the adoption by
consensus of the resolution entitled “Climate change
and its possible security implications”.
Indonesia recognizes the urgent need to address
climate change. We fully understand that the impact of
climate change is multidimensional and may include
possible security implications. As the world’s largest
archipelagic State, comprising more than 17,000
islands, the effects of climate change on Indonesia
could be a matter of continued existence for many of
our islands, people, cultures and ways of life.
From that point of view, Indonesia understands
the concern raised by the Pacific island developing
States. Sea level rise triggered by climate change could
set off a chain reaction which could adversely impact
small island developing States, including the possible
submergence of islands and territory and the
displacement of millions of people.
However, gathering the relevant data and
establishing a direct link between climate change and
its possible security implications require further study
and cooperation by all nations. Against this backdrop,
Indonesia is of the view that the request to the
Secretary-General contained in the resolution to submit
a report on this subject matter is key to understanding
the linkage between climate and security, if, after all,

7

A/63/PV.85

there is any. In this regard, we encourage Member
States to submit their views on this complex matter, as
requested by the resolution. That will ensure that the
richness of observations in the report is maintained.
Inviting all relevant organs of the United Nations
within their mandates to intensify their efforts in
addressing climate change will allow to work in a
coordinated manner, which will strengthen the capacity
of small island developing States to face the challenges
posed by climate change.
Indonesia believes that the issue of climate
change is, above all, a sustainable development issue.
The challenge of climate change is therefore a
challenge to our development efforts.
Let me conclude by saying that the issue before
us is a complex one. Addressing this issue in the
appropriate frameworks — the General Assembly and
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change — will provide all States Members of the
United Nations the opportunity to deliberate in a
comprehensive manner, which, we hope, will result in
beneficial solutions for millions of people.
We align ourselves fully with the letter dated
12 April 2007 addressed to the President of the
Security Council by Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (S/2007/203) and the letter
dated 16 April 2007 from Pakistan on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China (S/2007/211).
Mr. Muller (Marshall Islands): On behalf of His
Excellency President Litokwa Tomeing and the people
of the Marshall Islands, I bring warm greetings to the
General Assembly. The Republic of the Marshall
Islands supports and aligns itself with the statement of
the Republic of Nauru, whose representative spoke on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands fully
acknowledges the complexities of the possible security
implications of climate change. The issue of climate
change poses unprecedented questions for the
international community and thus requires a coherent
response by all within a cooperative framework and
involving
cross-sectoral
actions
to
address
development aspirations as well as security issues.
For a low-lying island nation like the Marshall
Islands, climate change also poses some very clear and
obvious questions with respect to our very existence.
The security implications of climate change pose a

8

direct and very real threat to our sovereignty, survival
and fundamental freedoms assured by the Charter of
the United Nations. No longer can Member States
afford to consider that the loss of entire nations does
not create a critical threat to global international
security.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands is proud
that the General Assembly has been able to work
together on resolution 63/281 in a spirit of positive
cooperation. The resolution expresses serious global
concern over the survival of entire populations and
their land in the face of climate impacts. By addressing
climate change in a holistic fashion, we ensure that
United Nations organs treat this issue with appropriate
urgency and within the respective mandates of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council. We also seek the active
engagement of all nations in addressing other climate
interlinkages, including the human dimension of
climate change and its implications for sustainable
development and the law of the sea.
This resolution was initiated by a group of small
island nations in the Pacific that are acutely vulnerable
to climate impacts. For Pacific islands, climate change
exists not only in the lens of a scientist, but in the very
visible effects already observed by our communities.
Our Pacific Islands Forum leaders identified the
security implications of climate change last August in
the Niue Declaration, and last September our leaders
collectively urged that this body properly acknowledge
the security implications of climate change. Last week,
our leaders emerged from the Fifth Pacific Islands
Leaders Meeting in Hokkaido with an initiative by the
Pacific Environment Community, in which Japan will
be working closely with Pacific Islands Forum partners
to support practical, Pacific-tailored approaches to
combating climate change. The Pacific Islands Forum
and the European Union also issued a joint declaration
in 2008 on shared commitments with regard to climate
change, and additional discussions are under way with
other partners, including developing nations.
All nations, and particularly the most vulnerable
nations, may face intensified climate impacts,
including competition for increasingly scarce
resources, which may pose serious barriers for some to
achieving international development goals. We urge all
nations to fully express their views in the report of the
Secretary-General called for in the resolution. In
addition, we expect that the report will further detail

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

practical strategies through which the United Nations
as a whole can proactively address these potential
implications now and with due urgency.
In the low-lying Marshall Islands, we cannot
move our people to higher ground, for we have no
mountains. As a nation and a culture closely dependent
upon our oceans and coastal areas, we cannot simply
replace these areas or move our communities to less
vulnerable locations on coral atolls that are already so
thin that one can stand in the lagoon and see the waves
crashing clear across the other side of the atoll.
As the Marshall Islands’ highest point is only two
metres above sea level, even the most conservative
2007 scientific projections of the United Nations
scientific body, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), of a sea level rise of 20 to
30 centimetres before the next century, clearly
indicate — and with certainty — that our national
survival is threatened by an upheaval that would
overwhelm our very land, our basic water and food
security, as well as the pillars of our traditional culture.
The worst-case scenarios offered by the IPCC of a sea
level rise greater than half a metre pose even more
severe threats to our existence.
Most recently, the IPCC scientific coordinator on
sea level rise stated that the IPCC findings are likely to
be “biased low” and that new research shows that the
risk of ice sheet melts, which are already being
observed, would lead to an increase of four metres or
greater in sea level rise. Other scientists have further
revised this analysis and recently issued a claim that
ice sheet-related total sea level rise may be at a lesser
rate of only three metres. That can hardly be
considered good news, as it is a rate of change which
nonetheless will completely submerge my nation.
The existence of a tipping point leaves us with a
very small window for urgent international action,
perhaps as little as 10 years, to avoid irreversible and
abrupt climate impacts. The people of the Marshall
Islands hope and pray that we will not reach this point
of no return. For the Republic of the Marshall Islands,
this situation is more than just a development barrier.
The Marshallese people have not taken these
threats silently; instead, we are actively confronting
climate impacts. Despite our capacity limitations as a
developing nation, like our Pacific neighbours we are
taking action and remain committed to building our
resilience to combat the effects of climate change by

09-35766

prioritizing, among other goals, water security, energy
conservation, the conservation of traditional plants and
non-invasive crops to address coastal erosion, and food
security by promoting climate-sensitive strategies. We
are also committed to implementing ecosystem
approaches to adaptation, such as the Micronesia
Challenge, which is a subregional commitment to
conserving 30 per cent of our near-shore marine and
20 per cent of our terrestrial resources.
We are also doing our part to implement
renewable energy strategies to reduce our greenhouse
gas emissions, even though they are already practically
nil. We are revising our national energy policy as the
foundation for meeting our commitment to
significantly improving energy efficiency and to
reducing our reliance on oil through utilizing practical
and affordable renewable energy resources.
We seek to continue to work with our partners to
build our national capacity to take on and manage
projects and, at the same time, are implementing
concrete strategies. Yet, we cannot fully remedy or
reduce
climate
impacts,
including
security
implications, without the ability to efficiently access
funding for adaptation and mitigation that
appropriately focuses on concrete results, and without
a meaningful commitment to funding based on the
“polluter pays” principle. Funding streams must be set
aside and dedicated to the most vulnerable nations,
with direct and simplified access.
We find some of the strongest support for our
survival in the principles of the United Nations
Charter, in its commitment to fundamental freedoms
and in the respective mandates of the relevant organs,
including those of the Security Council, to address
security issues. It is also inarguably within customary
international law that, like all Member nations, we are
bound to commit to the continued existence and
survival of the most vulnerable among us.
We wish to thank Member nations for their
support in arriving at a consensus on today’s
resolution. The Republic of the Marshall Islands again
expresses its gratitude for the awareness and
commitment of all nations to this vital issue.
Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): This is quite a
historic day for the General Assembly and it has been a
very long time coming. I recall when negotiations on
resolution 63/281 commenced last summer. At that
time, there was a lot of discussion among us on what

9

A/63/PV.85

the resolution was really about — whether it was really
about climate change, security or development. I think
that, in the end, we realized that it was about all those
things, but mostly it was really about respect — respect
for some of the smallest and least powerful States
represented in this General Assembly.

consensus on the link between climate change and
security. This is a link that is being discussed broadly
in academic papers and security documents in many
capitals around the world, but it is the first time that we
have formally made that link here — and I think that
that is very important, and important to reflect on.

These are not countries that usually make a lot of
noise in this Hall. They do not usually come to us
asking for much. In fact, generally, our experience with
these countries is that it is usually us asking them for
things — usually to vote for this or that. But, on this
occasion, they came to us asking for something
fundamentally important, as eloquently expressed by
the Permanent Representative of Nauru.

Australia recognizes that climate change is a
serious, long-term global challenge that, if not dealt
with effectively, is likely to exacerbate the intensity
and complexity of security-related risks, such as border
disputes over resources, displaced populations and
disaster management. For that reason, we have
contributed some $150 million to a fund within our
own region to assist with the adaptation and mitigation
efforts. But, as we have heard today, in our region the
Pacific island countries are among the most vulnerable,
possessing limited capacity to adapt.

I think it speaks well of us and of our processes
that we were able to rise to that challenge. The
negotiations were long and at times quite difficult. It is
worth reflecting that our dear friend, the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Palau, was able, during
the course of those negotiations, to conceive, carry to
term and give birth to a child before we concluded our
negotiations. But, luckily, we adopted the resolution
before the child was old enough to make a statement
here.
There are congratulations that need to be made
here today as well. First of all, I think that we need to
congratulate the Pacific island countries themselves for
the quiet determination and dignity with which they
conducted the negotiations. I think that it is also
important to congratulate the negotiating partners and,
in particular, I would like to congratulate those
countries that initially were not enthusiastic about
aspects of the resolution but that decided on principle
not to block it. To those, I say thank you.
Finally, congratulations need to go to one
delegation in particular. At a time when things really
looked as if they might go off the rails, one delegation,
that of Indonesia, took it on itself to play a crucial
brokering role to bring us together in terms of a
compromise resolution, which is largely the resolution
that we have adopted here today. I think that we are in
their debt.
I said at the beginning that this was a historic day.
It is historic for a few reasons. First of all, it is the first
time that the Pacific island countries have brought a
resolution such as this to the General Assembly. But,
more importantly, it is historic because, in the
resolution, we have agreed for the first time by

10

We look forward to receiving in due course the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General on this
matter that we have requested today. I think that the
report has the potential to be among the most
interesting and most important reports produced at this
next session. We also look forward to seeing the
relevant organs of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, take this issue up as appropriate.
This resolution is indeed an important and
historic step, but only one small step in the work that
we have ahead of us to deal with this very important
issue. However, I think that we have taken a good step
and that it is important for us to take a moment to
congratulate ourselves on this important day.
Mrs. Yang (Palau): Palau would like to associate
itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Nauru on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (Pacific SIDS). We are proud
of the statement and of resolution 63/281, “Climate
change and its possible security implications”. We
would like to thank the international community for
adopting the resolution by consensus.
We are past the point of debating whether climate
change is real, man-made and fundamentally altering
the future of human civilization. In Palau, freshwater
resources are dwindling and becoming salinated by salt
water. Fields of taro — the food supplies on which my
country relies — are being inundated by rising tides.
And our culture, which has thrived, developed and
endured since the times of Homer and the ancient
Greeks, faces the real possibility of being wiped out.

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
and other scientific bodies report that if nothing is
done, we will face a future marred by famine, droughts,
massive refugee problems, border disputes, energy
emergencies and humanitarian crises more desperate
and tragic than those confronting us today.
We do not carelessly call climate change a
security threat. When we are told by scientists to
prepare for humanitarian crises, including exodus, in
our lifetimes, how can anyone say that it is different
from preparing for a threat like war? Even
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has compared the
effects of climate change to those of war.
What is most important is that we know the cause
of climate change. It is we, when we continue to emit
carbon even though we know it is warming the Earth.
And it is we, the General Assembly, when we fail to act
to stop this crisis from unfolding. In the years ahead,
we will be judged by how we reacted when confronted
with this knowledge.
This resolution is a first step towards changing
our direction, but it is only a first step. We must not
rest on our achievements, but must look towards the
next steps so that we do not lose our momentum, our
sense of purpose or our urgency in tackling this
enormous problem.
When expert panels predict that flooding, disease
and famine will lead to unprecedented migration, we
must move to action. When our peoples are bearing
witness to drought and crop failures, which intensify
competition for food and water, we must move to
action. When we face the potential for economic and
political disruption on a scale not seen since the
Second World War, we must move to action.
All the organs of the United Nations must act
urgently. We include most particularly the Security
Council, whose solemn charge is to be the primary
defender of international peace and security. We
believe that in the coming days, the international
community must begin a dialogue on what the United
Nations can and should do. We hope this dialogue will
provide the focus, leadership and direction needed for
the task at hand. We are honoured to be part of that
dialogue, for through dialogue and discussion we can
set an agenda for action that can bring us back from the
brink of this nightmare.

09-35766

The Security Council must seize itself of the
broad issue of climate change and security and chart a
way forward. As we know, the Council has a vast array
of tools with which it may address this threat. We have
seen the Council, in the days following 11 September
2001, call upon all States to become parties to
international covenants and protocols relating to
terrorism and to increase cooperation to better address
the threat. Could the Council not consider similar
action on climate change conventions and protocols?
We have seen the Council acknowledge the
security threat posed by HIV/AIDS and integrate the
consideration of this thematic issue into their
resolutions on peacekeeping. Climate change is
acknowledged to be the epitome of a cross-cutting
issue and consideration of it and its effects could be
integrated into Council resolutions.
We have seen the Council form subsidiary bodies
on topics ranging from Africa, to terrorism to children
and armed conflict. These subsidiary bodies address
broad issues, where the harm does not stop at the
border of one nation. The same can be said of
greenhouse gases, the harmful effects of which do not
stop at the edge of the emitting country, but put into
jeopardy neighbours, such as the small islands. The
Pacific small island developing States are among those
nations least responsible for the problem, yet we will
be among the first to disappear.
Under Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter,
the Security Council may investigate any dispute or
situation that might lead to international friction or
give rise to a dispute. Could we not envision the
Council immediately investigating the security
implications of climate change and recommending
appropriate procedures or methods of adjustment if it
determines that the situation might endanger
international peace and security? Recommendations
already exist in the findings of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, but they desperately need
the strong backing of the Council so that they may
become binding on countries that act only when they
must, rather than when they should.
The solution to the climate crisis will involve
many facets, but it must involve reducing greenhouse
gas emissions and other sources of climate change.
Reducing emissions must therefore be the focus of the
Council’s deliberations, and the goal of the Council
must be effective, enforceable action to that end.

11

A/63/PV.85

If the Council is able to recommend enforcement
mechanisms for reducing carbon emissions, the root
cause of so many future humanitarian disasters will
finally be addressed and possibly averted. By adopting
this resolution, we acknowledge that climate change is
a threat to international peace and security. Now, the
Council must acknowledge this as well and do what it
can and must do to maintain or restore international
peace and security.
If the Council discusses the ways in which it can
apply its many tools and vast resources to reducing
carbon emissions and then takes appropriate action, it
will have lived up to its responsibility and mandate as
the world’s guardian of international peace and
security.
We believe that our voices are particularly salient
on this issue, because our shorelines will be among the
first to be inundated, our fresh water among the first to
be corrupted and our histories and cultures among the
first to be destroyed if carbon emissions are not
curtailed. We are asking the Security Council to
consider our peace and our security when it seizes
itself of this issue.
We have supported peace and security efforts
around the world by sending peacekeepers to Darfur
and Timor-Leste and by heeding the call of the Council
to action to address the threat of terrorism. This time,
our peace and security are at stake, and we need the
Council’s help.
Mr. Pita (Tuvalu): Today has special meaning for
the Pacific small island developing States (SIDS) and
for Tuvalu, as it is the first time in the history of the
United Nations that this body has considered a
resolution on climate change and its possible security
implications. I am therefore honoured to speak on
behalf of the Government of Tuvalu in fully supporting
the adoption of the Pacific SIDS resolution by
consensus.
At the outset, Tuvalu wishes to align itself with
the Pacific SIDS statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Nauru to the United
Nations and Chair of the Pacific SIDS. We also wish to
convey our sincere thanks to all the Member States that
willingly supported and sponsored the resolution. The
adoption of the Pacific SIDS resolution by consensus
today is a milestone and clear testimony that climate
change is a global phenomenon that undoubtedly has
security implications affecting all countries, especially

12

the most vulnerable small island States, such as
Tuvalu.
Climate change is certainly the most serious
threat to global security and the survival of humankind.
In particular, it is an issue of enormous concern to a
highly vulnerable small island State and low-lying atoll
nations such as Tuvalu, which resides right at the edge
of existence. Climate change is a matter of life and
death, and it certainly is a security issue from our
perspective — one that could very well push us over
that edge.
The people of Tuvalu recently celebrated their
thirtieth year of independence. While we are a very
young country, we are a very old society, with a history
stretching back more than 3,000 years. We have thrived
primarily on subsistence fishing and farming, and,
while our traditional way of life has kept our families
fed for many generations, it has never been tested by a
crisis as large as the one presented by climate change.
Tuvalu is not a contributor to the root cause of climate
change, yet its people must bear the adverse impacts of
a crisis caused by the actions of other countries.
The low-lying islands of Tuvalu are extremely
vulnerable to sea level rise. The highest point on any of
Tuvalu’s islands sits at no more than five metres above
sea level, with most of the islands at less than three
metres. Recent research forecasts sea level to rise by as
much as a metre or more by the end of this century.
Such a development would be truly catastrophic for
Tuvalu, but even a fraction of that will lead to
considerable hardship and suffering.
Sea level rise is also threatening our water
security, as saltwater contaminates our limited supply
of groundwater, which is critical for maintaining public
health and sanitation and for growing our food. The
increased salinity has destroyed many of our traditional
pulaka pit gardens and is forcing us to adopt more saltresistant crops.
Climate change also threatens the abundant coral
reefs that surround Tuvalu and support our subsistence
fishing activities. Rising ocean temperatures can cause
bleaching events, leaving a reef lifeless. Carbon
dioxide emissions are also changing the chemistry of
the oceans. In a more acidic ocean, corals find it
increasingly difficult to form their exoskeletons and are
more vulnerable to disease, parasites and predators.
Taken together, coral bleaching and ocean acidification
place a significant portion of Tuvalu’s food supply in

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

jeopardy. Signs of reef failure in Tuvalu are already
abundant, and fish populations around coral reefs have
experienced a significant drop in their numbers.
This resolution comes at a critical time. Scientists
tell us that we can still avoid the worst effects of
climate change, but that strong action must be taken
now. It is therefore paramount that the international
community honour its commitments under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
which were reaffirmed in the Barbados Programme of
Action for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States and again under the Mauritius
Strategy.
Climate change is a serious and destabilizing
force that threatens the security of Tuvalu and every
other Member State. The early effects are being felt
most acutely within the borders of poor countries, but
they will soon spill over into nearby countries as their
neighbours run out of food and clean water. Tuvaluans
have been among the first to taste the destructive
potential of climate change, but we will not be the last.
It is for this reason that Tuvalu urges the Security
Council and other relevant organs of the United
Nations to treat this issue with the urgency that a
security threat of this magnitude deserves.
Ms. Graham (New Zealand): My delegation
wishes to add our voice in support of resolution
63/281, adopted by consensus this morning.
In 2008, New Zealand, along with other Pacific
Island Forum members, adopted the Niue Declaration
on Climate Change. At that time, our leaders expressed
deep concerns about
“the serious current impacts of and growing
threat posed by climate change to the economic,
social, cultural and environmental well-being and
security of Pacific Island countries; and that
current and anticipated changes in the Pacific
climate, coupled with the region’s vulnerability,
are expected to exacerbate existing challenges
and lead to significant impacts on Pacific
countries’ environments,
their
sustainable
development and future survival”.
The resolution adopted today is historic, and it is
certainly a step in the right direction of addressing
these concerns. In particular, New Zealand looks
forward to the Secretary-General’s comprehensive

09-35766

report on the possible security implications of climate
change.
My delegation wishes to express our sincere
appreciation to Indonesia for its helpful role in
breaking the deadlock by producing a text that brought
about a consensus. Let me also thank the Like-Minded
Group and the Pacific small island developing States
for showing the flexibility that has enabled us to reach
a consensus. We thank, too, the many other delegations
that have worked tirelessly and patiently to reach such
a successful conclusion on this resolution.
Mrs. Beck (Solomon Islands): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting and for facilitating the
adoption of resolution 63/281. My delegation would
like to speak on the objectives, principles and
commitment of the resolution and take the opportunity
to thank its sponsors and those that supported it. My
delegation would also like to thank those that
participated in the negotiations.
The resolution was intensively negotiated over
months, and its adoption by consensus today sends an
important message of hope to the most vulnerable
populations in the Pacific and that their daily struggles
are not forgotten.
Before going any further, I would like to align
this statement with the statement introducing the
resolution delivered by the representative of Nauru on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States
(SIDS).
The resolution just adopted by the General
Assembly speaks of the adverse impact of climate
change, which is accelerating at rate that is now posing
human security, food security, water security, health
security and striking dominant security threats in
countries of the Pacific. It has triggered migratory
movements as more and more people become displaced
through shoreline erosion, coastal flooding, agriculture
disruption and increase of king tides within the Pacific,
and especially among Solomon Islands’ low-lying
islands. I would add that Solomon Islands is already
emerging from ethnic conflict and would like to see
stability maintained.
The recent report on the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change identifies
these climate change security threats. The resolution
calls on the United Nations system to deal with these
threats. It is our hope that, by having the United

13

A/63/PV.85

Nations principal organs, including the Security
Council, deal with climate change-induced security
threats, the resolution will allow the United Nations to
be proactive and to do more before we arrive at a point
where these threats become serious and irreversible.

much we promise, but how much we deliver for those
who need us most” (A/61/PV.31, p. 9). In this
connection, the resolution adopted today is a 911 call
for assistance from a group of States that need the
United Nations most.

Our time frame under the Kyoto Protocol is not
sufficient for reducing harmful gas emissions into our
environment. One of the objectives of the resolution is
to bring to the international community’s attention the
fact that SIDS and least developed countries (LDCs),
particularly those of the Pacific, are ill equipped to
combat the impact of climate change. The resolution
also builds a political momentum for current
negotiations, beginning in Bonn this week, on the Bali
Action Plan, to which we all attach much importance.

Mr. Vunibobo (Fiji): Fiji welcomes this
opportunity to make this statement after the adoption
of resolution 63/281, submitted by the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS), on climate change and
its possible security implications.

The principles and basis of the resolution are
intended to help us address collectively these security
threats by taking anticipatory precautionary measures
to prevent and minimize the threats. The resolution
also promotes sustainable development to better enable
those on the front line of climate change to better
respond to these threats with technology transfers and
sufficient funds to carry out mitigation and adaptation
programmes. My delegation takes this opportunity to
acknowledge Italy, Austria, the city of Milan, Turkey
and Taiwan for their support for the ongoing regional
and bilateral community- and rural-focused renewable
energy programmes in Solomon Islands.
Solomon Islands navigate, thrive and survive on
global cooperation. Thus, the resolution adopted today
calls for the widest possible cooperation of all Member
States. The sponsors and supporters of the resolution
are from all six regions of our membership. We are
very grateful for their support.
The commitment made in the resolution is to
ensure that it remains a living document and that the
international system has an effective institutional
arrangement to undertake periodic reporting on the
measurable climate change threats, especially to SIDS
and LDCs, and to have the membership fully engage
and maintain a deep sense of responsibility for
addressing them. Deeper actions with nationally strong
and appropriate mitigation and adaptation measures are
necessary to address the threats in an effective and
sustained manner.
Let me close by quoting our Secretary-General’s
acceptance speech, in which he stated that “[t]he true
measure of success for the United Nations is not how

14

My delegation supports and endorses the
statement made by the Permanent Representative of
Nauru on behalf of the Pacific SIDS and other sponsors
of the resolution. We deeply appreciate and value their
unwavering support, and we pay tribute to the
Assembly for adopting the resolution by consensus.
When we started this initiative, little did we
realize that we would ruffle some feathers and
unintentionally step on some sensitive toes. We
apologize for that breach of good manners.
We were encouraged by the reception accorded to
us by the five permanent members of the Security
Council. We were never given a lecture by any one of
them; we were given advice and suggestions. On
reflection, that particular reception on the part of the
permanent members of the Security Council gave us
enormous courage to press on despite looming
difficulties. A reading of the list of co-sponsors speaks
volumes about the intensity of our lobbying efforts, but
more important it is testimony of human solidarity, for
the original sponsors of the resolution are among the
smallest and most vulnerable States Members of the
United Nations.
Looking back over the past 12 months or so, our
draft resolution generated widespread discussion and
debate. However, the adoption of the resolution by
consensus is a tribute to all those who had been
concerned by the long and drawn-out consultation.
Equally important, it is recognition on the part of the
international community that it has acknowledged that
the issue of climate change cannot and should not be
viewed in isolation.
This resolution, we believe, touches a wide area
of concern to the human family. It touches economic,
social, demographic and political interests, and above
all issues of international peace and security. At the end
of the day, these concerns are part of the matrix that

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

affects our lives — and for us in the Pacific, our
survival and the protection of our identity, our
traditions and our culture.

island States are facing particular risk. Receding
coastlines, for instance, can result in the loss of
territory or even the disappearance of entire countries.

For small island States, the security implications
of climate change have been, first and foremost, a
threat to our very existence as sovereign nations. All
else will be immaterial if statehood is lost — lost
through rising sea levels and warming seas caused by
climate change. It is for small island States, a clear and
present danger, a zero-sum game, if you will, that may
just decide their future membership of this Assembly.

Even though climate change is not the only cause
of all these phenomena, we cannot afford to turn a
blind eye on the additional risks it poses. We will have
to maintain and increase our efforts to face its
implications in terms of security at all levels.
Switzerland supports any effort within the United
Nations to attract the attention of the international
community to security risks related to climate change.
For that reason, my country joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution proposed by the Pacific small island
developing States and welcomes its unanimous
adoption this morning.

Our situation bears some parallel to the current
global financial and economic crisis. Small island
States have become victims of a devastating
phenomenon not of their own making. Having said
that, we have no desire to apportion blame. We must
however acknowledge the past in order to address the
present and plan for the future. We fully recognize that
climate change is a global problem that requires a
concerted global plan of action. This resolution is but
one of the many plans needed to address the existential
threat posed by climate change.
Fiji therefore is pleased that the General
Assembly has adopted this resolution by consensus. We
invite the United Nations and all its relevant organs,
including the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and indeed the Security Council, within
their respective mandates, to redouble their efforts in
addressing the issue of climate change and its possible
security implications. The journey to Copenhagen is
thus strengthened.
To conclude, allow me once again, on behalf of
my delegation and indeed on behalf of our Pacific
community, to thank the Assembly for adopting the
resolution by consensus.
Mr.
Maurer
(Switzerland)
(spoke
in
French): The topic of climate change and its security
implications is of urgent relevance. The security threat
posed by climate change is real and its impacts are of
global nature, affecting both developed and developing
countries.
An impressive body of scientific evidence now
tells us that even a relatively small rise in global
temperatures can markedly exacerbate drought, water
scarcity and destructive weather events, and can thus
provoke the spread of disease, food shortages, human
migration and competition for natural resources. Small

09-35766

However, we regret that the extensive and
laborious negotiation process has only resulted in a
weak reference to the Security Council. Given the
seriousness of the issue, we would have preferred a
strong reference to the Security Council. The Council,
in our view, has a role to play in fighting climate
change and addressing its security implications.
We thank the Pacific small island developing
States for their tenacity, patience and skill in this
negotiation process. We look forward to continuing to
work together with them and all other interested parties
on this very important issue.
Mr. Osuga (Japan): I would like to join previous
speakers in welcoming the adoption of the present
resolution by consensus. The challenges of climate
change and its possible security implications are now
our shared concern. Japan particularly welcomes the
solidarity demonstrated through the resolution to the
small island countries facing growing threats to the
well-being and security of their people as a result of
climate change.
Japan commends the initiative taken by the
Pacific small island developing States (SIDS) and their
tenacity and perseverance in getting this resolution
through after lengthy negotiations. Japan reaffirmed its
support to the Pacific SIDS by deciding to join in
sponsoring the draft resolution at a very early stage.
Our solidarity was highlighted just 10 days ago, when
the fifth Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting, co-chaired
by the Prime Minister of Japan and the Premier of Niue
as the Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF), was
held in Hokkaido, Japan.

15

A/63/PV.85

In this meeting, the leaders of Japan and the PIF
expressed their resolve to pursue the shared objective
of ensuring a secure, resilient and more prosperous
region. To that end, Japan committed itself to provide
$500 million to Pacific island countries over the next
three years to assist them in the following areas:
environment and climate change, achieving the
Millennium Development Goals and promoting human
security, and overcoming economic vulnerabilities.
Climate change hits the most vulnerable countries
in the world. In our endeavours to reach agreement in
Copenhagen, we should take fully into account the
need to help the most vulnerable countries combat and
adapt to climate change. The Government of Japan, for
its part, will continue to provide financial and technical
assistance to developing countries through the Cool
Earth Partnership.
Climate change affects the most vulnerable and
poorest people and communities in the world and
within a country. Adaptation to climate change,
including disaster preparedness and prevention related
to sea-level rise, calls for a human security approach to
enhance resilience at the community level. For this
reason, we have added climate change to the agenda of
the sixth Friends of Human Security meeting, to be
held tomorrow morning, 4 June, under the
co-chairmanship of Japan and Mexico. I encourage all
delegations to participate in tomorrow’s meeting. In
our view, Friends of Human Security can be one of the
informal yet practical and useful platforms to consider
and address the possible security implications of
climate change.
Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada wishes to
congratulate the Pacific small island developing States
(SIDS) for their leadership in bringing the important
issue of security and climate change to the forefront of
our work at the United Nations. All the Pacific SIDS
delegations have spoken with great conviction and
cogency today. The process of bringing forward a
resolution in the General Assembly is often laborious,
but the time, energy, and challenges are far greater
when the concept being introduced is a novel one, as in
the present case.
The global challenge of climate change requires a
global response, and Canada is committed to reaching
a comprehensive and ambitious agreement in
Copenhagen this December. The current resolution
63/281 is an affirmation of our collective recognition

16

of the possible security implications of climate change.
The existential threat facing the Pacific small islands,
in particular, gives this important issue a very real,
urgent and human dimension.
Canada welcomes the calls for the relevant
United Nations bodies to intensify their efforts in
considering the possible security implications of
climate change. We also note that the SecretaryGeneral’s comprehensive report will help shape views
of Member States on this important issue and provide
useful context to inform our work.
Let me close by once again thanking the Pacific
small island developing States for their leadership and
foresight, and for the collaboration of the more than
90 sponsors of the resolution. I would also like to
thank the Like-Minded Group and other active
delegations for their flexibility and constructive
dialogue. Finally, let me pay tribute, as others have
done, to the delegation of Indonesia for the positive
bridging role it played at a crucial time in the
negotiations.
Mr. Elisaia (Samoa): As the last speaker from
among the Pacific small island developing States
(SIDS) to take the floor, allow me on their behalf to
thank the General Assembly, under the visionary
leadership of its President, for successfully adopting by
consensus the resolution entitled “Climate change and
its possible security implications” (resolution 63/281).
This is a momentous occasion in the life of our
Organization and a high point in the continuing efforts
of the Pacific SIDS to underscore the existential threat
posed by the adverse effects of climate change to our
smaller and more vulnerable island countries. History
will vindicate the Assembly’s strength of conviction as
demonstrated by the adoption of the consensus
resolution today.
A year ago, when the draft resolution was first
introduced, achieving the result that we have just
witnessed was considered untenable, far-fetched and
naive. Even a few weeks ago, a consensus resolution
remained all but elusive, and our Pacific SIDS
members were beginning to question whether we had
the perseverance and determination to pull this one off.
But persevere we did. Determined we were.
Compromise and accommodation we practised. For
true to our sense of moral and ethical obligation to our
Pacific islanders, who have already been and will soon

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

be victims of the impacts of climate change, we
continued to tell our story as truthfully as we saw it,
untroubled by whether people thought foul of us and
our motives. For there was no ulterior aim, no aim
other than to share the truth with the rest of the world.
After all, some of our members have the high moral
ground and can insist on having their stories told from
their simple perspectives, uncluttered by other agendas,
world dynamics and unfounded concerns.
Looking back now, any doubts we might have
had about a successful outcome are truly water under
the bridge, for actions speak louder than words.
Through the unanimous adoption of this resolution, the
General Assembly has rewarded our resolve with its
trust and repaid our fortitude with its confidence and
faith.
For those Member States that believed in and
stood by us from day one, through the thick and thin of
the negotiations, no reward suffices because none was
expected. In the Assembly, the Pacific SIDS have
found a true friend, for a friend in need is a friend
indeed.
Today’s resolution is the culmination of
exhaustive and protracted discussions with the wider
United Nations membership. The text of this finely
balanced resolution is the result of the pivotal role
Indonesia played in bringing together all parties in an
effort to bridge differences while respecting stated
positions. We wish to join others in acknowledging
Indonesia’s leadership in this regard.
Notwithstanding differences of view expressed by
various delegations throughout the course of
negotiations, I think we can all agree that the threat of
climate change to the livelihood, well-being and
security of all our peoples and countries is real and
upon us. The revised resolution just adopted represents
for all of us a collective compromise, but also, a united
call for the relevant organs of the United Nations to
intensify their efforts and give focused attention to a
particular aspect of climate change that has yet to be
fully discussed and considered at the United Nations.
In closing, allow me on behalf of the Pacific
SIDS to place on record our debt of gratitude to all the
sponsors, whose unwavering support nourished our
spirits and gave us the strength to continue to the end.
To all the States Members of the United Nations, we
say that words are inadequate to describe what the
heart feels, for it feels the truth. The unanimity of the

09-35766

support has dignified today’s proceedings, and the
consensus resolution is a legacy that is rightly the
Assembly’s and ours to claim.
The President of the General Assembly came to
our aid when we needed it most and he spared no effort
to ensure that Pacific islands concerns were at centre
stage, notwithstanding the multitude of global crises
competing for our Organization’s attention and time.
The facilitation roles of the Secretariat and all the
unsung heroes behind the scenes have not gone
unnoticed, and we warmly acknowledge their efforts.
Finally, to our Pacific island States and peoples
on whose behalf this effort was first initiated, I say that
I hope that we have not let them down. I hope that they
have not misplaced their trust in us. We have taken the
first and crucial step. We still have a long way to go
before we can benefit from today’s historic resolution.
The United Nations is our sanctuary and our place of
last resort, and we have every faith that it will not let
us down in the long and uncharted road ahead.
Mr. Khaleel (Maldives): The fourth assessment
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) clearly warned us of the adverse
consequences of climate change and global warming, if
left unchecked. That was two years ago. Unfortunately,
today’s statistics are much more serious and grim.
Human-induced climate change is accelerating much
faster and far beyond the IPCC’s predictions.
The science is clear. Climate change is real. It
knows no borders and has now become by far the most
serious threat facing human security. While there is no
longer a front line in the fight against climate change,
for those countries like the Maldives and other small
island developing States, with an average elevation of
one metre above sea level, as well as for low-lying
coastal areas across the globe, the situation may be
much more precarious today than ever before. Thus,
time is no longer a luxury that these countries can
afford; nor can they afford to pick and choose where
and when this important issue should be discussed.
Climate change-related conflicts are slowly
beginning to emerge as water and other scarce resources
are depleted, coastlines begin to recede, storms and
floods become more frequent, and droughts are
prolonged. As my delegation stated in the general debate
of this Assembly in September, for the Maldives climate
change “is not solely a development issue, but also a

17

A/63/PV.85

moral, ethical, political, legal and human rights issue, as
well as a grave security issue” (A/63/PV.16, p. 40).

promoted appropriate treatment of that particular
vulnerability.

It was against that backdrop that the Maldives
took the initiative in 1987 to raise this issue before the
Assembly. It was also the reason why the Maldives
participated at a high level in the Security Council
debate on this issue in 2007. It was the reason why the
Maldives decided to raise this issue in the Human
Rights Council last year, and it was also the reason
why the Maldives unconditionally joined our brothers
and sisters from the Pacific small island developing
States (SIDS) in submitting the important resolution
before us today.

However, as we have said on previous occasions,
the appropriate context for addressing climate change
is the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol, which
implicates the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council, the United Nations Environment
Programme and the Commission on Sustainable
Development, among others. Those bodies are
competent to address this and related issues in a
substantive way through due and harmonious
cooperation in dealing with situations arising from the
extreme consequences of climate change.

Unlike two decades ago when we first raised the
issue of the real threat of some of the low-lying SIDS,
including the Maldives, disappearing from the face of
the Earth due to global warming and sea-level rise,
climate change is a better understood and documented
phenomenon today. We have certainly taken our time in
reaching scientific and political consensus on the
nature and threat of climate change.
It is true that two decades of global action have
not yielded the results that we expected. Yet we refuse
to give up hope. We believe that a true partnership with
a common and shared vision of commitment and
multilateral solidarity can still guarantee our future.
Indeed, we have the means and the resources; what is
lacking is political will. As the Secretary-General has
been stressing, we will have to seal the deal in
Copenhagen. If we do not, it may be too late for some
of us.
Before I conclude, let me take this opportunity to
express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the
Pacific SIDS for taking this important initiative. We
commend them for this brave and courageous
undertaking. The consensus adoption of resolution
63/281, sponsored by nearly 90 countries, signals the
importance that the international community attaches
to climate change and its possible security
implications. We are fully convinced that the resolution
will become an important milestone in the annals of the
Assembly.
Mrs. Bianchi (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina understands and shares the concern of the
small island developing States and other countries that
are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of
climate change. In that respect, my country has always

18

Finally, I wish to stress that the phenomenon of
climate change must be addressed from the perspective
of sustainable development and the eradication of
poverty, promoting a comprehensive approach to the
root causes of the problem. That is why we believe that
the Security Council is not the competent organ to
address and consider this issue.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the adoption of resolution 63/281, which
seeks to alert the international community to the
adverse impacts of climate change, including rising sea
levels and the threat that they pose to security. The
resolution also calls on all relevant bodies of our
Organization to step up their efforts in that area.
We thank Indonesia for its role in bringing the
process to a successful conclusion, as well as the many
small island States that were directly involved in
drafting the resolution that we have adopted. In that
regard, we shared and supported the concern expressed
by the representative of Nauru on behalf of the Pacific
small island developing States.
Here, we cannot fail to recall the decisive
contribution of the Pacific small island developing
States to the law of the sea. If we wish to identify a
potential disaster situation, which is what is behind this
resolution, it is sufficient to focus on the existing facts
and to ask where the greatest risks and vulnerability lie
and who are the most threatened. Given that reality,
those States are entitled to be listened to. The evidence
of the major glaciers melting in both hemispheres is
irrefutable, and the sea level is rising. The Patagonian
glaciers, which are the largest ice mass in the southern
hemisphere after the Antarctic, have lost as much as

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

42 cubic kilometres of ice a year, which is equivalent
to 17 million Olympic-size swimming pools.
Studies carried out in the Antarctic show that the
ice is retreating at a rate of one metre a year and, in
certain periods, 10 metres a year. According to those
estimates, if the Antarctic peninsula ice were to
disintegrate, it would trigger an increase of up to five
metres in the level of the ocean. Bearing in mind that
many small island States are only two metres above sea
level, the implied security impact is obvious. The
resolution we have just adopted therefore accurately
reflects the international community’s recognition of
that phenomenon and represents an urgent appeal for
collective and coordinated action, which we believe
will earn the gratitude of future generations.
Mr. Sammis (United States of America): The
United States applauds the adoption today of resolution
63/281, “Climate change and its possible security
implications”, and is pleased to join the list of sponsors
that includes the original proponents of the resolution,
namely, the Pacific small island developing States.
We are encouraged by the General Assembly’s
ability to achieve broad consensus on a resolution
concerning the urgent issue of climate change,
particularly in these crucial remaining months leading
to the fifteenth meeting of the Conference of Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change in Copenhagen. We therefore express gratitude
to the Pacific small island developing States and to all
of our other negotiating partners for this collective
negotiating effort in the General Assembly.
This past April, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton
addressed representatives at the first preparatory
session of the Major Economies Forum on Energy and
Climate in Washington, D.C. At that meeting, Secretary
Clinton noted that
“the crisis of climate change exists at the nexus
of diplomacy, national security and development.
It is an environmental issue, a health issue, an
economic issue, an energy issue, and a security
issue … It threatens lives and livelihoods.
Desertification and rising sea levels generate
increased competition for food, water and
resources. But we also have seen increasingly the
dangers that these transpose to the stability of
societies and Governments. We see how this can

09-35766

breed conflict, unrest and forced migration. So no
issue we face today has broader long-term
consequences or greater potential to alter the
world for future generations.”
Climate change is among the highest priorities of
the Obama Administration, and Ambassador Rice has
made advancing the climate change agenda one of her
top priorities at the United Nations. The resolution
adopted today reinforces the Member States’
recognition that global climate change poses serious
challenges to our planet and requires an urgent
response and the widest possible cooperation by all
countries, as well as intensified efforts by the United
Nations system. The United States reaffirms its
commitment to leadership in this global endeavour.
Mr. Rangel (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We associate ourselves with the
statement made by the representative of the Republic
of Nicaragua and join the consensus in welcoming the
adoption of resolution 63/281, which ratifies our
commitment to supporting the efforts of the small
island developing States to adapt to the adverse impact
of climate change, including through special financing,
capacity-building and the transfer of appropriate
technology, given their paucity of financial resources,
high rates of poverty and the social problems linked to
their vulnerability to the effects of climate change and
related phenomena.
We wish, however, to reiterate our position
concerning the seventh preambular paragraph of
resolution 63/281, which refers to the Mauritius
Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development
of Small Island Developing States, paragraphs 26 and
27 of which refer to the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. In the understanding that this
reference is addressed to States parties to the
Convention, we stress the fact that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is not a State party to that
instrument, and that the standards of the Convention do
not apply to it under international customary law,
except for any provision that the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has recognized or will explicitly
recognize in its domestic legislation. Thus, the
aforementioned paragraph is not binding on our
country.

19

A/63/PV.85

Mr. Pálsson (Iceland): As a sponsor, my
delegation is very pleased that consensus was
established on today’s resolution. The text may fall
short of the expectations of some, but the patience and
hard work of the original drafters, the Pacific small
island developing States, have finally borne fruit. For
the first time, we now have a General Assembly
resolution that recognizes, with the full backing of the
entire United Nations membership, the possible link
between climate change and security. That is an
accomplishment, and my delegation highly appreciates
the show of flexibility by the different groups and
countries involved that made this achievement possible.
The adverse impacts of climate change on food
security, water availability and the loss of land in lowlying coastal States and islands due to rising sea levels
are no longer subject to dispute. It is also recognized
that such impacts can lead to forced migration and give
rise to tensions over access to land and natural
resources. Therefore, it is high time that the issue of
climate change and security be given the attention it
deserves.
My delegation certainly looks forward to future
consideration of this important issue based on the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General that the
General Assembly has requested through its resolution
today.
Mrs. Pessôa (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the
agreement reached on today’s resolution and
appreciates the efforts of all Member States in the
negotiations that led to this consensus text. Despite
some shortcomings in the text before us, Brazil joins
the consensus out of respect for and solidarity with the
small island developing States and in recognition that
we are all vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
Adaptive capacity is directly related to the level
of social and economic development, as pointed out in
the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The IPCC also
indicates that even if the concentration of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere were stabilized at current
levels, thermal expansion of the world’s oceans alone
would trigger sea-level rise in the coming centuries.
Among those most threatened by these adverse
impacts are small island developing States. Their
vulnerability, like that of many developing countries,
arises from the lack of adequate resources, technology,
capacity and knowledge for improving adaptive

20

capacity to such climate change-related phenomena as
sea-level rise. In that bleak scenario, hope lies in
enabling the vulnerable to build resilience in order to
avoid humanitarian catastrophes.
This is further reason why the international
commitments under the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol
should be fulfilled. Actions by all will be needed,
according to the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capabilities. Developed
countries, which have caused current and future
climate change through over 200 years of pollution,
bear a particular responsibility to reduce emissions and
support developing countries’ actions to adapt to and
mitigate climate change through additional financing
and technology transfer.
Brazil acknowledges the interdependence and
indivisibility of the concepts of development, security
and human rights as stated, inter alia, in principle 25 of
the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
and in the Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit (resolution 60/1). That is precisely why
attempts to shift the focus of the debate from
development to security should be avoided.
There is a clear link between climate change and
development, established by sound scientific research.
There is also a clear link between development and
security. There is no direct linkage, however, between
climate change and security. Determining whether a
given environmental impact gives rise to consequences
that might represent a threat to security remains a very
complex task. Thus, the consensus on this text should
not be construed as a recognition of a link between
climate change and security. Brazil reiterates its
commitment to tackle climate change and its adverse
impacts in a constructive and equitable manner.
The universal interest in climate change and the
related implications demands that the main forum for
an overall political appraisal of the matter remain the
General Assembly, where all Member States are
equally represented and which has the power to discuss
any issue or matter. We should stave off encroachment
by other bodies on the issues of the General Assembly.
The General Assembly should send a strong
message of support for the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and its Kyoto Protocol.
In preparation of the fifteenth Conference of the
Parties, a delicate negotiation process is currently under

09-35766

A/63/PV.85

way under those bodies. We must carefully measure
how to debate issues under consideration therein, so as
to retain the authority of the Convention and its Kyoto
Protocol and also move forward and constructively in
the preparation for Conference of the Parties.
Mr. Liu Yuyin (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
understand the concerns of countries with respect to
climate change. As a developing country, China too is a
victim of climate change. We are willing to discuss the
issue, and have taken an active part in such discussions
in a variety of institutions and forums. In the final
analysis, climate change is an issue of sustainable
development rather than a security issue, and it should
be addressed by international bodies charged to
consider sustainable development.
Ultimately, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change is the context for
substantive negotiations on this issue. Within the
United Nations, it should be discussed by the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
In responding to climate change, it is necessary to
uphold the principle of common but differentiated
responsibility, as established by the Framework
Convention. That reflects an important consensus
regarding the response to climate change and provides
the basis for maintaining the global partnership in this
respect.

09-35766

The international community is now engaged in
negotiations on the implementation of the Bali Road
Map and on strengthening the comprehensive, effective
and sustained implementation of the Framework
Convention and its Kyoto Protocol, with a view to a
positive outcome at the United Nations Climate
Change Conference to be held in Copenhagen at the
end of this year. We do not want to see the resolution’s
request for a report of the Secretary-General having a
negative impact on that negotiating process.
China is fully aware of the severity and urgency
of the issue of climate change. In a responsible spirit
regarding the long-term development of humankind,
China has steadfastly followed the path of sustainable
development. It has issued and implemented a national
plan for responding to climate change and has adopted
policies, measures and actions in an active effort to
respond to that phenomenon. We shall continue our
tireless efforts and active contributions in our response
to climate change.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 107.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

21
