A/64/PV.117

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

117

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 8 September 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya )

In the absence of the President, Mr. García
González (El Salvador), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/818)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.69)
Ms. Valenzuela Díaz (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome the holding of this important
meeting, which allows us to undertake a second review
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. We also welcome the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/64/818), which describes the activities of
the United Nations system in implementing the
Strategy.
The Government of El Salvador reiterates its
resolute support for all measures adopted within the
framework of the United Nations in the fight against
international terrorism. Such measures must be
implemented in accordance with the principles of the
Charter, international law and the relevant international
conventions and agreements.
We underscore the importance of continuing to
promote the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on the basis of its
four pillars. It is also important to strengthen actions
that, through the United Nations Office on Drugs and

Crime, can be fostered among States to facilitate the
necessary coordination among the various institutions
responsible for the issue.
We are fully convinced that the fight against
terrorism must be supported by a legal framework that
gives due legitimacy to Governments in achieving that
goal. That is why promoting the adoption, ratification
and entry into force of the various international treaties
on the issue is essential in providing the bodies
involved in the fight against terrorism with the legal
tools to facilitate their work.
However, we also believe that strengthening and
promoting international cooperation to be extremely
important, given that it is a key element that
strengthens effectiveness and efficiency in preventing
and suppressing terrorist acts, precisely owing to the
executive and operative nature of that cooperation. It is
also necessary to promote greater judicial cooperation
and exchange of information among financial entities
and police intelligence bodies.
Our commitment to fighting international
terrorism has guided our actions internally, bilaterally,
regionally and internationally. Thus, El Salvador
wishes to reiterate and renew its position condemning
all forms of the expression, financing and execution of
terrorism.
El Salvador is a State party to 15 international
sectoral instruments on terrorism. At the same time, it
continues to adapt its domestic legislation on the issue.
El Salvador is in compliance with the reports required

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-51015 (E)

*1051015*

A/64/PV.117

under the Security Council resolutions on the
prevention, combating and elimination of terrorism.
Moreover, it is necessary to promote among
countries and nations the elimination of factors that can
fuel terrorist acts, such as political, ethnic, racial and
religious intolerance and social and economic gaps,
and to continue to promote space for open dialogue
among the national focal points responsible for the
issue. That is necessary in order to promote the
exchange of experience, given that terrorism can go
hand in hand with other phenomena, such as drug
trafficking and related activities, such as transnational
organized crime.
Nationally,
with
the
restructuring
and
specialization of our public security bodies, El
Salvador has strengthened its implementation of the
Strategy. The Government of El Salvador will continue
to implement all steps necessary to fight terrorism in
all its forms. That is why we believe it necessary for us
all to reiterate and strengthen our commitment on the
issue at this meeting.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom aligns itself with the statement made earlier
on behalf of the European Union.
Terrorism remains one of the greatest challenges
to international peace, stability and security. The threat
posed to us all, including by Al-Qaida and its affiliates,
is real. The review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the upcoming adoption of draft resolution
A/64/L.69, once more by consensus, reaffirm our
collective commitment to working through the United
Nations to counter the terrorist threat. We must harness
that new impetus to effectively deliver the Strategy on
the ground, where it matters the most.
A key area on which to focus our efforts is
capacity-building. In this period of fiscal austerity, it is
crucial that we prioritize our activities and direct them
to those countries that are most vulnerable to the threat
posed by terrorists. We must ensure that our efforts to
counter the terrorist threat are comprehensive and
coordinated in order to avoid the duplication of effort.
Countries need to work together if we are going to
succeed.
Therefore, we need to continue actively to share
information among Member States and to use the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate and the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force

2

(CTITF) to full effect to promote discussion on the
capability and capacity-building needs of Member
States. The key gaps on which to target and upscale our
capacity building assistance include border control,
terrorist financing, the criminal justice sector and the
promotion of cultural dialogue.
We welcome the progress towards the
institutionalization of the CTITF. The CTITF will be
key to facilitating coherence and coordination among
its member entities and their work across a range of
issues, from border control to countering the appeal of
violent extremism. The CTITF Office can now work
with CTITF entities to ensure that all members of the
Task Force are mainstreaming counter-terrorism into
their work and appreciating the impact that their work
has on the Strategy’s goals.
In order to implement fully all four pillars of the
Strategy, we must find new ways to work more
innovatively with a range of new partners on counterterrorism. We must strengthen our global outreach with
civil society groups, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector and the media. We need actively to
build networks at the local, national and regional levels
to help us deliver counter-terrorism effects. To help us
build those new networks, we need to articulate better
the work of the United Nations. That will go a long
way towards reassuring others that the work of the
United Nations on counter-terrorism goes beyond hard
law enforcement efforts, and also works to help
address the roots of terrorism. In addition, we should
consider how we can incorporate civil society input
into country assessments and formalize our
relationships.
The terrorist threat is evolving. One example is
the new trends in kidnapping for ransom among
Al-Qaida affiliates. The United Kingdom believes that
the counter-terrorism community needs to take this
issue seriously. We understand from direct experience
just how difficult kidnapping cases are. But we also
know that ransoms cannot be excused as a necessary
evil or seen as part of a legitimate toolkit used to
resolve kidnappings. For many terrorist groups,
ransoms are a vital source of money for funding the
nuts and bolts of their operations — weapons, logistics
and recruitment. As their spending grows, so does the
threat that they pose. When major attacks can be put
together for tens of thousands of dollars, $1 million
dollars goes a very long way.

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

Last December, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1904 (2009), in which it explicitly
confirmed that ransom payments were subject to assetfreezing measures. If a State pays a ransom to an
individual or group on the sanctions list, it contravenes
sanctions adopted under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. It is that simple in law, but we
recognize that its implementation may be challenging
for some States. We therefore welcome the plans of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban to look at the implications of the regime as it
applies to ransom payments.
We must not forget that it is the devastating
impact of terrorism on its victims and their families in
many parts of the world that motivate us to come
together in New York to tackle the problem. The
Strategy is an important product of our efforts, and
rightly highlights the plight of victims of terrorism.
The United Kingdom therefore urges the CTITF to do
more to use its unique global convening power to bring
victims together and get their voices and stories heard,
building on the successful symposium of 2008. In
addition, the CTITF should do more actively to support
the work, and highlight the important contributions of,
civil society to counter terrorism.
Mr. Shin Boonam (Republic of Korea): I would
like to extend my sincere congratulations to the
President on convening this important meeting to
review progress made in the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
following the first review in 2008.
We commend the hard work of Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, who has led the process of
the Strategy review and developed the draft resolution
that awaits action by the General Assembly
(A/64/L.69).
I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General and
his staff for the comprehensive and informative report
contained in document A/64/818, of 17 June 2010,
which was requested by the General Assembly in
resolution 62/272.
The Republic of Korea shares the concern of the
international community over terrorism as a serious
threat to international peace and security. In that
regard, the Republic of Korea strongly condemns all

10-51015

acts of terrorism, irrespective of their forms and
manifestations and their alleged motives.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, adopted unanimously by the General
Assembly in September 2006, has provided a solid
basis for comprehensive and systematic counterterrorism activities by the international community. An
effective counter-terrorism approach should address all
aspects of terrorism, including strengthening law
enforcement and State capacity-building, denying
terrorists access to weapons — especially weapons of
mass destruction — suppressing the financing of
terrorism, facilitating public-private cooperation and
defending human rights. Fully convinced of the need
for comprehensive and systematic counter-terrorism
efforts, the Republic of Korea is actively participating
in international cooperation and strengthening its
domestic measures to counter terrorism.
Addressing the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism that could possibly be exploited by
terrorists can serve to complement the international
community’s efforts to counter terrorism. A range of
efforts is being pursued globally, including the easing
of socio-economic marginalization, the promotion of
dialogue among civilizations and the integration of
ethnic and religious minorities. In that regard, the
Republic of Korea has tripled its official development
assistance since 2000 and will continue to support
international efforts in such areas as poverty reduction,
disease control, human resource development and
sustainable development, which can also be valuable in
the efforts to address the conditions conducive to the
spread of terrorism.
The Republic of Korea has revised its national
Anti-Terror Action Directive, which is the main legal
basis of Korea’s counter-terrorism system. The
Directive defines the roles and responsibilities of
relevant authorities and offices, enabling Government
bodies to adopt individual measures to respond to
different types of terrorist actions.
To prevent the financing of terrorism, the
Republic of Korea enacted the Prohibition of Financing
for Offences of Public Intimidation Act in December
2008. The main objective of the Act is to implement
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism, thus to control moneylaundering by terrorist organizations in and through the
country. The Republic of Korea’s accession to the

3

A/64/PV.117

Organisation
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development (OECD)-affiliated Financial Action Task
Force in October 2009 allows it to actively participate
in the process of setting and revising global antimoney-laundering and standards in combating the
financing of terrorism, and to increase international
cooperation.
The Republic of Korea is also making use of its
advanced information technology to lead the fight
against cyberterrorism. The distributed denial-ofservice attacks are a strong reminder that cyberattacks
have the power to paralyze national infrastructure.
Together with the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
it is now time to make another serious attempt to adopt
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism
that would reinforce the legal network for preventing
international terrorism.
The Republic of Korea has made efforts to help
other States to build and enhance their counterterrorism capacity through various assistance
programmes.
Such
programmes
involve
the
participation of governmental agencies. They cover a
broad spectrum of projects, such as preventing crime
and ensuring criminal justice, forensic science
investigation, the prevention of money-laundering,
maritime security, cybersecurity and drug control.
The Republic of Korea became a member of the
OECD Development Assistance Committee in
November 2009. The Republic of Korea will continue
to develop its assistance programmes in terms of
substance and with a view to broadening the range of
cooperation, reflecting the needs in the field of
counter-terrorism capacity-building.
Welcoming the progress towards the finalization
of the institutionalization of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the Republic of
Korea expects that the CTITF will continue to play an
important role in ensuring overall coordination and
coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United
Nations system and in promoting international
cooperation and capacity-building.
As a State party to major international legal
instruments of human rights law, refugee law and
international humanitarian law, the Republic of Korea
has endeavoured to ensure that its various counterterrorism measures comply with obligations under
those international legal instruments. The Republic of
Korea shares the view that effective counter-terrorism

4

efforts and the protection of human rights are not
contradictory but, rather, mutually reinforcing.
Recent terrorist attacks have demonstrated only
too clearly that terrorism is an indiscriminate affront to
humanity. Terrorism cannot be linked to a particular
nationality, religion, civilization or culture. It is a
common threat we all face, and as a result requires
solidarity on the part of the international community.
Standing united under the goal of ensuring peace and
security for the world, the Republic of Korea takes this
opportunity to reaffirm its strong commitment to the
international community’s tireless efforts to combat
terrorism.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): The Belgian presidency
has clearly outlined the positions of the European
Union. I would, of course, like to align myself fully
with that statement and reinforce some general points
based on our own experience.
This meeting is indeed an occasion not only to
review the Strategy but to celebrate that landmark
achievement, which unites all of us on the basis of one
single and holistic approach. This is truly remarkable
in relation to an issue as sensitive and potentially
divisive as counter-terrorism. If we shall have grounds
to celebrate also at the next review of the Strategy, we
must, however, stay ambitious. The Strategy remains
an adequate framework but we need it to make even
more of a difference on the ground. It is like riding a
bicycle. You need to keep moving the pedals; otherwise
you will fall over.
In moving forward, it is our suggestion that we
navigate using the following bearings. We need to tear
down the walls between the security community and
the development community and between their
respective agendas. It is increasingly clear that these
dividing lines are artificial and that there is an intimate
relationship between security and development. We can
have no real security without development and no real
development without security. This is true for all our
countries, irrespective of their level of development.
Including counter-terrorism capacity-building as
an aspect of development programmes is a delicate but
nevertheless necessary task. Our national experience as
an important donor country shows that this is possible.
The report of the Secretary-General (A/64/818) also
usefully highlights the links between development and
social inclusion agendas, such as the effect youth
employment could have on reducing marginalization

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

and thereby
recruitment.

the

potential

for

extremism

and

On the initiative and under the aegis of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Denmark participated in organizing the
first meeting of the counter-terrorism focal points in
the ECOWAS region in the spring of 2010. One of the
forceful points coming out of that process was exactly
the strong interrelationship between a range of
interlinked security and development challenges and
the need to tackle them simultaneously. A report
developed by the Center on Global Counterterrorism
Cooperation setting out these points is available, and it
is our hope that countries in the region, other United
Nations Member States and the United Nations system
can follow up on the recommendations. Denmark will
do what we can to facilitate that.
All relevant parts of the United Nations system
need to be fully engaged. The CTITF should be
commended for its efforts in this regard. Moving
forward, this should increasingly involve United
Nations bodies coming also from the development
perspective. This applies in particular to the United
Nations Development Programme but also to
UNESCO. This is extremely important also because
counter-terrorism and counter-radicalization measures
should be reflected in national development plans or
poverty reduction strategies that recognize links
between development and security strategies if we
want to make a difference.
Some United Nations bodies, such as the Terrorist
Prevention Branch of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and, increasingly, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
are active in the field either by implementing or
identifying projects. This field presence should be
further developed, and other relevant United Nations
bodies should take inspiration from this and should
also be appropriately reflected in relation to the
renewal of the mandate of CTED later this year.
The commitment and efforts of each individual
country and the full national ownership of the
measures are fundamental. The importance of regional
organizations and of regional centres cannot, however,
be overestimated.
Terrorism, by its very nature, is a transborder
phenomenon, and should be addressed as such.
Indonesia and Australia have provided us with a

10-51015

beacon we can follow in the shape of the Jakarta
Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation. The Centre
is playing an important role, not only for the two
countries most directly involved but for the whole
South-East Asian region, and has now also received
considerable support from other donors. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the IGAD Capacity Building Programme against
Terrorism are key to actions in East Africa, and
ECOWAS is taking on a bigger role in West Africa. We
therefore believe that the establishment of an
institution that could do for South Asia what the
Jakarta Centre has done for South-East Asia is very
important, and we hope that this agenda can gain broad
support and go forward swiftly.
While the goal of countering terrorism is shared
around the world, questions have been raised about the
means used. There is a perception and concern in
global public opinion that efforts to strengthen law
enforcement and other security-related counterterrorism capacities have in some cases led to human
rights violations and to the oppression of civil society
and legitimate opposition. We need constantly to
ensure that the instruments we use to fight terrorism,
such as targeted sanctions, are in full compliance with
human rights standards and reflect due process
guarantees. If they are not, we will undermine the
legitimacy of our fight, and thus its effectiveness.
Fighting terrorism and protecting human rights are in
no way conflicting goals. The notion of a trade-off is
false.
Here we should move forward and bring together
the security community and the human rights
community. The approach should be not an ideological
but a practical one. We need to focus on the concrete
measures we have taken, to stay effective in our
common fight against terrorism, and to try to identify
ways to maximize due process and other guarantees for
each measure. A better understanding of this at the
practitioner level, maybe in the form of best practices,
would be an important contribution to the
implementation of the Strategy.
We have come a long way. If we want to be
celebrating the Strategy again in two years’ time, we
need a continuing commitment to involvement,
cooperation and implementation at the highest levels
and in all relevant bodies. We are confident that this
will happen.

5

A/64/PV.117

Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful for the organization of this meeting, which
we believe to be most timely. Acts of terrorism are a
direct, heinous assault on human rights and one of the
most serious threats to the peace and security of all
peoples. We therefore unequivocally reject terrorism
and any argument used to justify or, worse, glorify it.
That said, Costa Rica wishes to take this
opportunity to express two concerns. The first relates
to the growing confluence between the strategies, links
and methods of terrorist groups and those of organized
crime. There is a growing relationship between the
arms trafficking practiced by terrorists and other
criminals and money-laundering, drug trafficking and
even the trafficking and exploitation of human beings.
Our second concern is that the possibility of greater
nuclear proliferation may facilitate terrorists’ future
access to components with the capacity for mass
destruction.
The conclusion is clear. We are confronted by
risks and networks of growing complexity and size, in
the face of which the international community must
offer an organized, coherent, decided, intelligent,
systematic and systemic response. If we take this line
of thought and action, we must not only consider
whether we are doing well what we have decided to do,
but also what new doctrines and methods reality
imposes on us.
It is precisely this second review of the Global
Strategy that gives us the opportunity once again to
consider the progress or failures in its implementation,
grasping the lessons that would allow us to improve it
and, based on those lessons, to continue to make
progress on a level commensurate with the size and
character of these networks.
Costa Rica believes that the four pillars of the
Strategy are equally important and mutually
complementary. Our duty as States is to encourage
their equitable, coordinated application on a national,
global and regional scale. As my country believes
firmly in multilateralism and international law, the
importance of respecting human rights in the struggle
against terrorism is a fundamental point of Costa Rican
foreign policy. The adoption of effective policies to
counter terrorism and the protection of human rights
are mutually reinforcing. This is why, without losing
its effectiveness, the fight against this scourge must be

6

conducted in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
In this regard, efforts to improve transparency
and accountability are particularly important in the
processes for listing and de-listing persons and entities
associated with Al-Qaida and the Taliban on the
Security Council’s consolidated list, established in
accordance with resolution 1267 (1999). The need for
an impartial, nimble system that allows listed
individuals to exercise their right to defend themselves
is essential. Costa Rica believes that the appointment
of Ms. Kimberly Prost as the Ombudsperson for
counter-terrorism is an important step in that direction,
and we welcome it.
By conviction, and in compliance with its
obligations and commitments, Costa Rica has taken
important steps against terrorism at the national, global
and regional levels. In 2006, we established an interinstitutional committee on terrorism that unites all
national bodies involved in this area under the
coordination of the Office of the President. The
committee maintains relations with both the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee and the InterAmerican Committee Against Terrorism of the
Organization of American States (OAS). On 16 March
2009, we enacted a law strengthening terrorism, which,
among other measures, updates procedures for fighting
terrorism, drug trafficking, money-laundering, human
trafficking and related criminal activity. In addition,
the law provides for tough punishments for those who
help foment terrorism, defines the financing of
terrorism as a crime, incorporates a system of
prevention, control and suppression of this activity, and
establishes requirements for greater transparency and
awareness of clients in financial activities.
At the international level, Costa Rica participated
with the other member States of the International
Process on Global Counter-Terrorism Cooperation —
Japan, Slovakia, Switzerland and Turkey — in
organizing an international workshop for national
counter-terrorism coordinators, which took place in
Vienna in October 2009. In this way, we join Norway,
Austria, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate.
At the regional level, our country cooperates closely
in various efforts, particularly the Inter-American

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

Committee Against Terrorism, whose coordination with
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee is
essential for our countries.
In Central America, our immediate geographic
and historical environment, we have increased and
improved cooperation between our countries. However,
our economic vulnerabilities reduce our Governments’
direct capacity to act against terrorism and, especially,
against organized crime. In the light of our Central
American experience, we believe that the international
community should improve its cooperation with those
countries that, despite their willingness to fight such
scourges, do not have enough resources to do so.
I conclude with a reaffirmation of our
commitment to fighting terrorism as part of a broader
commitment to human rights and to the well-being,
security and peace of our citizens and those of the
entire world.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): I endorse
the statement made by the representative of Syrian
Arab Republic on behalf of the States members of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, and welcome
the holding of this second biennial review of the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, which offers us another excellent
opportunity to further reaffirm our firm commitment to
acting together to confront the threat of terrorism.
I also welcome the appointment of our colleague
and friend, Dr. Abulkalam Abdul Momen, Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh to the United Nations, as
facilitator of the second biennial review. The
outstanding manner in which he guided negotiations on
the draft resolution (A/64/L.69) before us confirmed
his great qualities as an academic and a diplomat, with
which we were already familiar. I would also like to
commend the entire team that supported him in that
undertaking.
The historic adoption on 8 September 2006 of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy was undoubtedly
the crowning achievement of our collective
mobilization to deliver a global coordinated response
to the scourge of terrorism. In truth, the scale of the
terrorist threat is such that no State can effectively
tackle it alone. Therein lies the merit of the CounterTerrorism Strategy, whose comprehensive, balanced
and effective implementation would surely represent a
significant step forward in our struggle to eradicate
terrorism.

10-51015

As provided for in paragraph 14 of resolution
62/272, the task we are again undertaking at this
second biennial review of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy is to take stock of its
implementation with a view to assessing progress
already achieved, determining areas requiring
additional action and identifying, above all, potential
gaps in order to make the necessary corrections.
Above all, we need to take stock of the
implementation of the Strategy by Member States,
which have the primary responsibility to that end, and
to assess the action undertaken in that framework
within the United Nations system and at the regional
level. The report of the Secretary-General (A/64/818),
whose publication we welcome, broadly informs us of
the activities undertaken by the United Nations system
to implement the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
since the first biennial review. We also have an
opportunity to exchange information at this debate on
what we have done in this field as Member States. We
therefore hope that this meeting will allow us to agree
on the key actions to be taken, at all levels identified in
the Strategy, with a view to enhancing its
implementation, which is already on the right track,
and to give it further momentum.
It is pleasing to note that considerable progress
has been made in the implementation since the first
biennial review, held in September 2006. This progress
is a result, in particular, of actions undertaken by States
both at the national level and within the framework of
regional or international cooperation. They also
constitute, as indicated in the Secretary-General’s
report, the fruit of considerable efforts deployed by
many United Nations bodies, programmes, funds and
specialized agencies and by regional organizations and
non-governmental organizations to promote, inter alia,
economic development, conflict prevention and a
culture of peace and a dialogue between civilizations.
Among the activities undertaken in these areas,
initiatives to strengthen intercultural and interreligious
dialogue are particularly important in the struggle to
eradicate conditions that are conducive to the spread of
terrorism because they promote better understanding
between peoples and the emergence of a greater culture
of tolerance.
Dialogue
among
civilizations,
combating
prejudice, tolerance and strengthening cooperation
between religions and cultures are undoubtedly among
the most effective ways to promote cooperation and

7

A/64/PV.117

achieve success in countering terrorism. It is by
rejuvenating the ideals of peace, dialogue and tolerance
that we will contribute effectively to meeting the
challenge of ensuring for present and future
generations a peaceful and safer world, free of
gratuitous hatred and violence.
Another challenge that we must meet in the
struggle against terrorism is that of development. In
that respect, there is a need to stress that, in addition to
our efforts to establish true dialogue among peoples
and to combat wanton hatred and ignorance, we need
to work to create decent living conditions for all by
combating abject poverty through a true commitment
to promoting development.
System-wide coherence in countering terrorism,
as well as capacity-building and assistance to Member
States, are crucial to a comprehensive and equal
implementation of the four pillars of the Strategy.
According to the report, the methodology developed by
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force in
the context of its integrated assistance initiative,
allowing States to seek the help of Task Force members
following a simple procedure via a single focal point,
deserves to be commended in that respect. I also
welcome the adoption on 24 December 2009 of
resolution 64/235 on the institutionalization of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
calls for greater interaction between it and the Member
States.
Senegal has demonstrated its commitment to
fighting terrorism by adopting a series of internal
measures to strengthen the relevant existing legal and
institutional mechanisms and by actively cooperating
in the fight against terrorism at the bilateral, regional
and international levels.
As a party to 13 relevant international counterterrorism conventions, my country is convinced that
the ultimate success of our common undertaking to
eradicate terrorism will depend largely on the
combined efforts of all actors concerned in the
framework of sincere, dynamic and inclusive
international cooperation. Senegal also participates at
the regional level, inter alia, as a member of the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States, in the forum of
representatives of the intelligence services of its 23
member States, which offers a framework for
exchanging information and assessing the terrorist
threat.

8

We are also heavily involved in the Economic
Community of West African States, and sincerely thank
Denmark for its valuable assistance to the countries of
the West African subregion. At the same time, Senegal
has also been a member since 2006 of the TransSaharan Partnership against Terrorism, which seeks to
strengthen the counter-terrorism capacities of its
member States.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the
importance that Senegal attaches to respecting human
rights law and international law in the fight against
terrorism.
Mr. Ayashi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): My
country has a long history of dealing with and fighting
the phenomena of violence and terrorism. Jordan has
witnessed attacks against its national security in the
past, since the time when the founder of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Abdullah al-Awad ibn al-Hussein
was assassinated. Terrorism has also targeted our
citizens and institutions both inside and outside the
country. Therefore, Jordan’s firm policy unequivocally
condemns all forms and manifestations of terrorism
committed by anyone, anywhere and for whatever
purposes. We believe that terrorism is an international
scourge and must be dismantled and uprooted through
coordinated international efforts. It recognizes no
borders and no homeland and is among the most
dangerous threats to international peace and security.
Terrorism will not be fully eradicated solely
through preventive security and administrative or
precautionary measures. The fundamental causes
leading to the proliferation of terrorism, in particular
its economic, political and legal causes, must be
addressed. We confirm that the rule of law and human
rights must be respected in the fight against terrorism
at the national and the international levels. In that
context, Jordan rejects the linking of terrorism to any
particular group, religion, culture or nationality.
Terrorism is a scourge from which all humanity suffers,
irrespective of its different regimes, ideas and beliefs.
This message from Amman seeks to spread the culture
of peace, equality and tolerance.
The General Assembly adopted the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four
pillars in 2006 (resolution 60/288), and Jordan
considers this review of the Strategy to be extremely
important. We stress our unity in condemning terrorism
and in fighting it.

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

Allow me to thank His Excellency Mr. Abulkalam
Abdul Momen, Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, and his team for their great efforts in
preparing draft resolution A/64/L.69 on the CounterTerrorism Strategy. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/64/818), “United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy: activities of the
United Nations system in implementing the Strategy”.
We also confirm the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.
Jordan has taken many firm and comprehensive
measures to combat terrorism and to maintain the rule
of law and peace and security. Jordan has also made
administrative and legislative changes to conform to
international norms and agreements. My country has
modified its penal code, adopted a counter-terrorism
law and modified the law against money-laundering in
line with international efforts to track, prosecute and
put an end to terrorists and their destructive acts.
Jordan has also taken other measures, including
prohibiting terrorist organizations from using its
territory. We enforce strict security measures at our
borders, in particular on identification verification, and
our customs authorities have also implemented certain
measures. With respect to banking security, we request
verification for money transfers and cooperate with
INTERPOL and many friendly countries in countering
terrorism.
Jordan has signed many bilateral and
international agreements, revealing its commitment to
cooperate in extending mutual legal assistance.
Additionally, Jordan has signed many international
counter-terrorism agreements and enacted many such
agreements at the international level and among the
Arab States, raising the alarm against terrorism and
calling for its defeat.
Finally, Jordan counts on the successful
implementation of the Strategy because the fight
against terrorism will be successful not only through
national
and
regional
efforts,
but
through
comprehensive international efforts as well, and the
Strategy is one of its main pillars. We are more than
ready here to maintain and strengthen our cooperation
with all United Nations organizations in order to
ensure the success of these efforts.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of my delegation, permit me to add to the
appreciation expressed for organizing this meeting of

10-51015

the Assembly to carry out the second biennial review
of the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the plan of action (see
resolution 60/288, annex), both adopted in 2006. My
delegation fully adheres to the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Belgium on behalf of the
European Union. I also wish to express our thanks for
the work done by Mr. Abdulkalam Abdul Momen,
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh who
facilitated preparation of the draft resolution
(A/64/L.69) submitted for our consideration.
Four years ago, the General Assembly took a
historic step by adopting the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy by consensus. Spain played
a prominent role in its inception, and it is now the
responsibility of all to ensure its effective
implementation. We therefore welcome the thorough
report of the Secretary-General (A/64/818) before us
today, which sets out the most outstanding
achievements of the entire United Nations system in its
efforts to implement the Global Strategy. Spain
believes that it is indispensable to adopt measures to
address the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism, as highlighted in section I of the plan of
action of the Strategy.
On this point, I recall that Spain actively
contributes, together with Turkey and many other
countries and organizations, to the Alliance of
Civilizations, an initiative introduced six years ago to
this Assembly by the President of the Government of
Spain, which was then undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral. Spain has actively supported the convening of
the forums of the Alliance, held, successively, in
Madrid in 2008, Istanbul in 2009, and Rio de Janeiro in
2010. As the result of all these efforts, in November
2009 the General Assembly adopted by consensus
resolution 64/14 on the Alliance of Civilizations.
Another priority action for Spain in the context of
the fight against terrorism is the promotion of
international solidarity in support of the victims of
terrorism. Spain believes that victims must play a key
role in any strategy to fight terrorism. We have
therefore developed a system to assist, respond and
provide reparations to victims, which I dare to describe
as one of the most comprehensive in the world. I take
this opportunity to offer to share our experience and to
offer our cooperation in this area to any State that
wishes to implement similar measures to support
victims of terrorism.

9

A/64/PV.117

Spain has welcomed and supported the
organization by the Office of the Task Force of the
International Symposium on Supporting Victims of
Terrorism, convened by the Secretary-General here in
2008. We would like to see a similar meeting take
place in the near future. Accordingly, we call on the
Secretary-General and the Office of the Task Force to
take the necessary steps to make this possible.
Spain should also have liked to see the necessary
objective of promoting and protecting the rights of the
victims of terrorism recognized in the draft resolution
before us today (A/64/L.69). Because of time
constraints, it was not possible to do so, but we trust
that this important issue will be duly taken up in future
reviews of the implementation of the Global Strategy.
With regard to measures to prevent and to combat
terrorism, I wish to highlight the fact that Spain has
ratified the 16 conventions and protocols of the United
Nations that constitute the international normative
framework for counter-terrorism measures. Spain will
continue working for the consolidation and
development of this framework, which should lead to
the future conclusion of a global United Nations
counter-terrorism convention.
With regard to measures to build States’ capacity
to prevent and combat terrorism and to strengthen the
role of the United Nations system in that regard, Spain
has made periodic contributions to the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. Spain also
provides financial support to the technical support
work conducted by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate of the Security Council, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and other
regional and sectoral organizations and institutions,
particularly in Africa.
Finally, in order to develop the section of the
Global Strategy on measures to ensure respect for
human rights and the rule of law as a fundamental
basis for the fight against terrorism, Spain has
promoted an international counter-terrorism approach
that gives consistent priority to international legality,
respect for human rights and rule of law instruments.
Spain is firmly convinced that respect for human rights
and the rule of law should be the basis and the limit for
any action of the State and the international community
in the fight against terrorism.
Spain firmly supports active and efficient
multilateralism in the fight against terrorism. We

10

believe that the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy is a valuable instrument to respond
to the global threat of terrorism. To that end, we will
need the firm commitment and cooperation of all, and
the full implementation of the Global Strategy is an
essential path thereto.
Mr. Saripudin (Indonesia): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his report on the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy (A/64/818). Following the first
biennial review of the Strategy two years ago, it is a
very comprehensive report and contains gratifying
information about the work being undertaken both
within the United Nations system and by Member
States.
Indonesia would also like to express its sincere
appreciation to Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, for his
tireless efforts in facilitating the Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review consultations. It is our hope that the
draft resolution emanating from those consultations
(A/64/L.69) will be adopted very soon by consensus.
My delegation wishes to align itself with the
statement of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Viet Nam and the statement of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference delivered
earlier by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
The Counter-Terrorism Strategy is indeed of great
importance to members of the international community.
Indonesia believes, however, that it must be
implemented with full recognition for the principles of
the United Nations Charter, particularly as they pertain
to the sovereign equality of States and their territorial
integrity and political independence.
Having seen the menace of terrorism at its most
reprehensible,
Indonesia
welcomes
the
full
implementation of the four pillars of the CounterTerrorism Strategy. We have worked tirelessly in this
direction. For several years now, our national response
to the challenge of terrorism has followed these pillars,
and we believe that they provide the required holistic
framework that can guarantee coordination and
success.
At the national level, Indonesia has ratified seven
of the universal counter-terrorism instruments. We

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

have also signed the Protocol for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving
International Civil Aviation, and are in the process of
ratifying the 1991 Convention on the Marking of
Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection.
At the bilateral level, we continue to develop or
strengthen cooperation with various countries,
including the Russian Federation, the United States,
France, the Netherlands and India.
Regionally, Indonesia continues to work
assiduously with various bodies, including ASEAN, the
ASEAN Regional Forum, the Asia-Europe Meeting,
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Bali
Regional Ministerial Meeting on Counter-Terrorism
and the Asia-Middle East Dialogue. Our focus includes
preventing and combating terrorist financing, increased
cooperation in investigations and the sharing of
information among law enforcement authorities, as
well as further exchanges of ideas on tightening border
controls, capacity-building and interfaith dialogue.
In this regard, let me point out how successful the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation,
which is a capacity-strengthening collaboration
between Indonesia and Australia, has been. As a
regional training centre for law enforcement officers
engaged in combating transnational crime, specifically
counter-terrorism, the Centre has, since its
establishment in 2004, conducted more than 200
courses for participants from 45 countries in the AsiaPacific region and trained over 6,000 participants in
the process.
Similarly, in the effort to prevent the
indiscriminate targeting of different religions and
cultures, we have actively taken the lead by
encouraging, hosting and participating in a variety of
interfaith dialogues with other countries. And in
recognition of the critical importance of seeking a
balance between promoting tolerance and freedom of
expression, Indonesia and Norway have sponsored the
Global Inter-Media Dialogue three times since 2006.
We continue to be committed to promoting the
effective implementation of the resolution 1267 (1999)
sanctions regime. Of great importance to us is the need
to improve its procedures, which would be of
assistance to Member States in the implementation
process.

10-51015

Indonesia continues to clarify and strengthen its
national strategy on counter-terrorism, which was
adopted through a ministerial decision in 2006. In
addition to a wide range of existing legislative
measures aimed at countering terrorist activity,
Indonesia is currently drafting legislation on terrorist
financing. In order to strengthen coordination relating
to the issue of terrorism, Indonesia, through a
presidential regulation, has established a national
coordinating body for combating terrorism with
responsibility for, among other things, implementing
the five universal counter-terrorism strategies, namely,
prevention, protection, enforcement, preparedness and
recovery.
We will also continue to pay greater attention to
the protection of the victims of terrorism, an effort for
which Indonesia now has various legislative
provisions, including a provision concerning witnesses
in terrorism cases.
It remains the belief of Indonesia that the only
way to fight terrorism successfully is to implement the
measures incorporated in the Strategy in a consistent,
transparent, balanced and comprehensive manner. A
key element here is to address those conditions that are
deemed conducive to the spread of terrorism. If
undertaken by all stakeholders diligently and
universally, we can make substantial headway.
One of the most important measures is the
extension of technical assistance to Member States in
order to help them enhance their capacity, as required
by the third pillar of the Strategy. We also support
enhanced dialogue among Member States with the
objective of promoting international, regional and
subregional cooperation in the implementation of the
Strategy.
In this connection, Indonesia welcomed
resolution 64/235 of 24 December 2009, by which the
General Assembly institutionalized the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) in order
to enhance its coordination role. We believe that this is
a critical step forward in the battle against terrorism
because it provides the required overall coordination
and coherence of counter-terrorism efforts in the
United Nations system. At the same time, we call for
the strengthening of transparency and coordination in
its work, with extra attention being paid to the need to
avoid duplication of work in all United Nations
counter-terrorism activities. In addition, we urge the

11

A/64/PV.117

CTITF to work more closely with Member States so as
to enhance their ability to fulfil their role in the
implementation of the Strategy.
Finally, my delegation looks forward to
negotiating a comprehensive and balanced convention
that respects the principles of international law and
humanitarian law, as well as national sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
delegation of the Islamic Republic of Iran would like to
thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening the second review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We appreciate the
efforts of Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
Permanent
Representative
of
Bangladesh,
in
facilitating the negotiations on the draft resolution on
the second review of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/64/L.69).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic on behalf of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference group, and fully endorses the
principled position the group has consistently taken on
the issue of terrorism.
The adoption by consensus of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on 8 September
2006 was a landmark step towards an integrated and
collective approach, under the auspices of the United
Nations, to tackling the problem of terrorism
worldwide. It was an attempt to provide an inclusive
remedy to a global challenge. The Strategy remains a
living document that should be reviewed and adapted
to the new circumstances as appropriate.
The Strategy is built on a categorical
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, committed by whomever, wherever and
for whatever purpose. The Strategy’s call for removing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism is a
realistic approach to addressing this multifaceted
phenomenon. It is imperative to understand that
terrorism cannot be eliminated if the environment that
breeds hatred, violence and chaos, including the
unlawful use of force, aggression, foreign occupation,
injustice and exclusion, is allowed to thrive.
States play the key role in eliminating terrorism.
A holistic approach to countering terrorism requires
collective will on the part of all States to develop a

12

culture of peace and tolerance, as well as a
commitment to the peaceful resolution of disputes.
Four years after the adoption of the Strategy, one
may ask how effectively terrorism has been countered.
The facts on the ground are not very encouraging,
despite many efforts undertaken at the national,
regional and global levels to prevent and combat
terrorism. Terrorist acts continue to target civilians,
particularly in our region of the Middle East, and an
increasing number of innocent men, women and
children fall victim to brutal acts of terrorism.
Unfortunately, many more are killed and injured as part
of the so-called collateral damage of occupying forces’
military strikes.
On the other hand, certain Powers persist in
propagating a culture of terror and intimidation in
pursuing their national interests, and in doing so they
offer a bad model to be followed by extremists and
terrorist groups. It is almost impossible to overcome
terrorism while a culture of terror and intimidation is
expanded by certain Powers. Moreover, some States
insist on applying double standards in dealing with
terrorist groups by acquiescing to certain terrorist
groups that they regard as beneficial to their narrow
political interests.
The Islamic Republic of Iran strongly condemns
terrorism in all its forms and practices, including State
terrorism. It is our firm belief that resort to
indiscriminate violence and terrorist acts, whether by
terrorist groups or by State military and security forces,
killing and maiming innocent people and generating
terror and intimidation among civilians are criminal
acts that cannot be justified in any manner.
My country has long been a target of terrorism
supported and encouraged by certain foreign Powers
that regard terrorism as one of the tools at their
disposal to exert pressure on countries like Iran. The
most recent terrorist act, carried out on 16 July 2010 in
a mosque in the south-eastern city of Zahedan, killed
and injured more than 200 innocent people. This
inhuman act was carried out by the remaining elements
of the terrorist group Jundullah, which has carried out a
string of terrorist acts in south-eastern Iran over the
past four years. These terrorist activities are, in part,
the result of the prevailing disorder and violence
caused by foreign invasion and interference in the
region.

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

There is also evidence that those terrorist
activities were actively supported by foreign military
and security services. Just a few months ago, the
Islamic Republic of Iran managed to capture the leader
of the terrorist group Jundullah. There is undeniable
evidence, including his own confession, that he
enjoyed extensive support from certain countries that
have military a presence in our neighbouring countries.
The biannual reviews of the Strategy are an
opportunity to renew our commitment to implementing
the Strategy in all its four pillars and in a consistent
and integrated manner. It goes without saying that the
responsibility for the implementation of the Strategy
lies with Member States, and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF) has the important
task of coordinating the United Nations counterterrorism
activities.
We
trust
that
the
institutionalization of the CTITF will contribute to the
better functioning of that important United Nations
body within its mandate. We also look forward to
meaningful
interactions
between
the
general
membership and the CTITF and to regular reporting by
the Task Force to Member States.
We would also like to highlight that the
involvement of the United Nations specialized agencies
in United Nations counter-terrorism activities under the
CTITF should not affect their mandates and/or their
much-needed operational activities.
A consensus legal definition of terrorism would
very much contribute to the successful implementation
of the Strategy. In this regard, we reiterate the
importance of the resolution 46/51, which in its
preamble reaffirms
“the inalienable right to self-determination and
independence of all peoples under colonial and
racist regimes and other forms of alien
domination and foreign occupation, and uphold[s]
the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the
struggle of national liberation movements, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter and the Declaration on Principles of
International Law”.
We are concerned about the increase in terrorist
acts in our region, which has been mainly brought
about or triggered by the ongoing conflicts imposed by
non-regional Powers. The unparalleled rise in terrorism
in recent years, which has claimed the lives of tens of
thousands of innocent people and resulted in huge

10-51015

economic damage and instability, has been mainly
generated or fuelled by conflicts and wars inflicted
upon the region from outside.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has spared no effort
in fighting terrorism. We stand ready to cooperate with
other countries, especially our neighbours, and with the
relevant United Nations bodies. Iran has been keen to
improve its overall capacity to prevent and combat
terrorism and crime.
The accession of the Islamic Republic of Iran to
three international instruments against terrorism — the
1988 Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, its Protocol
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the
Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental
Shelf, and the 1991 Convention on the Marking of
Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection — was
recently endorsed by Parliament.
Moreover, the Anti-Money-Laundering Act,
which has been in force since early 2008, provides the
necessary and sufficient legal tools to prevent and fight
the laundering of the proceeds of any crime. The
establishment of the Financial Information Unit was
one of the results of this Act, which is essential to
improving information-gathering on illegal financial
activities. Accession to the 1999 International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism is also under way.
We have also benefited from the technical
assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime in combating terrorism and crime through a
number of joint projects and workshops. A number of
initiatives have also been taken at the bilateral and
regional levels — particularly among the members of
the Economic Cooperation Organization and trilaterally
between Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan — to promote
cooperation against terrorism and transnational
organized crime, especially drug trafficking, given the
fact that drug trafficking has been used as the main
financial source for some terrorist groups in the region.
A good number of bilateral agreements and
memorandums of understanding have been concluded
to strengthen mutual legal cooperation and judicial
assistance in combating organized crime and terrorist
acts.
For decades, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
been at the forefront of a full-scale war against
transnational drug mafias. Thousands of Iranian law

13

A/64/PV.117

enforcement personnel have lost their lives, and
billions of dollars have been spent to combat drug
traffickers and to interdict opium shipments. According
to the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
international cooperation against the world drug
problem (A/65/93), more than 6,900 tons of opium —
or 89 per cent of the world total in 2009 — were
produced in neighbouring Afghanistan. Most of this
product is trafficked across Iran’s borders. We urge the
international community to pay more attention to this
issue. We have shouldered a great burden, largely
without receiving minimal assistance from the
international community, but we should note that no
country can tackle this scourge single-handedly.
In our efforts to uproot terrorism, due attention
should be paid to all ways and means that may be used
by terrorist groups to pursue their dangerous activities.
In that context, we share the concern that terrorist
groups may increasingly use the Internet, both in
campaigning for their vicious cause and in pursuing
their criminal activities. That needs due consideration
by States and the relevant United Nations bodies.
Terrorism is a despicable crime that should be
rejected in all its forms by and against whomever it
may be committed. Selectivity and double standards in
dealing with terrorist groups are real impediments to
eliminating terrorism. Likewise, linking terrorism with
any religion, nationality or culture must be rejected.
Such an unwise approach towards terrorism will only
lead to distrust, hatred and division among nations. It is
imperative that we redouble our collective efforts to
promote dialogue and tolerance among civilizations
and cultures — as was mentioned by my colleague
from Indonesia — and to counter disrespect for and
defamation of religions.
Mr. Vilović (Croatia): I thank the President for
convening this plenary meeting to consider the
progress made since the first review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its plan
of action two years ago.
I express my appreciation to the facilitator,
Ambassador Momen of Bangladesh, and his expert
team for leading the process of the negotiation of the
outcome document of this meeting. We welcome the
draft resolution (A/64/L.69) agreed upon by all
delegations, and believe that it represents a solid basis
for the future implementation of the Strategy.

14

At the outset, allow me to reiterate that Croatia
firmly believes that the United Nations should play a
central role in the global struggle against terrorism.
The Strategy represents an overarching framework that
brings together all Member States, United Nations
bodies and agencies and other counter-terrorism
partners. All countries and other relevant stakeholders
should be committed to the full and integrated
implementation of all four pillars of the Strategy.
My country has aligned itself with the statement
delivered earlier today on behalf of the European
Union and fully supports the main messages contained
therein. However, allow me to provide the Assembly
with a brief account of Croatia’s implementation of the
Strategy at the national, regional and international
levels.
Since the first review, Croatia has adopted a
national strategy for the prevention and suppression of
terrorism. That landmark document is guided by the
principles and values enshrined in the Croatian
Constitution and the United Nations Charter and is
based on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, the European Union Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and other relevant international legal
documents in this field. The coordination of
implementation at the national level of all relevant
international instruments and initiatives in the area of
counter-terrorism is carried out by our inter-agency
working group for the suppression of terrorism, which
has been operational since 2001 and is chaired by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration.
The Global Strategy describes broad and diverse
measures under its first pillar. In that regard, Croatia is
involved in a number of regional activities with the aim
of preventing and suppressing conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism. Furthermore, during its twoyear membership of the Security Council, Croatia was
actively engaged in trying to find long-term solutions
to a number of prolonged and unresolved conflicts.
Allow me also to remind the Assembly that
Croatia chaired the Counter-Terrorism Committee of
the Security Council in 2008 and 2009, while, during
our presidency of the Council in December 2008 the
Croatian President chaired a thematic debate on global
security and international terrorism. The outcome of
that
meeting
was
a
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2008/45) in which the Council, inter alia,
called on all Member States to renew the degree of

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

solidarity manifested immediately after the tragic
events of 11 September 2001 and to redouble their
efforts to tackle global terrorism.
Croatia continues to contribute to United Nations
peacekeeping and is currently participating in nine
peacekeeping missions on the ground. Croatia also
looks forward to an increased and strengthened role for
the Peacebuilding Commission. As a country that has
gradually undergone a transformation from recipient
country to donor of development assistance, Croatia
actively participates in international activities aimed at
achieving sustainable development and eliminating
potential factors of instability.
Croatia has been active in promoting intercultural
and interreligious dialogue in close cooperation with
UNESCO and regional organizations. In particular,
Croatia has contributed to intensifying regional
dialogue in South-East Europe at the highest level, thus
creating an atmosphere of good-neighbourly relations.
Croatia became a member of the Group of Friends of
the Alliance of Civilizations in May 2008 and recently
adopted its national plan in that connection, which
serves as an important and useful tool for building
tolerance and understanding among nations. Croatia
welcomes the first regional strategy of the Alliance of
Civilizations for the countries of South-East Europe,
adopted in Sarajevo in 2009, and looks forward to the
adoption of the regional strategy and action plan for
the Mediterranean.
Croatia is also active within the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
Council of Europe, where Croatia has chaired the
Committee of Experts on Terrorism. Bearing in mind
the need to prohibit incitement to commit terrorist acts
and to prevent such conduct, Croatia has ratified a
number of Council of Europe conventions and
protocols on terrorism. Croatia is also advocating for
other countries to use those legal instruments, as they
are open to signature and ratification by States
non-members of the Council of Europe.
Under the second pillar of the Strategy, Croatia
has undertaken a wide array of measures in order to
prevent and combat terrorism, which represents a
serious threat to international peace and security as it
attempts to undermine the core values of the modern
world. Croatia has ratified 14 key international
conventions on the suppression of terrorism, including
the United Nations Convention against Transnational

10-51015

Organized Crime and its three Protocols, as well as the
United Nations Convention against Corruption. In
addition, Croatia is active in the development and early
use of monitoring mechanisms for those two
Conventions. Croatia has fully harmonized its
legislation with the European Union framework
decision on combating terrorism of June 2002.
Accordingly, our domestic legislation has been
adjusted as well. In 2008, an important set of
amendments was adopted to the criminal code as new
offences had been introduced, such as public
instigation to terrorism and recruitment and training for
terrorism. That enabled the direct incorporation of
provisions of international and regional legal
instruments, including requirements of Security
Council resolution 1624 (2005).
Furthermore, the new International Restrictive
Measures Act was adopted in 2008. The Act enables
more comprehensive and efficient implementation of
sanctions
regimes,
including
counter-terrorism
sanctions adopted within the framework of the United
Nations, the European Union and other international
organizations,
including
restrictive
measures
introduced by Croatia in accordance with other
obligations that are in conformity with international
law.
Croatia has also continued its cooperation with
INTERPOL and the European Union in the area of
enhancing border security and control of lost and
stolen travel documents. Croatia has to date signed
numerous bilateral treaties on police cooperation with
other States and international organizations, including
with all of our neighbouring countries.
Under the third pillar of the Strategy, Croatia
supports the activities of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), which
is responsible for ensuring a comprehensive and
coordinated approach in implementing the Strategy,
which has been comprehensively elaborated in the
report of the Secretary-General (A/64/818). Croatia
welcomes the progress made in the final stage of the
institutionalization of the Task Force pursuant to
resolution 64/235, adopted by this body in December
2009. We believe that providing funding from the
regular budget for the CTITF’s core operations will
positively contribute to the coordination and
harmonization of United Nations system-wide counterterrorism efforts, as well as to providing support for the

15

A/64/PV.117

efforts of Member States to implement the Strategy in
all its aspects.
Croatian authorities have enjoyed constructive
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime in Vienna and with its Terrorism Prevention
Branch, as well as with the OSCE, by actively
participating in their various counter-terrorism
conferences, workshops and seminars. Similar events
have also been organized at the national level for the
purpose of educating law enforcement officials, state
attorneys, judges and customs officers.
With regard to the fourth pillar, Croatia believes
that effective counter-terrorism measures and the
protection of human rights are indeed complementary
and mutually reinforcing. Croatia has ratified a large
number of international treaties and set up the
necessary domestic measures to ensure full respect for
human rights and a rule-of-law-based national criminal
justice system. The protection of the highest human
rights standards is enshrined in the Croatian
Constitution. In our national strategy for the prevention
and suppression of terrorism, special attention has been
focused on the protection of human rights. Any
measures taken to combat terrorism fully comply with
our obligations under international law, in particular
human rights law, refugee law and international
humanitarian law.
Finally, I believe that this second review will
confirm the commitment of all participants to the
implementation of the Strategy and chart the way
forward towards reinforcing the consensus of the
international community in fighting this heinous
scourge.
Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I, too, would like to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his useful report (A/64/818), and the
facilitator, Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, and his cofacilitator, our colleague Mr. Muhammad Rafiuddin
Shah of Pakistan, whose tireless and well-appreciated
work contributed to facilitating the arduous
negotiations in recent weeks.
The General Assembly, which has a central role
within the United Nations system, in 2006 adopted the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars,
which have served as the framework for combating
terrorism. It is up to us to implement the pillars in a
balanced and equal manner, bearing in mind that this is

16

an ongoing process subject to periodic review against
the backdrop of the provisions of international law in
their entirety.
While we take note of the progress that has been
made, as set out in the report of the Secretary-General,
and fully associate ourselves with the statement
delivered by the representative of Syria on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, my
country nevertheless believes that the progress made
does not yet amount to the implementation of the
Strategy’s pillars. In fact, the implementation of the
Strategy is still far from achieving the goals of the first
pillar, namely, measures to address the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism. The consensus we
have reached to put aside justifications for terrorism
should not obviate the need to define the phenomenon
of terrorism and to carry out an objective assessment of
the sources and conditions conducive to tension and
the breeding of terrorism — for example, the illegal
use of force, aggression, occupation, the denial of the
right of peoples to resist foreign occupation, injustice
and various forms of economic and political
marginalization. We cannot continue to ignore these
conditions and sources, to apply double standards, to
resort to pre-prepared accusations and to link terrorism
to a specific religion, nationality, culture, ethnic group
or geographic area.
With regard to the Strategy’s second pillar —
measures to prevent and combat terrorism — there is
still a need for more effective measures. Without going
into detail as to the necessary measures, we believe
that preventing the funding of terrorism in all its forms,
including the taking of hostages for ransom, merits
special attention at the national and international
levels, and that political asylum should adhere to the
noble humanitarian objectives for which it was
established.
Greater effort is also needed in
strengthening State capacities and providing increased
technical assistance to enable countries to prevent and
combat terrorism, as clearly called for by the Strategy’s
third pillar.
All of this should be done without sidelining
measures to ensure respect for human rights for all and
the primacy of the rule of law as the cornerstone for
combating terrorism, as set out in the Strategy’s fourth
and last pillar.
As the Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism
Committee was able to see during its last visit, my

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

country has adopted a series of steps aimed at
implementing the Strategy. We call on all Member
States, which have the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the Strategy, to bolster their efforts
in that regard. We also call for strengthening the role of
the United Nations system. In that connection, we
underscore the important role of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), chaired by
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde. We believe that the CTITF
should play an effective role that involves all States in
a clear and transparent manner.
I also recall the importance of adhering to all
existing
international
legal
instruments
and
arrangements, which should be complemented by the
comprehensive counter-terrorism convention currently
being drafted and by the holding of a General
Assembly session resulting in a clear definition of
terrorism that distinguishes that phenomenon from the
legitimate resistance to occupation. The ultimate
purpose should be to achieve the goals of the
international community to eliminate the causes and
manifestations of terrorism and to establish a world in
which everyone can enjoy peace and security.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me take
this opportunity, at the very outset, to offer my
congratulations to Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul
Momen, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, on
his outstanding efforts in facilitating consultations on
the draft resolution on the second review of the United
Nations
Global
Counter-Terrorism
Strategy
(A/64/L.69). We also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (A/64/818) on the activities of the United
Nations system in implementing the Strategy, which
highlights the efforts of the United Nations system in
that regard.
Terrorism is the most abhorrent and heinous
crime against humanity as a whole; indeed, it is the
scourge of our times. It continues to be a pervasive and
insidious threat not only to global security but also to
the core values of the United Nations. It is our firm
conviction that no belief, justification, political cause
or argument can be used to justify acts of terrorism. We
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
irrespective of its motivations, as criminal and
unjustifiable. We therefore reiterate that no cause, no
matter how seemingly just, can excuse terrorism. As a
victim of terrorism and as its worst sufferer for many
recent decades, India has an abiding interest in greater

10-51015

and more meaningful international cooperation to
counter and combat terrorism.
The adoption of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in 2006 was a landmark in the fight against
terrorism. The four pillars of the Strategy deal with the
menace of terrorism in a balanced manner that
addresses all aspects, contributing as well as
preventive. The institutionalization of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF) in 2009
contributed to strengthening United Nations efforts to
counter terrorism by providing an umbrella under
which different United Nations entities can effectively
implement the Strategy in a coordinated and coherent
manner. We are confident that the institutionalization
of the CTITF will streamline the overall work of the
United Nations system in countering terrorism. As the
primary responsibility for the implementation of the
Strategy rests with Member States, we hope that the
institutionalization process will also provide a useful
platform for the practical engagement of the CTITF
with Member States, guided by their individual needs.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is a unique, universally agreed strategic
framework to counter terrorism. The Strategy is
intended to play a pivotal role in guiding counterterrorism efforts undertaken at the global, regional,
subregional and national levels. The Strategy needs to
be implemented in an integrated manner in all its four
pillars. The various United Nations and other
specialized agencies have to ensure that counterterrorism approaches and measures cater to regional,
national, international and functional specificities to
facilitate multidimensional technical assistance needs.
In that regard, the CTITF has to play a crucial role in
ensuring coordinated and coherent efforts across the
United Nations system to counter-terrorism.
India has firmly put in place a policy, strategic,
administrative, operational and legal framework to
implement the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in all
its four pillars. We are willing to share our experiences
in the implementation of the Strategy and to provide
assistance, bilaterally or multilaterally, as necessary
and needed in the larger efforts to counter the threat of
terrorism at the global, regional, subregional and
national levels. We are also willing to share relevant
information with competent United Nations agencies as
and when the need arises.

17

A/64/PV.117

The draft resolution on the second review of the
implementation of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is an important step forward. Stressing the
primary responsibility of States to implement the
Strategy, it lays emphasis on the implementation of the
Strategy by the United Nations system in a coordinated
and coherent manner and on the need to avoid the
duplication of efforts undertaken by various United
Nations entities.
We are happy to see that the draft resolution
encourages Member States to get involved in the work
of the CTITF, not merely to receive regular quarterly
briefings from the Task Force on its work but also to
provide the CTITF with policy guidance and feedback
on its work. This interactive mechanism will be
immensely beneficial both for Member States and for
the United Nations system in their joint efforts to
combat terrorism.
We are also happy to note the plans of the CTITF
to bring its work to a wider audience through the
development of a comprehensive website. That is a
significant effort, as the work of the CTITF is relevant
not only to Member States and United Nations entities
but also to civil society at large. Encouraging Member
States to participate in the work of the CTITF will
further add value to the legitimacy and credibility of
United Nations efforts to counter terrorism.
In paragraph 139 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral has very aptly pointed out that
“The comprehensiveness of implementing
the Strategy will not be complete without the
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. As committed in the
Strategy, Member States should make every effort
to reach an agreement on the text and conclude
the convention in order to unite behind the global
counter-terrorism effort.”
In conclusion, I wish to reassure the General
Assembly that we will actively engage with the CTITF
and all other relevant entities of the United Nations in
the efforts of the Organization to counter terrorism.
Mr. Chekkori (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation associates itself with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. I should now like to make some comments
in my national capacity.

18

I first wish to thank the President for his initiative
to convene this important meeting on the second
review of the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which was adopted
in September 2006. I would also like to express our
gratitude to Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, and to the
working group he led for their efforts to produce a
draft resolution on the second review of the Strategy
(A/64/L.69).
The Kingdom of Morocco fully condemns all acts
of terrorism. We are convinced that nothing can justify
terrorism, irrespective of its motivations and goals. The
terrorist acts that have taken place in the past two years
are evidence of the fact that the fight against terrorism
is not yet over and that, despite all the efforts that have
been made, terrorism continues to be one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security.
In that regard, the scope, diversity and severity of
the terrorist threat leads us to conclude that, despite its
importance, actions by individual States cannot replace
an effective, continuous and collective commitment to
putting an end to terrorism as a real cross-border threat
that can strike any nation regardless of religion or
culture or level of development. In that respect, we
reject all attempts, whatever their sources, to link
terrorism to any religious or ethnic group, culture or
faith, since terrorism denies all religious, moral or
humanitarian values.
The United Nations is the appropriate and
legitimate framework for Member States to fight
collectively against terrorism. Member States are
working within that multilateral framework to draw up
collective legislative measures against terrorism. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is
one of the most noteworthy signs of the international
community’s resolve to eliminate this dangerous
scourge and improve the performance of the United
Nations in that regard.
However, four years after the adoption of the
Strategy, its success will be assessed based on events
and results on the ground. This General Assembly
meeting is a real opportunity to take stock of the
progress we have made in implementing the provisions
of the Strategy. In that respect, we would like to
express our satisfaction at the discussions on the
provisions of the draft resolution before us today in the
context of the second review. The draft resolution

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

reaffirms the basic principles agreed in resolution
60/288, adopted in 2006. It also contains a new
provision on interaction between Member States and
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force,
institutionalized through resolution 64/235 of 2009, to
achieve greater transparency and enable Member States
to assess actions to be undertaken by the Task Force
and receive observations and guidance on the general
policy on efforts made towards the implementation of
the Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Moreover, we are satisfied with the contents of
paragraph 11 of the draft resolution before us, which
reaffirm the need for enhanced dialogue among the
counter-terrorism officials of Member States. That
provision is very encouraging with regard to the
speedy and operational implementation of the
important proposals submitted by Saudi Arabia on
establishing a good basis for the promotion and
enhancement of cooperation, national capacitybuilding and sharing of experiences on counterterrorism.
My country has been active whenever signs of
terrorism have appeared and has worked with other
countries to establish a comprehensive and multilateral
national approach in line with the United Nations
Strategy and its four pillars. My country’s approach in
the political, legal, security, economic, social and
cultural fields has succeeded only because all our
citizens have totally rejected terrorism and are
committed to the values of tolerance, coexistence and
the culture of peace. However, despite its success, that
national approach will be sufficient only in conjunction
with unconditional regional and international
commitment and efforts to counter all forms of
terrorism, in particular its funding and root causes,
especially in its new form as transnational organized
crime, which is increasing its links with terrorist
networks worldwide.
We are very concerned about the ongoing terrorist
activity in the corridor between the Arab Mahreb and
the Sahel and the link between such activity and drug
trafficking, the small arms trade and clandestine
immigration. However, we believe that the approach to
be adopted by countries concerned about the region’s
security must be based on solidarity, constructive
dialogue, indivisibility and comprehensiveness, and
that all parties should shoulder their responsibilities
and form partnerships with the international
organizations, in particular the United Nations, that

10-51015

assist countries in building their national capacities to
counter terrorism.
In conclusion, as we participate in this important
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, we call for the consideration of new ideas for
the next review, in accordance with the spirit and letter
of paragraphs 16 and 17 of the draft resolution before
us, so as to uphold the credibility and vitality of the
Strategy that we adopted four years ago.
Mr. Slapničar (Slovenia): In the interests of
time, I would like to highlight some of the points in the
written statement being distributed.
While Slovenia aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the
European Union, I would like to make a couple of
general remarks from a national perspective and
present some national activities undertaken in support
of the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy since September 2008.
The United Nations remains the main
international forum for action against terrorism. The
consensus that enabled the adoption of the Strategy
four years ago remains strong. The implementation of
the Strategy gained pace with a number of activities at
the international, regional, subregional and national
levels. We recognize that significant progress has been
achieved, yet much remains to be done. A
comprehensive, balanced approach to the four pillars
and sustained implementation remain crucial. We agree
that a regular review is necessary to compare notes,
improve our capabilities and take a fresh look at the
issues that we are dealing with. A two-year interval
seems the right approach.
While the main responsibility for implementation
lies with Member States, we fully support the activities
of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force to
ensure United Nations system-wide coherence. The
Strategy and its implementation should also be
considered through the prism of our regular reporting
to the counter-terrorism bodies of the Security Council
in order to avoid duplication and so-called reporting
fatigue.
Slovenia is now party to 14 of the 16 United
Nations conventions and protocols on counterterrorism. In the fall of last year, we ratified the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism and the amendments to the

19

A/64/PV.117

Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material. We have also initiated internal procedures on
the ratification of the remaining two Protocols on the
suppression of unlawful acts against the safety of
maritime navigation.
In the fall of last year, Slovenia also ratified the
Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism, and this spring the Council of Europe
Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and
Confiscation of the Proceeds from Crime and on the
Financing of Terrorism. These ratifications were made
possible by relevant amendments to the penal code and
to the Law on the Prevention of Money Laundering and
Terrorist Financing.
In regard to the first pillar, we should continue to
focus on the promotion of and respect for human
rights, the rule of law, good governance, democracy,
tolerance, education and economic prosperity. This is
important from the perspective of countering the issue
of radicalization and recruitment, and for addressing
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
In regard to the second and third pillars, we
believe that national efforts to counter terrorism should
be complemented by international cooperation, since
no country can cope with this scourge on its own. It is
a long-term effort that will bring added value if we
enhance existing cooperation and offer technical
assistance to those who need it, through bilateral or
multilateral channels.
I would also like to inform the Assembly that the
Slovenian Parliament approved a new national security
strategy this spring. The revision of the strategy is part
of an ongoing general overhaul of our strategic
documents. This overall strategic framework identifies
threats and challenges to national security at the global,
supranational and national levels, and defines policies
and instruments for addressing them. The strategies
also call specifically for work to be done in
partnership, whether bilaterally or in a regional or
multilateral arena. The national security strategy
recognizes the threat of terrorism and envisages the
Government’s adoption of a national counter-terrorism
plan.
There is also a need to enhance cooperation
between law enforcement and judicial authorities,
which is not always easy to achieve. It is very
important not only to condemn the perpetrators of
terrorist acts, but also to do everything we can to

20

prosecute them, while ensuring respect for human
rights. With that commitment, we contribute to
essential principles shared by our societies, such as the
importance of the rule of law.
Slovenia has concluded a number of bilateral
agreements with more than 20 States on cooperation
between Governments, police authorities and financial
intelligence units in suppressing crime, including
terrorism. Slovenia’s activities are aimed particularly at
cooperation with the countries of the Western Balkans.
Following Slovenia’s initiative, cooperation is under
way on the basis of an agreement on counter-terrorism
cooperation between police authorities in the region.
Another Slovenian initiative, in the form of a transfer
of European Union best practices on counter-terrorism,
is being carried out in the Western Balkans in an effort
to improve national capabilities through a
comprehensive and structured approach.
Concerning the fourth pillar of the plan of action,
I would like to express our firm belief that any
measures we undertake must comply with our
obligations under international law, in particular
international human rights law, international refugee
law and international humanitarian law. In this context,
we welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1904 (2009) on procedural guarantees, as
well as the appointment of an Ombudsperson. We also
wish to extend our continued full support for the work
of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
while countering terrorism.
In conclusion, I would like to recall that Slovenia
has announced its candidature for a non-permanent seat
on the Security Council for the period 2012-2013, and
in that process will promote the further implementation
of counter-terrorism measures, with due regard for the
rule of law and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, as terrorism remains one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
Mrs. Halliyadde (Sri Lanka): At the outset, let
me thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/818) and for his efforts to strengthen the
implementation of the United Nations CounterTerrorism Strategy. Our thanks also go to the President
of the General Assembly and to the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh for their efforts during
the informal consultations to facilitate reaching a

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

consensus draft resolution on the second review
conference.

mechanisms aimed at dealing with terrorism, including
the provision of additional funding and staff.

As a country that has only recently emerged from
a long and brutal terrorist conflict, Sri Lanka takes
considerable interest in the United Nations CounterTerrorism Strategy. Sri Lanka’s experience during
those long, dark years makes us very sensitive to and
encouraged by all the measures employed by the
international community to counter terrorism. Although
we succeeded in eliminating the terrorist threat
domestically, we remain vigilant about the possibility
of terrorism rearing its ugly head again through
international machinations.

Mr. Ali (Malaysia): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement made by the representative of Syria
on behalf of the 57 States members of the Organization
of the Islamic Conference. We also echo the expression
of appreciation extended to Ambassador Abulkalam
Abdul Momen, Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh, who was the facilitator for this year’s
biennial review of the Strategy. His calm demeanour
and mediating experience were factors that managed to
carry through the draft resolution before us
(A/64/L.69) to its eventual conclusion. A lesser man, to
say the least, would probably not have fared as well,
which is why I would urge the President of the
Assembly to appoint a facilitator for the negotiations
on the draft resolution as early as possible in advance
of the next review, which I understand will be even
earlier, in June 2012.

In this context, we welcome the Strategy’s
emphasis on further enhancing the capacity of the
United Nations and other international organizations to
deal with terrorism and to assist Member States in
countering terrorism themselves. We also welcome the
call on States to cooperate with each other. Terrorism
can be defeated effectively only through international
cooperation and pragmatic action. We endorse the call
on Member States to consider becoming a party to the
existing instruments that deal with terrorism. We also
take this opportunity to encourage Member States to
make every effort to conclude negotiations on the
comprehensive convention on terrorism.
While we adopt international instruments and
commit to putting them into effect, we must also avoid
creating the impression that terrorists can somehow
gain their goals through other means. I note that the
terrorist group that was defeated in Sri Lanka is now
conducting a massive international campaign to grab a
victory in a different way by vilifying Sri Lanka. It is
also sad that this campaign has gained some acceptance
among important entities globally, encouraging the
rump of the terrorist group to find new energy and
purpose for its continued existence. We feel that it is
incumbent on all of us who object to terrorism to
ensure that our acts do not contribute to encouraging it,
directly or indirectly.
We have also noted that terrorist groups have
used the system of political asylum to enable their
members to seek safe haven elsewhere. Political
asylum should be granted only after every precaution
has been taken to ensure that terrorism is not
encouraged in the process.
Finally,
strengthening

10-51015

we
of

strongly
encourage
further
United Nations institutional

In reading the Secretary-General’s report
(A/64/818), my delegation could go only so far as to
take note of the information therein. We were uneasy
as to how a United Nations document — which is
supposed to be of the highest possible standard —
could contain a number of glaring factual mistakes.
The first mistake appears, surprisingly, in
paragraph 3 of the report itself. In describing what we
Member States were doing on 4 and 5 September two
years ago, the drafters of the report took it upon
themselves to declare that the General Assembly held
its first review of the implementation of the Strategy.
My delegation was one of the many delegations that
argued that the exercise in 2008 was a review of the
Strategy, while the review of the implementation of the
Strategy fell within the ambit of what the Secretariat
was entrusted to undertake. As Member States, we
reaffirmed the primary responsibility of Member States
towards the Strategy in resolution 62/272 of 2008. In
fact, paragraph 4 of 62/272 clearly states that the
exercise undertaken on 4 and 5 September 2008 was
the first biennial review of the Strategy.
In another paragraph, the report is less factually
incorrect, but still incorrect in its perception. Paragraph
134 talks about how Member States should receive
coordinated advice, in particular from the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF). This is
an inversion of the way matters should be, since the
purpose of institutionalizing the CTITF was to ensure

21

A/64/PV.117

that it became a part of the Secretariat and therefore
another subject of the Member States. I believe,
however, that this is merely an oversight on the part of
the drafters of the report, rather than an attempt to
ensure that Member States become subservient to the
Task Force.
I would like to take this opportunity to record my
delegation’s appreciation of the spirit of compromise
and flexibility that prevailed during the negotiations of
the draft resolution that we are about to adopt
(A/64/L.69). From the very beginning, all delegations
brought with them the willingness to accommodate and
hear differing viewpoints. I believe that this helped the
negotiations to the degree required in order to achieve
consensus. We understand that while important
positions had to be upheld, delegations were willing to
bring to the negotiations a kind of compromise solution
that would satisfy all parties. In 2008, when we first
started this process, the positions of delegations were
worlds apart. Whatever else we may achieve with this
review, at least it has brought a better understanding of
each other.
Speaking of reviews, when we adopted the
Strategy in 2006 through resolution 60/288, it was
never meant to be cast in stone, which is why a clause
was added in the resolution to ensure that every two
years Member States would embark on a process of
examining the progress made and consider updating it
to respond to changes.
My delegation believes that the time has now
come for us to discuss the Strategy itself. We should
set a timetable in which we update the Strategy to
ensure its relevance in today’s world, particularly by
taking note of new terrorism methods and how
different tools are used by terrorist entities. With the
current advances in technology and the innovation
being shown by terrorist entities to adapt to a changing
world, we too must show that we can adapt and change
to be a step ahead of them in their own game. We
should not tie ourselves to a dead-letter document
merely to avoid difficult discussions. If we are
committed to tackling the problem of terrorism, we
should be willing to explore all the possible solutions
to its causes.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not mention the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and its
institutionalization through resolution 64/235 last year.
The CTITF provides much-needed coordination and

22

coherence in the implementation of the Strategy by
ensuring that there is one entity that can play a lead
role in linking all counter-terrorism activities of the
United Nations and other organizations. My delegation
believes that the added value the CTITF provides to the
effort in countering terrorism lies in its coordination
capacity. Under the new draft resolution, the
duplication of the work of counter-terrorism entities is
to be avoided in order to ensure cost-effectiveness.
In the same vein, we would urge the Task Force
not to duplicate the excellent work already being
carried out by other entities on the ground. For
example, the Task Force would not need to spend
precious time and resources in undertaking a field visit
when one of the other entities could so easily undertake
such a field visit within its own mandate and then
report back to the Task Force.
Let me end by saying that terrorism and terrorist
activities are an evolving matter and one that has
shown great resilience and adaptability. Our challenge
lies not only in addressing these activities, but also in
ensuring that our solution, while keeping within the
boundaries of the rule of law, can also yield concrete
results through our continued commitment to
cooperation and dialogue.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela is firmly committed to fighting
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and
whatever its origin or motivation, including State
terrorism, which is one of the most abhorrent forms of
terrorism. We reaffirm our conviction that the fight
against terrorism must be conducted within the
framework of multilateralism and through close
international cooperation on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
of States and in accordance with obligations under
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant conventions and international and regional
protocols.
Venezuela has strictly fulfilled all of its
commitments and obligations stemming from its status
as a State party to various international legal
instruments in the field of counter-terrorism, as well as
other instruments, such as resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
In our hemisphere, Venezuela is party to the
Inter-American Convention against Terrorism and the

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

Organization of American States Convention to Prevent
and Punish Acts of Terrorism Taking the Form of
Crimes against Persons and Related Extortion that are
of International Significance. At the international level,
Venezuela is party to the Convention on Offences and
Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft; the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation; the Convention for
the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft; the
International Convention against the Taking of
Hostages; the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings; the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected
Persons, including Diplomatic Agents.
In the context of international efforts to prevent
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorist groups and in line with resolution 1540
(2004), Venezuela has developed a bill to facilitate the
implementation of that judicial instrument in its
capacity as a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention. With regard to the Biological Weapons
Convention, institutional consultations are taking place
for the purpose of forming a coordinating body to
develop policies to strengthen the activities of the
national Government in implementing the Convention.
The Bolivarian Government is also considering, among
other legal instruments, the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism with a
view to possible membership.
Since 2008, Venezuela has implemented a
comprehensive national security plan on the measures
to be applied to nuclear physical safety and radiation
and waste management security. Venezuela is
contemplating acceding to other international
instruments, such as the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material, the Code of Practice on
the International Transboundary Movement of
Radioactive Waste and the Convention on Nuclear
Safety. I should also like to point out that Venezuela
has already enacted a law of accession to the
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear
Accident. Similarly, our National Assembly will soon
enact a new draft law on weapons and explosives to
replace the legislation currently in force.
With regard to the international norms referred to
in the 40 recommendations on money-laundering and
the nine special recommendations on the financing of

10-51015

terrorism of the Financial Action Task Force,
Venezuela is a member of the Caribbean Financial
Action Task Force, which was formed to implement
joint measures to address the problem of money
laundering. My country has rigorously abided by the
provisions on mutual judicial assistance and the
extradition of any person who has participated in the
planning, preparation, financing or commission of
terrorist acts.
Some Member States have assumed for
themselves the role of standard-bearer in the fight
against terrorism while allowing and defending
impunity for dangerous terrorists who have served
them abroad by participating in covert operations.
Today, as Venezuela expresses its support for draft
resolution A/64/L.69, we reaffirm our commitment to
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My country is concerned that confessed and
convicted terrorists are being protected, such as the
Cuban-Venezuelan national Luis Posada Carriles, who
is responsible for numerous terrorist attacks, including
the bombing of a Cubana de Aviación aircraft flying off
the coast of Barbados, in which more than 73 innocent
persons lost their lives. It is highly worrisome that the
extradition to Venezuela of Luis Posada Carriles has
been denied repeatedly and that, barring that, calls to
retry him for his terrorists acts have also been rebuffed.
In that regard, I recall Security Council resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), which, among other
things, urge States not to facilitate safe haven for
terrorists or resort to political pretexts for refusing
requests for the extradition of terrorists.
Lastly, my country takes this opportunity to call
once again for the immediate release of the five
innocent Cuban heroes who fought terrorism, as well
as for the extradition to Venezuela or the immediate
trial of the dangerous international terrorist Luis
Posada Carriles.
Mr. Bühler (Austria): At the outset, on behalf of
Ambassador Ebner, I would like to thank Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen and his team for their skilful
efforts in facilitating the consultations on the draft
resolution (A/64/L.69) on the second review of the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Austria fully supports the statement delivered this
morning by the representative of Belgium on behalf of

23

A/64/PV.117

the European Union. I will therefore limit my
intervention to highlighting the following three points.
First, I would like to express Austria’s strong
commitment to promoting the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
Strategy constitutes the first universally agreed
strategic framework to combat terrorism. Its adoption
by consensus in 2006 was a landmark event. However,
its success depends entirely on its implementation
through concrete measures by the authorities of
Member States. We therefore must increase our efforts
to make the Strategy known worldwide and ensure that
it is implemented globally in a holistic and integrated
manner.
Austria has taken several initiatives in order to
advance knowledge about and global implementation
of the Strategy. In May 2007, Austria, together with the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) and the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC), organized the Vienna terrorism
workshop, which was the first meeting after the
adoption of the Strategy that brought together Member
States, the Task Force, regional and subregional
organizations and civil society to discuss the Strategy’s
implementation. In October 2009, together with
Switzerland, Norway, Turkey and other like-minded
countries, Austria co-organized and hosted in Vienna
the first global workshop of national counter-terrorism
focal points which, again for the first time, brought
together national counter-terrorism coordinators from
more than 100 Member States and representatives of 40
regional organizations. The results and findings of that
meeting were presented at a side event today. Austria
will also support the series of planned regional focal
point workshops to be held as follow-up to the Vienna
workshop.
Secondly, my delegation would like to underline
the pivotal role of the United Nations at the heart of
our global counter-terrorism efforts. Terrorism is a
global threat that can be effectively combated globally
only in a multilateral framework. Austria strongly
supports the important work of the CTITF under the
leadership of its Chairman, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, and
recalls its core mandate to ensure overall coordination
and coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the
United Nations system.

24

We welcome the progress towards finalizing the
institutionalization of the Task Force in accordance
with resolution 64/235, which was introduced by
Austria along with a group of like-minded countries
and adopted by consensus in December last year. We
hope that the secretariat of the Task Force will soon
become fully operational to develop its full potential.
We call on the Task Force, through its Chairman, to
interact more regularly with Member States by
organizing periodic briefings about the work of the
CTITF and its working groups and by developing a
comprehensive website and email newsletters in order
to ensure that its work is made more transparent and
accessible.
Thirdly, it is Austria’s firm belief that respect for
the rule of law is a fundamental basis of the fight
against terrorism. We all must ensure that any measures
taken to combat terrorism comply with our obligations
under international law, in particular human rights law,
refugee law and international humanitarian law.
The strengthening of the rule of law and criminal
justice systems is particularly highlighted in the fourth
pillar of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. We strongly support the work of UNODC in
this area, which provides technical assistance to
Member States to develop their capacity to implement
the Strategy. Austria is one of the largest voluntary
contributors to the Terrorism Prevention Branch of
UNODC and its global project on strengthening the
legal regime against terrorism.
On our own part, we remain firmly committed to
strengthening the legal framework to combat terrorism.
Austria has ratified and implemented all 16 universal
counter-terrorism instruments as well as all relevant
Security Council resolutions.
As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Austria is also committed to strengthening the
rule of law in the work of the Council’s counterterrorism committees. In particular, as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban, Austria
has worked tirelessly over the past years to enhance
due process and fair and clear procedures. On 30 July,
the 1267 Committee concluded its two-year review of
its consolidated list of individuals and entities subject
to sanctions measures pursuant to resolution 1822
(2008). Of the 488 entries examined, almost 10 per
cent — a that is, 45 entries — were removed from the

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

list as a direct result of the review. Moreover, the
recent appointment of Ms. Kimberly Prost as first
Ombudsperson to receive de-listing requests in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1904
(2009) constitutes a further quantum leap forward.
As my delegation has stated on previous
occasions, there is more to our task at hand if we are to
succeed in implementing the United Nations CounterTerrorism Strategy globally and to achieve our
common goal to overcome the global threat of
terrorism. We must leave all our disputes and distrust
behind and unite our strengths — all of us, not only
States and international, regional or subregional
organizations, but also civil society, victims’
organizations and the private sector — in short, all of
humankind. That is our real challenge. Let me reassure
the Assembly of Austria’s support in this joint
endeavour.
Mr. Núñez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Cuba wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/64/818). We also wish to laud the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, as facilitator of the informal
consultations undertaken to negotiate the draft
resolution on the second review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/64/L.69).
The delegation of Cuba wishes to reaffirm the
importance of the Strategy as a central instrument for
guiding our global fight against the scourge of
terrorism, which has claimed so many innocent lives
throughout history. Aware of the great responsibility
we all have in the fight against terrorism and
committed to multilateral efforts to bring an end to the
scourge, the delegation of Cuba participated in the
consultation process for the preparation of the draft
resolution on the review of the Strategy (A/64/L.69).
Once again, Cuba expresses its firm commitment
in the fight against terrorism and in defence of
multilateralism. Cuba reiterates its deepest rejection
and condemnation of all terrorist acts, methods and
practices in all their forms and manifestations, by
whomever and against whomever they are committed
and for whatever motivation, including those in which
States are directly or indirectly involved. State
terrorism is one of the most abhorrent forms of
terrorism.

10-51015

Measures to eliminate international terrorism
must be based on strict respect for the Charter of the
United Nations and principles of international law and
international humanitarian law. Arbitrary and unilateral
measures, acts of aggression, covert actions, unilateral
sanctions or the drawing up of lists or certifications of
countries for clearly political purposes can in no way
be justified. Cuban has never permitted and will never
permit the use of its national territory for the conduct,
planning or financing of acts of terrorism against any
other State.
Our country was one of the first three States to
ratify the 12 first international instruments against
international terrorism and is a party to the 13 existing
international instruments, having acceded to the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism last year. The Republic of Cuba has
enacted a general law against acts of terrorism and
adopted non-legislative domestic measures to fight the
scourge. Likewise, it cooperates and strictly complies
with the provisions of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), providing comprehensive reports on this issue
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
We emphatically reject the inclusion of our
country on the spurious list of those that supposedly
sponsor international terrorism, drafted by the
Government of the United States of America every
year. Cuba firmly rejects its inclusion on that list,
which is unilateral, politically motivated and comes
from a country that lacks any moral authority
whatsoever to judge others with respect to terrorism.
In the United States, mainly in Miami, funds to
carry out terrorist acts are provided and collected with
complete impunity. Bank accounts are operated to
finance terrorism, safe haven is provided and the use of
national territory is permitted for those who finance,
plan and commit acts of terrorism against Cuba. An
long-standing example of this is the case of notorious
terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, responsible for the 1976
downing of a Cubana de Aviación aircraft in flight with
73 persons on board. He is also responsible for attacks
on tourist facilities in Havana in 1987 in which an
Italian tourist was killed. In brief, he is responsible for
many plans to physically eliminate the Commander-inChief, Fidel Castro. This individual remains at liberty
although the Government of the United States has all
the evidence needed, including that provided by Cuba.

25

A/64/PV.117

In contrast to the aforementioned, five Cuban
youths, whose only crime was to fight terrorism in
order to save the lives of Cuban and North American
citizens, were sentenced to long terms in the United
States, and in the days to come they will have been
unjustly incarcerated for 12 years in prisons in that
country.
Cuba believes that impunity and double standards
are unacceptable in the fight against terrorism.
Terrorism must be rejected in all circumstances. There
should be closer cooperation between States to fight
that scourge on the basis of respect for sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States.
Selectivity and the petty urge for territorial expansion
to satisfy the insatiable appetite of the powerful for
strategic resources must come to an end. Accordingly,
Cuba completely rejects the exploitation of the fight
against terrorism as a pretext to justify interference in
the internal affairs of other States, aggression and the
undermining of the national sovereignty of States.
Finally, we reiterate the firm and unshakeable
will of the Government and people of Cuba to
cooperate in multilateral efforts to put an end to all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism in whatever
shape or form.
Mr. Šcepanović (Montenegro): Montenegro
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Belgium on behalf of the European
Union.
At the outset, let me thank the President for
convening this important meeting. Terrorism represents
a significant challenge in today’s world, and meetings
such as this are always a good opportunity to discuss
issues of importance so that we can explore and agree
on solutions to deal better with the common threat we
are facing. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Momen of Bangladesh and Mr. Shah of Pakistan for
facilitating the consultations that have resulted in a
consensus draft text (A/64/L.69).
Taking into account the fact that terrorism and the
financing of terrorism represent a considerable threat
to humankind at the global level, and in order to
adequately address and face potential challenges from
all forms of terrorism, Montenegro continues to
develop and implement a comprehensive national
policy in that regard.

26

Recognizing the importance of international
cooperation in successfully tackling terrorism,
Montenegro is a State party to all relevant multilateral
and bilateral conventions and arrangements dealing
with this subject. We believe that regional cooperation
and common projects – with support from United
Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, and from other international
organizations – are of great importance in combating
terrorism. At the national level, all forms of terrorist
activity are treated as criminal acts under the revised
criminal code of Montenegro, in accordance with
ratified United Nations conventions.
Aside from implementing measures mandated by
our national legislature and by international
arrangements, our relevant institutions also operate
within the strategic framework to prevent terrorism
further. In this context, our strategy for judicial reform
for the period 2007-2012 defines combating organized
crime, corruption, terrorism and war crimes as one of
its primary goals, and, among other measures,
prescribes more effective legal prosecution and the
strengthening of the capacities of judicial institutions
as means to achieve this goal.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate Montenegro’s unwavering commitment to the
full implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and its plan of action. We
welcome the spirit of consensus and unity that
prevailed throughout the second review of the strategy.
We believe that only if we are united and join our
efforts can we put ourselves in the best possible
position to respond appropriately to today’s challenges
and discourage future terrorist activities. In this regard,
Montenegro considers the conclusion of negotiations
on a draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism to be of the utmost importance in stepping up
the fight against terrorism.
By strengthening its legislative and institutional
framework through inter-sectoral as well as
international cooperation, and by implementing
international mechanisms, Montenegro will continue to
contribute to global efforts to confront organized crime
and terrorism in such a way that it constitutes a factor
for stability in the region and a country that holds no
place for terrorists and terrorist activities.
In closing, I would like to reiterate Montenegro’s
firm support and commitment to the actions and efforts

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

of the United Nations and the international community
in the field of terrorism.
Mr. Bame (Ethiopia): I would like to express my
delegation’s gratitude to Ambassador Momen of
Bangladesh for the successful completion of his work
and his efforts in facilitating the consultations on the
draft resolution before us (A/64/L.69). I would also
like to extend my sincere appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive report
(A/64/818).
My delegation believes that the adoption of the
Strategy in 2006 was a paradigm shift in counterterrorism action, for it contains a new approach that
combines it with concerns for the protection of human
rights. Humankind has continued to witness significant
increases in the number of terrorist attacks in recent
years. We in Africa have been among the hardest hit;
last year alone, Africa recorded 6,177 casualties in 266
acts of terrorism, making it second only to Asia.
Ethiopia has expressed its commitment to
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy by taking a broad range of
measures, including the adoption of a new
proclamation. As we are at the epicentre of the global
terrorist network, my Government has been in the front
line of the struggle against terrorism. The anarchy in
Somalia, the belligerent nature of the regime in Eritrea,
the changing political dynamics in the region and the
symbiosis between domestic and regional negative
forces have contributed to the expansion of the terror
network. Ethiopia has been a target of international and
domestic terrorists since the early 1990s, and the
people of Ethiopia have paid dearly in the process.
Hundreds have been killed and thousands maimed, and
property worth millions of dollars has been destroyed.
Ethiopia believes that in order to adequately fight
terrorism, it is essential to implement the four pillars of
the Strategy. We emphasize the importance of
promoting tolerance, including between people of
different religions, to combat the spread of terrorism.
In organizing its national strategy, the Ethiopian
Parliament has put in place appropriate legislative
mechanisms
that
incorporate
procedures
for
preventing, controlling and foiling terrorism, as
outlined in the United Nations Global Strategy.
The National Intelligence and Security Service
Agency, which has been entrusted with the task of
overseeing the management of counter-terrorism

10-51015

activities, is mandated to conduct intelligence, border
security, and criminal investigation in order to prevent
and control terrorist acts. The appropriate authorities
are also mandated to gather and compile sufficient
information and evidence in order to take action
against suspected individuals and organizations for acts
of terrorism. The Government has set up enhanced
investigation and prosecution systems, granting
domestic judicial organs jurisdiction over offences
committed within and beyond our territories. In order
to respond to terrorist incidents, the federal and
regional police forces have been required to develop
counter-terrorism capabilities.
The National Bank of Ethiopia has developed
financial investigation mechanisms to control foreign
funding; the authorities are empowered to confiscate
the proceeds of crimes such as money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism. In its endeavour to curtail
terrorist financing and counterfeiting, the Government
has adopted directives for anti-money-laundering
legislation, including the establishment of a financial
intelligence unit. In accordance with the various
conventions, the new law criminalizes and punishes the
financing of terrorism and possessing or using property
knowing or intending it to be used to commit or
facilitate a terrorist act. The revised penal code
criminalizes money-laundering and a number of other
financial crimes. Those offences included in the
international instruments to which Ethiopia is a party
have been made part of the new counter-terrorism law.
Ethiopia has been working in cooperation with
Governments and organizations that uphold antiterrorism objectives, particularly in the Horn of Africa,
on the African continent and in other parts of the
world. This indispensable notion of cooperation and
collaboration has been explicitly set forth in the
purpose clause of the new proclamation.
My delegation believes that cooperation at the
bilateral and multilateral levels are necessary to defeat
both international and domestic terrorism. We would
like to emphasize that no distinction should be drawn
between these two brands of terrorism. Some partners
in the cooperation framework are selective as a result
of a failure to understand the complexity and fluidity
of terrorism. We cannot have an effective counterterrorism strategy when a selective approach is used.
In the past five years, local terrorist organizations
that maintain links to Al-Ittihad Al-Islamiya and

27

A/64/PV.117

Al-Shabaab have carried out several attacks on
innocent civilians and property, a number of which
have been directed at hotels, public transportation
systems and public gatherings. It is morally
unacceptable to ignore the plight of victims of socalled domestic terrorists.
Ethiopia
has
been
collaborating
with
neighbouring countries and other partners in the fight
against terrorism, yet there are challenges to the
regional cooperation framework owing to capacity
gaps and vulnerabilities. The United Nations CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force has an important
role to play in supporting Strategy implementation in
our subregion. One aspect of that role is assisting
States to implement their obligations and providing
technical support to States and to regional and
subregional bodies. In order to ensure compliance with
international human rights obligations when taking
counter-terrorism measures, the States of the region
need assistance in capacity-building, the rule of law
and related activities.
Al-Shabaab remains the major threat to peace and
stability not only in Somalia, but also in other
countries of the region. Due to Al-Shabaab’s continued
attacks on civilians and the Transitional Federal
Government, Somalia has become more of a threat to
regional and international security. Al-Shabaab has
several hundred foreign fighters in its ranks and more
continue to arrive from different parts of the world.
While the Transitional Federal Government has been
unable to compensate its troops, Al-Shabaab has
regularly paid its militia with the help of its
international partners.
The Monitoring Group on Somalia reported
recently that Eritrea is the main financier of terrorism
in the region. It is a public secret that Eritrea supplies
arms, training and finance to Al-Shabaab and other
terrorist groups. Eritrean military advisers have been
sent to Mogadishu to train combatants to help
extremist groups in Somalia. It is important to note that
domestic terrorist groups in Ethiopia have obtained
training and arms largely from Eritrea. Eritrea has also
been a conduit for logistical and financial support from
a number of actors outside the region.
The Government of Ethiopia has committed itself
to enforcing agreements that have been entered into
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
African Union. Ethiopia has adopted the United

28

Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime. Ethiopia has implemented the main elements of
the Strategy, putting mechanisms into action within its
new legislation. Ethiopia has been actively
participating in African Union counter-terrorism
efforts. My delegation supports international and
regional cooperation and reaffirms its commitment to
the full implementation of the United Nations Global
Strategy.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 44/6 of 17 October 1989, I now call on the
observer of the Council of Europe.
Ms. Requena (Council of Europe): It is an
honour for me to address the General Assembly on this
important issue and to have the opportunity to present
an overview of the Council of Europe’s approach to the
fight against terrorism, and more specifically of the
Council’s contribution to the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The importance of a single, coherent and
universally accepted framework for international action
against terrorism cannot be overestimated. Let me
emphasize its enormous significance and confirm the
commitment of the Council of Europe — the oldest
pan-European regional organization — to conducting
its action against terrorism along the lines set out in the
Strategy.
Combating terrorism efficiently requires bringing
forces together. That is why in 2007 the relevant
Council of Europe entities working on counterterrorism issues adopted a road map on the
contribution of our organization to the implementation
of the United Nations Strategy with a view to
streamlining and coordinating our efforts on the four
pillars of the Strategy.
First of all, regarding the measures to address
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, the
Council of Europe is actively involved in education,
youth and the media. It contributes to ensuring the
protection of minorities and to fighting intolerance,
racism and social exclusion in an attempt to weaken
the sources of discontent that may fuel terrorism. For
example, the Council of Europe drew up a white paper
on intercultural dialogue that is currently being
actively implemented after a large-scale consultation
process between State and non-State actors. Moreover,
through the Intercultural Cities project, the Council of
Europe very recently tested a model of immigrant/

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

minority integration at the local level based on the
principle of intercultural community-building.
Secondly, regarding measures to prevent and
combat terrorism, one of the priorities of the Council
of Europe is to strengthen legal action against
terrorism. As a standard-setting organization, the
Council of Europe pays close attention to the
development of counter-terrorism standards. One of the
most prominent steps in this direction is the Council of
Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism,
adopted in 2005, which constitutes the first
international legally binding instrument on this subject.
The Council of Europe has also prepared a set of
recommendations on special investigation techniques,
travel identity documents in the context of the fight
against terrorism, the protection of witnesses and
collaborators of justice, and cooperation with
INTERPOL.
In the fight against terrorism, the Council of
Europe also promotes the use of existing standards
contained in other Council of Europe conventions and
instruments that foster the harmonization of national
substantive and procedural law and international
cooperation. For example, regarding assistance for
victims of terrorism, the spectrum of Council of
Europe standards is contained in some relevant Council
of Europe conventions and in more than 12 resolutions
and recommendations. I should also mention that the
general mutual legal assistance instruments of the
Council of Europe can be used to fight terrorism as a
specific type of organized crime and that our
Convention on Cybercrime already has a global reach.
The main objective of the core body of our
counter-terrorism action, the Committee of Experts on
Terrorism of the Council of Europe, is to monitor the
existing instruments, to identify gaps in international
law and actions against terrorism, and to propose
solutions to those gaps.
In relation to the third pillar on measures to build
States’ capacity to prevent and combat terrorism, the
Council of Europe has set up a number of specific legal
cooperation programmes that are open to the Council
of Europe’s 47 member States.
Finally, the measures to ensure respect for human
rights for all and the rule of law as the fundamental
basis of the fight against terrorism are perhaps the most
vital — from the Council of Europe’s point of view —
because they touch upon the very reason for the

10-51015

existence of our organization. All Council of Europe
activities concerning the fight against terrorism are
based on the statutory principles of our organization:
human rights, the rule of law and democracy. These are
prevalent throughout one of the main conventions of
the Council of Europe, the European Convention on
Human Rights, as interpreted by the European Court of
Human Rights, which has already compiled important
case law on the fight against terrorism. In fact, the
Council of Europe strongly believes that the promotion
and protection of human rights and respect for the rule
of law must be at the core of any action to fight
terrorism. To effectively fight terrorism while ensuring
respect for human rights is not only possible, but
indispensable.
To sum up, terrorism is a complex phenomenon,
and to fight it effectively we need a comprehensive
approach and multidisciplinary expertise. We believe
that regional organizations can make meaningful
contributions to supporting the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. In
this respect, I would very much like to thank the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, and in particular its Chair, Mr. Laborde,
for taking the regional organization perspective on
board in the follow-up to the Global Strategy.
With its rich background of standards, expertise,
knowledge of the regional threat perception and field
presence, the Council of Europe has already and will
continue to serve as a strategic and useful partner for
United Nations bodies, enhancing the effectiveness of
the measures and impact of the Strategy.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 48/5 of 13 October 1993, I now call on the
observer for the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe.
Mr. Perl (Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe): The United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy calls on regional
organizations to support the Strategy’s implementation.
Centralized visionary leadership and regional
coordination of implementation efforts are an effective
combination to combat terrorism. At the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), we
are actively integrating the United Nations strategy
into our counter-terrorism programmes.
For those not familiar with my organization, let
me briefly note that, with 56 States members from

29

A/64/PV.117

Europe, Central Asia and North America, the OSCE is
the largest regional security organization in the world.
The organization is a primary instrument for early
warning, conflict prevention, crisis management and postconflict rehabilitation. The OSCE’s comprehensive
concept of security includes a political-military
dimension, an economic-environmental dimension and
a human dimension, which are all central in the fight
against terrorism.
Regional organizations are a powerful force
multiplier in implementing the United Nations Strategy
through tailored assistance and capacity-building.
Activities at this intermediate geographic level provide
cost-effective
mechanisms
for
disseminating
information, for sharing best practices and lessons
learned, and for pioneering region-specific initiatives
that complement global counter-terrorism objectives.
Since the adoption of the United Nations
Strategy, the OSCE has looked upon this important
document as both providing the strategic framework
and offering practical guidance for its counterterrorism efforts. We also carry out our counterterrorism programme in close cooperation with the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF). We at the OSCE take a
comprehensive approach to security, and hence our
counter-terrorism activities embrace all four pillars of
the United Nations Strategy. We build consensus and
political support among participating States with the
objective of preventing and combating terrorism in line
with international legal instruments. We generate
support for implementing the international conventions
and protocols related to terrorism.
We actively support the implementation of
security standards, recommendations and good
practices developed by specialized global organizations
and agencies, and promote respect for human rights.
We have an independent body dedicated to that. To cite
some specific examples, we support and facilitate
capacity-building programmes of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime on promoting the
international legal framework against terrorism. We
support the International Civil Aviation Organization
on enhancing travel document security and the World
Customs Organization on strengthening container
supply chain security. In close coordination with
international partners, we also work on enhancing
cybersecurity and countering the use of the Internet for
terrorist
purposes,
protecting
critical
energy
infrastructures,
and
promoting
public-private
partnerships in countering terrorism.

30

Regional organizations such as the OSCE enjoy
comparative advantages in relation to the international
response to terrorism and implementing the United
Nations Strategy. Advantages include smaller
membership and in-depth knowledge of the situation
on the ground. Clearly, field mission presence, such as
the 18 OSCE offices in South-East Europe, Eastern
Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia represent a
significant organizational advantage. Moreover, the
OSCE through its activities helps free up the counterterrorism
resources
of
other
international
organizations, enabling them to target resources in
areas that do not overlap with, but instead extend
beyond the OSCE sphere of responsibility.
Unfortunately, time may be working against us
with respect to the issue of terrorism. To some extent,
terrorism has long been a self-sustaining process. Like
an epidemic, it starts slowly, but once it has taken
hold — whether as a world view, a tactical
methodology or simply a sociological aberration —
eradicating it is difficult and may take decades or even
generations. Longer-term measures require cooperation
and diplomacy, which in turn require mutual trust.
Regional organizations provide a forum for the
building of such multilateral trust, which takes a long
time to develop and which grows as durable
relationships emerge among diplomats and among
nations.
One must carefully weigh the trade-offs from
costly or draconian counter-terrorism reactions that
may abridge human rights or individual liberties
against the putative protections they seek to achieve.
No nation can remain mobilized on full alert
indefinitely. In the modern world of asymmetric
weapons, where a single individual can bring about
widespread destruction, no policy can protect
everything everywhere all the time. Human rights are
difficult to regain once they have been lost or
compromised by extreme protective measures, however
well-intentioned.
We must take the necessary precautions to stop
terrorist attacks on our vital infrastructure and global
economic underpinnings, but it is also necessary to ask
ourselves where we should draw the line. How much
protection is enough? That question is not easily
answered, but one thing is clear — we must work
together to achieve the level of protection against
terrorism needed to promote peace and understanding
both within and among nations. Implementing the
United Nations Strategy is an important step in that
direction.

10-51015

A/64/PV.117

To conclude, effective counter-terrorism work
requires a global and integrated response. In today’s
increasingly interconnected world, no organization can
operate effectively in isolation or in a vacuum. In order
to succeed, we must cooperate and coordinate closely
with each other. Further reinforcing the mechanisms
within the United Nations framework to coordinate the
activities of regional organizations, as well as
strengthening the CTITF and its working groups,
would greatly enhance the effectiveness of our joint
efforts. The more closely we work together, the better
our chances to spot terrorist trends and devise
countermeasures. Our resources are limited, and we
need to maximize what we get out of them.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.69. Before giving the floor to speakers in
explanation of vote or position, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): At the outset, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
entrusting me with the assignment of facilitator of the
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. I highly value the Assembly’s trust in and
continued support for me and for the Bangladesh
Mission.
Counter-terrorism is one of the most important
and difficult items on the agenda of the United
Nations. Although most Member States are willing to
participate in the multilateral counter-terrorism
engagements, they also have to support their national
positions on both the law enforcement and security
aspects of the counter-terrorism debate.
I realized the intricacies of the issue in hand
before undertaking this work, and I was guided by the
need to promote and strengthen consensus, which had
remained elusive before the adoption of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in 2006. It
was my considered view that, without building
consensus and a constructive approach, we would not
be able to straddle the gap between the national,
regional and international views. In that regard, from
day one I enjoyed the strong support and the spirit of
consensus of the delegation of the European Union, led
by Belgium, and the delegation of the Organization of
the Islamic Conference, led by Syria. In addition, other
delegations also played a constructive and positive role

10-51015

during the whole process. I am indebted to them for
their spirit of cooperation, flexibility and sincerity. I
thank them all most sincerely.
I also received excellent support from the staff. I
thank Ms. Angela Nworgu, Adviser of the Office of the
President of the General Assembly, for her continued
efforts to liaise between my office and the Office of the
President. I especially commend the constructive role
that Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force (CTITF), played
during the process.
Terrorism, in both its magnitude and its diversity,
is one of the grave challenges facing the international
community. It has affected all facets of our societies,
including international security, the environment for
domestic law enforcement, domestic legal structures,
intercultural harmony, development aspects of our
societies, international travel and the like.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy is the international community’s holistic
response to that threat. It envisages measures to
eliminate the conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism and to prevent and combat terrorism, as well
as measures aimed at building and strengthening the
capacity of the United Nations system and that of
Member States’ responses, and at protecting human
rights and the rule of law, even in the case of counterterrorism. The holistic approach to developing the
Strategy not only provided a comprehensive strategic
framework to defeat terrorism, but also helped build
the desperately needed, but often too elusive consensus
on this sensitive issue.
The holistic and consensus nature of the Strategy
gives it a unique status as a document, but only through
its effective and integrated implementation in all its
aspects can we defeat terrorism. This second review of
the Strategy has provided us with an excellent
opportunity to carefully look into all aspects of its
implementation, identify shortcomings and propose
better ways and means to plug the gaps and strengthen
its implementation.
From the very beginning, we faced the challenge
of limited time at our disposal. The earnest pursuit of
the agreed timelines to complete the task was possible
only thanks to the flexibility and spirit of cooperation
that Member States showed during the negotiations.
The final text of the draft resolution, I am pleased
to say, is based on consensus and a balanced text. It
reflects the spirit of the original 2006 resolution on the

31

A/64/PV.117

Strategy (resolution 60/288) and the 2008 resolution on
the first review (resolution 62/272). It covers key
issues that enjoy broad cross-regional support. Some of
the issues put forward by regional groups or a specific
Member State or their specific wording may not have
been fully reflected in the text, but I can affirm that we
left no stone unturned to achieve broad consensus and
compromise. Thus, the text reflects a measured
expression of pertinent ideas that enjoys broad support.
It is a win-win situation for all.
I attempted a fair deal for all stakeholders. The
final text of the draft resolution, submitted as
document
A/64/L.69,
unequivocally
condemns
terrorism and reaffirms the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in all its aspects.
It recognizes that international cooperation and
all measures undertaken by Member States to prevent
and combat terrorism must fully comply with their
obligations under international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant
international conventions and protocols, in particular
human rights, refugee and international humanitarian
law.
It welcomes the progress made towards finalizing
the institutionalization of the CTITF, in accordance
with resolution 64/235 of 24 December 2009. It
underscores the need to enhance dialogue among the
counter-terrorism officials of Member States to
promote international, regional and subregional
cooperation and the wider dissemination of knowledge
of the Counter-Terrorism Strategy in order to counter
terrorism.
It also calls for the enhanced engagement of
Member States in the work of the CTITF by increasing
the interactive opportunities between the Task Force
and Member States. The importance of transparency
has also been highlighted; it also encourages the
CTITF to develop a comprehensive website in order to
ensure that its work is made more accessible to a wider
audience.
Every now and then, we have discussed the
inadequacy of a review during the holiday season of
August and the opening session preparatory season of
September. That anomaly has been removed by the
decision that the next review will be completed by June
2012.
The CTITF’s mandate to develop limited crossregional counter-terrorism programmes and to deliver

32

one-window capacity-building assistance at the request
of Member States has also been endorsed. The focus
has remained primarily on implementation. The
outcome of this consensus draft resolution will be a
stronger CTITF that is enabled to promote international
counter-terrorism efforts in a more effective,
coordinated and coherent manner.
With those brief comments, I would request all
regional groups and Member States to support the
consensus text under consideration. The consensus
adoption of this text will cement the consensus that we
have protected and built since the adoption of the
Counter-Terrorism Strategy resolution in 2006.
On other matters, I would like to formerly thank
Mr. Muhammad Rafiuddin Shah, Counsellor of the
Permanent Mission of Pakistan — who has vast
experience on the subject matter, including excellent
negotiating skills — for his tireless efforts to reach
consensus on difficult issues concerning the final text
of the draft resolution. My appreciation also goes to the
General Assembly Affairs Branch for its continued
secretarial support. Finally, I am thankful to colleagues
from my own Mission who assisted me during the
whole process. More important, I am thankful to my
friends and colleagues, especially Permanent
Representatives and experts from Member States, who
trusted me and provided me with their support, wisdom
and constant encouragement to complete this process.
The Acting President: I thank Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, Permanent Representative
of Bangladesh and facilitator of the draft resolution on
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
for his excellent work on that task.
We have heard the only speaker in explanation of
vote before the voting.
The General Assembly will now take action on
draft resolution A/64/L.69. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution
(resolution 64/297).

A/64/L.69

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.35 p.m.

10-51015
