VIIL

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

bly at its forty-sixth session in accordance with paragraph 4 of its resolution 44/200 B of 21 December 1989;
5. Takes note of the proposals of the Secretary-General and the views expressed by Member States on priorities, and endorses the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination thereon, and
requests the Secretary-General to pay particular attention to them in preparing the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 1992-1993;
6. Recognizes that the outline should provide a
greater level of predictability of resources required for
the following biennium, while ensuring that such resources are adequate for the fulfilment of the objectives, programmes and activities of the Organization, as
mandated by the relevant legislative bodies of the
United Nations, thereby facilitating the widest possible
agreement on the programme budget;
7. Takes note of the rate of real growth, compared
with the previous budget, indicated by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, and stresses that the methodology for the preparation of the outline and the programme budget should be revised, taking into account
the views of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination and the Advisory Committee as well as the
need for increased transparency in the methodology
used to reflect inflation and currency fluctuations;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 19921993 in accordance with the present resolution and all
resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly pertinent to the new budgetary process.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990

45/256.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on the scale of
assessments, in particular resolutions 43/223 B of 21
December 1988 and 44/197 A of 21 December 1989,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Contributions, 105
Taking note of the views expressed in the Fifth Committee during the forty-fifth session, 106
Bearing in mind the difficult economic situation faced
by many Member States, in particular the developing
countries and among them the least developed countries,
l. Reaffirms that:
(a) The capacity of Member States to pay is the fundamental criterion for determining the scale of assessments;
(b) The scale of assessments should be determined
on the basis of reliable, verifiable and comparable data;
105
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 11 (N45/11).
106
Ibid., Forty-fifth Session, Fifth Commillee, 3rd to 5th, 7th to 9th,
12th, 13th, 15th and 52nd meetings, and corrigendum.

357

(c) The methodology for determining the scale of
assessments should be simplified as far as possible with
a view to making it more transparent and stable over
time;
2. Requests the Committee on Contributions to recommend to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session a scale of assessments whose period of applicability
will then be decided by the Assembly and which is prepared on the basis of the recommendations of the Committee contained in its report, 105 taking into account the
following:
(a) The debt adjustment approach used in the preparation of the scale of assessments for the period 19891991;
(b) A low per capita income allowance formula,
taking into account the recommendations of the Committee, adjusted in accordance with the evolution of the
average world per capita income until 1989;
(c) Individual rates for the least developed countries should not exceed their present level, namely 0.01
per cent;
3. Also requests the Committee on Contributions to
use the criteria specified in paragraph 42 of its report
for the ad hoe adjustment of the machine scale and to
provide detailed information on the decisions made in
this regard; it is recognized that the ad hoe adjustment
process depends on the availability of points provided
voluntarily by Member States;
4. Further requests the Committee on Contributions
to continue its work on the improvement of the methodology for the preparation of future scales of assessment, in particular with regard to:
(a) The scheme of limits, with a view to reducing
speedily any of its excessive distorting effects;
(b) The possible modification of the statistical base
period;
(c) The possibility of excluding the allocation of any
additional points, as a result of the application of the
scheme of limits, to those Member States having a very
low per capita income;
(d) The application of debt-adjusted income as recommended by the Committee in its report and the debt
adjustment factor and taking into account the views expressed during the forty-Ii 11 h session of the General Assembly;
(e) The application of price-adjusted rates of exchange;
(J) Alternative income concepts;
(g) The possible use of factors that take account of
the situation of countries with economic characteristics
such as those outlined in paragraph 3 of Assembly resolution 43/223 B;
(h) The relationship of each of the elements and
factors as part of the overall methodology;
5. Requests the Committee on Contributions to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-sixth session a
report on the work undertaken in response to the requests contained in paragraph 4 of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee on Contributions with the facilities it re-

General Assembly-Forty-flnh Session

358

quires to carry out its work, including supplementary
assistance if necessary.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
B

The General Assembly
Resolves that:
1. The rates of assessment for the following States,
admitted to membership in the United Nations on 23
April and 18 September 1990, respectively, shall be as
follows:
Member Stole

Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Liechtenstein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Per cenl

0.01
0.01

For 1990 and 1991, these rates shall be added to the
scale of assessments established under General Assembly resolution 43/223 A of 21 December 1988;
2. For the year of their admission, Namibia shall
contribute at the rate of one fourth of 0.01 per cent and
Liechtenstein at the rate of one ninth of 0.01 per cent,
such contributions to be taken into account as miscellaneous income under regulation 5.2 (c) of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations. Liechtenstein's
contribution shall be adjusted by one ninth of the flat
fee paid for its participation in United Nations activities
as a non-Member State;
3. For the year 1991, Namibia and Liechtenstein
shall each contribute at the rate of 0.01 per cent, such
contribution by Liechtenstein also to be taken into account as miscellaneous income under regulation 5.2 (c)
of the Financial Regulations of the United Nations;
4. The contributions of Namibia and Liechtenstein
for 1990 and 1991 shall be applied to the same basis of
assessment as for other Member States, except that, in
the case of appropriations or apportionments approved
by the General Assembly for the financing of peacekeeping operations, the con1rihutions of those States,
as determined by the group of contributors to which

they may be assigned by the Assembly, shall be calculated in proportion to the calendar year;
5. The advances of Namibia and Liechtenstein to
the Working Capital Fund, under regulation 5.8 of the
Financial Regulations of the United Nations, shall be
calculated by the application of the rates of assessment
of 0.01 per cent each to the authorized level of the
Fund, such advances to be added to the Fund pending
the incorporation of the new Members' rates of assessment in a 100 per cent scale;
6. Yemen, having been formed when the People's
Democratic Republic of Yemen and the Yemen Arab
Republic merged on 22 May 1990, shall contribute at
the rate of 0.02 per cent for 1990 and 0.01 per cent for
1991 with a corresponding reduction in the State's advance to the Working Capital Fund;
7. Following the accession of the German Democratic Republic to the Federal Republic of Germany on
3 October 1990, and in compliance with the current
scale methodology and based on the statistical and economic data available for the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic, Germany
shall contribute at the rate of 9.36 per cent for 1991.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
C

The General Assembly,
Recalling rule 160 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly,
Requests the Committee on Contributions to hold in
1991, on an experimental basis, one or two information
meetings, in a manner to be decided by the Committee,
prior to executing the ad hoe adjustment of the machine
scale_, so as to give Member States the opportunity to
provide the Committee with additional information as
deemed necessary for the purpose of making the ad hoe
adjustments.
72nd plenary meeting
21 December 1990
