S/2015/855

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 November 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 14 October 2015 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you regarding the financing of the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
The Oversight Committee of the Residual Special Court has informed me that
the Court will run out of funding in March 2016 and that it will not be poss ible to
secure the voluntary contributions necessary to enable the Court to continue its
work thereafter. As you are aware, article 3 of the agreement establishing the Court
provides that “[t]he expenses of the Residual Special Court shall be borne by
voluntary contributions from the international community. The Parties and the
Oversight Committee may explore alternative means of financing the Residual
Special Court.” The parties and the Oversight Committee have decided to explore
alternative means of financing the Court.
In July 2010, I notified the Security Council of my intention to seek to
negotiate and conclude with the Government of Sierra Leone an agreement
establishing a residual mechanism for the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
statute of the residual mechanism. The members of the Security Council took note
of that intention and agreed to my proposed manner of proceeding. I therefore
concluded with the Government of Sierra Leone an agreement establishing the
Residual Special Court, which entered into force on 2 October 2012. I remain
grateful that the Security Council welcomed the agreement, expressed its intention
to support the Residual Special Court and called on Member States to contribute
generously to the implementation of the agreement.
The Residual Special Court commenced functioning on 1 January 2014,
immediately upon the closure of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. In so doing, the
Residual Special Court is the first example of a full transition from a United Nations
or United Nations-assisted criminal tribunal into a residual institution. The functions
of the Residual Special Court include supervising the enforcement of sentences of
the persons convicted by the Special Court, protecting and supporting witnesses,
reviewing judgments and sentences, responding to requests for access to evidence
by national prosecuting authorities, managing the archives, conducting contempt of
court proceedings and providing defence counsel and legal aid for any proceedings
before the Residual Special Court.
The Residual Special Court is a small and efficient entity, with a limited
number of staff. The current and estimated future annual budget for the continuous
activities of the Court amounts to $3.5 million. In the experience of the Court to
15-19672 (E)

111115

*1519672*

S/2015/855

date, this figure includes the costs of ad hoc judicial activities that may arise from
time to time. It is possible that such judicial activities may generate additional costs
in the future, depending on their nature and complexity.
When establishing the Special Court, the Security Council decided that it
should be funded from voluntary contributions. The funding basis was continued for
the Residual Special Court as the successor institution. Since the commencement of
the operations of the Residual Special Court, intensive efforts have been deployed to
secure sufficient voluntary funding. These have encompassed sustained appeals for
funding by the President of the Residual Special Court, Philip Waki (Kenya); the
Prosecutor, Brenda Hollis (United States of America); and the Registrar, Binta
Mansaray (Sierra Leone). The Oversight Committee and the Member States
comprising it have supported these activities and engaged in their own fundraising
efforts, while I issued, on 5 May 2015, a general appeal to the membership o f the
Organization calling for additional contributions to the important work of the
Residual Special Court. Despite these efforts, there will not be sufficient voluntary
contributions for the continuation of the work of the Residual Special Court beyond
March 2016.
In my letter to the President of the Security Council dated 8 November 2012
(S/2012/891), I noted that, when the agreement establishing the Residual Special
Court had been concluded, it was thought that it would be possible to secure
voluntary contributions for the operations of the Residual Special Court. I recalled
at that time, however, that the experience of the Special Court had led to the
conclusion that, given the long-term nature of residual mechanisms in particular, it
would not be prudent to leave the funding of the Residual Special Court to the
uncertainties of voluntary contributions. In addition, I did not consider that it would
be practical to engage in continuous appeals for funding for that purpose. In order to
find a viable and sustainable financial mechanism to ensure secure and continuous
funding for the Residual Special Court, I therefore expressed my intention to submit
a proposal to the General Assembly for alternative means of fin ancing the Residual
Special Court. By letter from the President of the Security Council dated
28 November 2012 (S/2012/892), I was advised that, at that time, there was no
agreement among members of the Security Council with respect to the possible need
for such alternate means.
In my view, the experience since the previous consideration of the matter by
the Security Council has further confirmed the need for alternate means of funding
the Residual Special Court. International criminal tribunals engaged in trial and
appeal processes provide specific reference points for actual or potential donors. By
contrast, the work of a residual institution that is not seized of a trial or appeal has
less visibility, thereby rendering the ability to attract voluntary funding significantly
more difficult, as the Residual Special Court has experienced. At the same time, I
believe that the Residual Special Court has duly confirmed its worth by successfully
completing a full transition from the Special Court and effectively discharging a
diverse range of judicial and non-judicial functions with very limited financial and
human resources. In doing so, it is continuing the contribution towards peace and
security in Sierra Leone and the region initiated by the Special Court, and is helping
to strengthen and deepen the rule of law.

2/3

15-19672

S/2015/855

In the light of the foregoing, I intend to propose to the General Assembly that
the costs of the Residual Special Court for the coming biennium should be pr ovided
through a subvention under the assessed programme budget.
The proposal would be a temporary measure to address the current financial
situation. I will consult closely with the Government of Sierra Leone, the Oversight
Committee of the Residual Special Court and associated stakeholders during the
biennium in order to seek to propose more comprehensive solutions to the Security
Council and the General Assembly.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-19672

3/3
