United Nations

S/PV.4111 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth Year

4111th Meeting
Monday, 13 March 2000, 3.25 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Chowdhury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Bangladesh)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Vamos-Goldman
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Doutriaux
Miss Durrant
Mr. Hasmy
Mr. Ouane
Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi
Mr. Hamer
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Jerandi
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Ms. Soderberg

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Third report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (S/2000/186)

00-33995 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security
Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be
incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation
concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The meeting was resumed at 3.25 p.m.
Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): At the outset let
me thank the Secretary-General for the report he has
circulated to us and also thank Mr. Annabi for the remarks
he made introducing this report. The report of the
Secretary-General clearly indicates to us the progress that
has been achieved since the deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and the
problems that exist. It also provides us with proposals for
how to move forward. We are very grateful for these. We
also want to thank Ambassador Greenstock for the briefing
he gave us.
The people of Sierra Leone have experienced
unimaginable horrors. Only a process of reconciliation,
accompanied by the demobilization of combatants and
military integration, can help instil peace and security in
Sierra Leone. We therefore thank those who are helping
with this difficult process, and we welcome UNAMSIL’s
readiness to assist in this regard.
The security situation certainly worries our delegation.
In this connection, it should be emphasized that it is very
important to ensure that peacekeeping operations are always
carried out under appropriate mandates and that the size
and strength of the force is commensurate with the
problem. We think that these two go together. It is one
thing to have the appropriate mandate, but if the size does
not conform, then this in itself presents a problem.
The fact that the areas with extensive UNAMSIL
patrols are seeing improved security, in our view, speaks
volumes. We understand from the report that the conflict
had a major impact on institutions of law and order. In this
regard, we appeal to the international community to assist
Sierra Leone in the training of police as well as in
providing essential facilities and equipment. The work of
UNAMSIL and the Commonwealth Police Task Force in
this field is highly commendable.
In all conflict situations, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process has proved to be
the most difficult. Indeed, it depends not only on the
commitment of the parties but also on the extent of support
from the international community. The programme by
UNAMSIL for the disposal of arms and ammunition, to be
commenced soon, should therefore be assisted.
Similarly, we welcome the launching of the
community rehabilitation and reintegration programme, and
we thank the World Bank and the African Development

2

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
Bank for their contribution to this programme. It is
programmes such as this one which will serve as
incentives for ex-combatants to surrender their weapons,
despite the reluctance of their leaders.
The report clearly points out that the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process is being
set back by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). We
need to examine how UNAMSIL can maximize its
progress in this area. Hence, and as the Secretary-General
clearly proposes in his report, one of the main priorities
for the United Nations in Sierra Leone remains the speedy
establishment of a credible peacekeeping presence
throughout the country to create the necessary climate of
confidence and security conditions for the implementation
of various aspects of the peace process. The report also
points out, in a very clear manner, the impediments to the
DDR programme, which need to be examined further.
Our delegation believes that we have a real chance
to succeed here and so we must at all costs avoid
repeating the experience we had in Angola with regard to
the DDR of UNITA combatants. Here again we believe
that some collective thinking needs to be exercised and
past experience taken into account.
We note that the human rights situation is most
disturbing in the RUF-held areas. We wish to underscore
that the perpetrators of violence against civilians and aid
workers are not covered by the amnesty under the Lomé
Agreement, as mentioned in the report. Here again we
commend UNAMSIL for its work in the area of human
rights.
Furthermore, we concur with the steps proposed by
the Secretary-General. Indeed, the early disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of all ex-combatants; the
extension of State authority, including law enforcement,
throughout the country; national reconciliation and
democratization; and the improvement of Sierra Leone’s
capacity to ensure its own security is what is needed to
restore peace and stability to Sierra Leone.
With regard to national reconciliation and
democratization, we support the steps proposed by the
Secretary-General. We wish to underline that for national
reconciliation and democratization to prosper in Sierra
Leone, all parties, especially the RUF, should cooperate,
and the international community should lend its assistance
in this regard.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Namibia supports the proposed donor conference,
scheduled for 27 March this year in London, and we call on
all to contribute generously. We thank the United Kingdom
Government for this initiative.
We commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, the men and women of
UNAMSIL, and the personnel of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) for their courageous work in Sierra Leone.
Finally, our thanks go to all those countries that
contribute troops to UNAMSIL, and we also are in
agreement with the proposal that you, Mr. President, speak
to the press after this meeting.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): I should like
to begin by thanking Mr. Hedi Annabi for introducing the
third report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), which gives a
comprehensive account of the situation prevailing in the
country and identifies the challenges to be faced in order to
complete the peace process successfully, as well as the
steps to be taken in order to act effectively to meet those
challenges.
My delegation supports Mr. Annabi’s suggestion that
the report henceforth be published every 60 days.
In this regard, my delegation notes with satisfaction
the progress that has been made in the political area in the
implementation of the provisions relating to governance.
Here we would like to point out the need to speed up
this process so as to establish and put into effective
operation, as soon as possible, the National Electoral
Commission and the Commission for the Management of
Strategic Resources, National Reconstruction and
Development.
However, we are bound to acknowledge that the
situation in Sierra Leone, because of its continuing
precariousness, is still profoundly disquieting, in particular
with respect to the manifest reluctance of Mr. Sankoh to
cooperate in implementing the Peace Agreement. Here we
reaffirm Tunisia’s commitment to the full and early
implementation of the provisions of that Agreement, which
offers a genuine chance for salvation to the people of Sierra
Leone, who have already endured such hardship and who
continue to be the victims of a tragedy of vast
humanitarian, social, economic and political dimensions.

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
My delegation would like to express its profound
concern at the failure by the rebels to respect their
commitments, undertaken voluntarily in the framework of
the Lomé Agreement. We feel that it is essential for them,
and in particular for Mr. Sankoh and his party, to fulfil
their responsibilities vis-à-vis their people and their
country in good faith, especially since Mr. Sankoh now
bears a post of responsibility of high importance in the
Government.
In this regard, we deem it necessary for the Security
Council to continue to exert pressure on the recalcitrant
parties and to indicate, as firmly and forcefully as
possible, its commitment to securing a return to peace,
security and stability in the country, in accordance with
the provisions of the Peace Agreement. This commitment
is all the more pressing because the barriers placed in the
way of humanitarian assistance and the obstacles
impeding the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, as well as
the obstructive manoeuvres to impede UNAMSIL’s
activities and attacks on personnel of the Mission, have
become daily occurrences.
My delegation in this regard would like to
underscore the +pertinent nature of the steps suggested by
the Secretary-General in part VII of his report, which are
aimed at creating a climate of confidence and the
necessary conditions for the implementation of the various
aspects of the peace process. The proposals by the
Secretary-General deserve our full support, and we should
all do our utmost to see them put into effect.
The following steps seem to us to be most urgent in
this regard: the rapid establishment of an effective
peacekeeping force throughout the territory; the provision
to peacekeeping troops of the necessary equipment to
permit them to carry out their mandate properly and
command the necessary credibility; strict respect for the
rules of engagement by UNAMSIL troops; the speeding
up of the deployment in the field of the police officers
provided for in resolution 1289 (2000), and, as necessary,
an increase in their personnel in the light of the needs
perceived in this area; an increase in financial assistance
to Sierra Leone; and, lastly, support by the Security
Council for the efforts deployed by the President of Mali,
Mr. Alpha Oumar Konaré, current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States — efforts
which attest to the importance that western Africa, and
Africa in general, attaches to the situation in Sierra
Leone.

3

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
My delegation believes that the question of
development, including the right of the people of Sierra
Leone to development, should be one of the priorities of the
Sierra Leone peace process in view of the close link
between development and lasting peace, as was stated so
eloquently by the Secretary-General in his report on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of lasting peace and
sustainable development in Africa.
In our opinion, focusing on development in Sierra
Leone not only will contribute to the successful
implementation of the demobilization and reintegration
programme for former combatants, but will also help to
resettle refugees and displaced persons in their country and
to steel Sierra Leoneans against any temptation to rally
behind the forces of destruction.
Since there is no need for further proof of the link
between peace and development, particularly with regard to
internal conflicts, it seems to us appropriate for the Security
Council to envisage including a reference to this question
in its resolutions and statements dealing with this type of
conflict.
I also wish to thank the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom for the first-hand information he gave us
concerning his recent trip to the country. I endorse his
suggestion regarding a statement to the press by the
President of the Council.
Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
we would like to thank Mr. Annabi for the very
comprehensive information he gave us in his introduction
of the latest report of the Secretary-General.
We are also grateful for the first-hand information that
Ambassador Greenstock shared with us. That information
gave us an eloquent and precise picture of the overall
situation in Sierra Leone.
We cannot conceal the fact that the content of the
report of the Secretary-General is a source of concern to us.
What emerges from it is a lack of commitment to the Lomé
Agreement on the part of Foday Sankoh, the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) and the rebel forces in general. That
lack of commitment takes specific forms: first, continued
attacks on the civilian population by the rebel forces;
secondly, not only hostile rhetoric against the presence of
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL),
but also serious acts of violence against its personnel and
equipment; and thirdly, slowness in the disarmament,

4

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
demobilization and reintegration process, largely due to
the rebels’ lack of cooperation.
We wish to reaffirm categorically our absolute
condemnation of violations of human rights carried out by
the rebel forces. The amnesty agreed in the Lomé
Agreement does not cover crimes committed since its
signature. Moreover, crimes against humanity cannot be
exempted because they are offences against the collective
conscience of mankind.
Attacks against the personnel of UNAMSIL are
unacceptable. We have been aware since the beginning
that the personnel of UNAMSIL could face a hostile
environment. In that context, we believe that Chapter VII
of the Charter and the rules of engagement should be
applied very rigorously. Otherwise, UNAMSIL will be
prevented from fulfilling its mandate. We do not call for
absolute security assurances, but neither do we believe
that UNAMSIL personnel should be exposed to
disproportionate risks. This could ultimately affect the
viability of the Mission.
Given the situation described, the sanctions regime
imposed by the Security Council should be applied firmly.
In this regard, we agree with what is said by the
Secretary-General at the end of paragraph 49 of his report
concerning the possibility of considering measures to put
an end to illegal diamond sales. In this connection, the
exceptional work done by Ambassador Fowler in the
context of the sanctions regime imposed on UNITA might
serve as a valuable model.
Notwithstanding the difficulties that it indicates, the
report of the Secretary-General also shows that the
expansion of UNAMSIL has begun to have positive
effects. The distribution of humanitarian assistance has
improved within its area of deployment, as has the human
rights situation. We hope that the deployment of the
11,000 members of UNAMSIL throughout the country,
and particularly in those areas under rebel control, will
have a significant stabilizing effect. We once again
reiterate that for that deployment to be possible it is
necessary for the very parties that in the Lomé Agreement
called for the presence of UNAMSIL — and I refer to the
rebels — comply fully with the commitments they
undertook in July 1999 and that they guarantee the
security and freedom of movement of United Nations
personnel.
Finally, we wish to express our agreement with the
priorities set out by the Secretary-General in part VII of

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
his report: rapid implementation of the disarmament
process, the extension of State authority throughout the
territory of Sierra Leone, the national reconciliation process
and the creation of a professional army and police force.
However, in order to achieve this there is a need for a clear
commitment to peace on the part of all the parties, in
particular the rebel forces.
In closing, I would like to raise two points. First, we
agree with the request made by Mr. Annabi that the report
of the Secretariat be presented every 60 days, instead of
every 45. We know that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations has too few personnel to carry out the tasks we
have given it. We also know that it does remarkable work,
for which we are very grateful.
Lastly, we approve the elements for a statement to the
press proposed by Ambassador Greenstock.
Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): I want to
thank Mr. Annabi not only for his briefing today but also
for the amount of time and energy he and his staff have put
into trying to give the United Nations operation in Sierra
Leone the ability to carry out the mandate that the United
Nations has given it. It is a very difficult Mission, and they
certainly deserve our full support in their efforts. I think it
is one of the most difficult missions out there today and
one that deserves the full attention of the Council.
I appreciate the holding of this briefing today, and I
think we should all commend Ambassador Greenstock for
taking the time to go to Sierra Leone. There is nothing like
seeing the situation on the ground. I think it is informative.
I myself was there about six months ago. You cannot come
back from a trip like that and not determine to do
everything you can to try to help ameliorate the situation.
I certainly share Ambassador Greenstock’s view that the
people of Sierra Leone are committed to achieving the
peace that they so rightly deserve. I think it is incumbent
on all of us to do what we can to give it to them.
I would underscore what others have said, and
certainly the Secretary-General’s report and Mr. Annabi’s
briefing. But I think it boils down to two real problems in
Sierra Leone. One is the failure of Foday Sankoh to live up
to his commitments in the peace process. From that failure
stems a myriad of problems that we are dealing with. But
until he begins to live up to the commitments that he has
made, as well as the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the
mission given by the Security Council to UNAMSIL is not
going to be fulfilled. I would certainly join the Secretary-

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
General and others in calling on Foday Sankoh to abide
by his commitments.
Looking at the Secretary-General’s report, we see
that he is very blunt about raising serious doubts about
the commitment of Foday Sankoh to the faithful
implementation of the peace accord. He is talking about
the main obstacle to the extension of State authority being
the continuing refusal of access by the RUF. I think it is
important for us to be as blunt about this as possible, both
in our private discussions with him as well as publicly.
Along those lines, I would fully support the proposal for
a press statement that Ambassador Greenstock put
forward, which I think rightly includes a call for Foday
Sankoh and the RUF to fulfil their commitments.
The second problem that we face there is the fact
that the United Nations operation is not fully up and
running. That is no one’s fault in particular. It is just a
long process. It takes several months for the United
Nations to expand a mandate such as the one the Security
Council gave it. I think we all need to do more within our
own Governments, and in the region, to provide the
resources so that they can get fully deployed. I think none
of us want to see a repeat of the United Nations
peacekeepers being disarmed by the RUF, as opposed to
the other way around. I therefore commend the British
Government for calling the donors’ conference at the end
of this month. I certainly hope that the Deputy SecretaryGeneral will be in a position to go there. I think that until
we have a full peacekeeping force on the ground there, it
is going to be very difficult to have it carry out its
mandate, much less overcome the continuing problems
going on there.
I would also second something that others have said.
I think we need to look at the travel restrictions on the
RUF leaders. It is our strong view that such leaders
should be able to travel only upon prior consent of the
sanctions committee. The recent travel schedule of Mr.
Foday Sankoh is one that surprised our delegation at
least, and I think a number of other members of the
delegations on the Security Council. I think we need to
reiterate our commitment there, and I would perhaps
underscore that in the press statement, if others would
agree, in order to remind Member States that there are
travel bans on some of these leaders.
Lastly, I will just underscore the situation on human
rights in Sierra Leone, particularly with regard to women,
girls and child soldiers. It is one of the more horrific
situations with respect to abuses of human rights, and I

5

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
think we should remember that when we look at trying to
contribute to the Trust Fund or help the United Nations
mobilize. It is a very serious situation. As Ambassador
Greenstock said, the world is focused on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but the real test of the moment is
whether or not Sierra Leone is going to work. It is one that
we all have a responsibility in helping the parties fulfil.
Mr. Vamos-Goldman (Canada): We would also like
to thank Mr. Annabi for his detailed briefing, and like
previous speakers, we also have no objections to the
extension of the reporting period. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Greenstock for sharing his impressions so
frankly with us this morning.
The modest progress made in implementing the Lomé
Agreement and in establishing various bodies to that end,
notably the Commission for the Consolidation of Peace and
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, gives some
encouragement.
We are particularly gratified that the security,
humanitarian and human rights situation in Sierra Leone
has improved most in the areas of deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). This
confirms that a robust troop commitment in support of a
strong mandate is the best contribution the Council can
make to individual security.
It is most important that troop-contributing countries
provide their contingents with adequate equipment to use
the full measure of their mandate and rules of engagement.
This is particularly important in the context of sporadic acts
of aggression and systematic interference by ex-rebel
elements against United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. We are concerned that, without an adequate
resource base, UNAMSIL’s ability to protect civilians may
erode with future confrontations.
Canada remains concerned by persistent reports of
human rights and humanitarian law violations, particularly
those perpetrated by ex-Sierra Leone Army elements in the
Port Loko area. All parties in Sierra Leone have an
obligation to ensure the protection of civilians and the safe
and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, and should recall that the amnesty provisions of
the Lomé Agreement do not apply to offences committed
since its signature.
All parties must refrain from interfering with the free
movement of people, goods and, particularly, UNAMSIL
and humanitarian personnel through the use of illegal

6

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
roadblocks. Canada is gravely concerned with reports that
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has begun laying
landmines near Bendu, presumably with a view to
interfering with UNAMSIL deployment to the area. This
would be a basic and grievous violation of the Lomé
Agreement.
As expressed by the Council in its statement of 8
March, a tangible expression of commitment to the peace
process is needed from the RUF and its leader, Foday
Sankoh, in the light of the group’s inadequate compliance
with the provisions of the Lomé Agreement. Specifically,
the RUF must disclose the number of combatants under
its command, as other armed factions have done, and
return equipment seized from the Guinean battalion of
UNAMSIL during a 10 January ambush. For his part, Mr.
Sankoh must respect the travel ban provisions of Security
Council resolution 1171 (1998) and refrain from making
hostile public statements against UNAMSIL which, to say
the very least, undermine confidence in the peace process.
While the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme (DDR) is making gradual
progress overall, the same cannot be said for the northern
and eastern parts of Sierra Leone still under RUF control.
RUF obstructionism has hindered humanitarian access to
some 2.6 million war-affected Sierra Leoneans and has
stymied the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees efforts to monitor and
facilitate refugee returns. We urge all parties to participate
fully in the DDR programme.
Finally, we agree with the elements of the statement
to the press proposed by Ambassador Greenstock,
including the element added by Ambassador Soderberg.
Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation)(spoke in
Russian): We associate ourselves with the words of
gratitude addressed to Mr. Annabi and Ambassador
Greenstock. We note certain progress that has been made
in the implementation of the Lomé Agreement and in the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) contingents in various regions of the
country, including those areas where the peacekeepers of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) were not
deployed earlier. We hope that further expansion of
United Nations presence will assist in speeding up the
return to normal life for all the citizens of Sierra Leone.
We express our gratitude to the Government of Nigeria
for the flexibility it has demonstrated regarding the issue
of the extension of the dates for the Nigerian contingent’s

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
stay in Sierra Leone, which makes it possible to prevent a
vacuum in the area of ensuring security and to establish
favourable conditions for a build-up of the UNAMSIL
presence.
At the same time, we are concerned by the parts of the
report that refer to a dangerous trend of escalating tensions
between the combatants of the Revolutionary United Front
(RUF) and the UNAMSIL military personnel in the field,
which has manifested itself in particular in incidents during
which obstacles were created to the freedom of movement
of UNAMSIL personnel and in which weapons were seized
from the military personnel of the Mission.

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
note of the irreplaceable role being played in this context
by the leaders of States of the region and of the active
and constructive policy of the current Chairman of the
Economic Community of West African States, President
Konaré of Mali, which have given significant impetus to
efforts to strengthen peace.
In conclusion, I support the elements of the
presidential statement proposed by Ambassador
Greenstock.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Bangladesh.

We note that these unlawful actions follow the same
type of logic as the hostile public statements of the leader
of the Revolutionary United Front Party (RUFP) towards
UNAMSIL, and we believe it is appropriate for the Council
to warn Mr. Sankoh regarding his personal responsibility
for the unpredictable consequences that such incidents may
entail. The weapons must be returned to the peacekeepers.
Creating obstacles to the implementation of the Mission’s
mandate is inadmissible.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report. We agree with the steps he has
identified for the success of the peace process and with
his observations contained in the report.

Russia supports the Secretary-General’s view
concerning four key areas in which efforts should now be
focused to move the peace process in Sierra Leone forward:
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of all
former combatants; the extension of State authority to the
entire territory of the country, including law enforcement
activity; national reconciliation and democratization; and the
rebuilding of national security forces. We are convinced
that progress on each of these tracks is possible solely in
conditions of cooperation between the Government, the
RUFP and other Sierra Leonean groups and leaders, which
in the final analysis bear fundamental responsibility for the
restoration of peace to the country.

Bangladesh believes that overall progress has been
made in Sierra Leone, despite difficulties which continue
to exist. We are happy at the role played by regional
countries in facilitating the implementation of the Lomé
Peace Agreement. In particular, the role of President
Konaré of Mali, in holding, first, the second meeting of
the Joint Implementation Committee on 24 January and,
then, the special meeting on 1 and 2 March.

We call upon them to actively cooperate with each
other and with UNAMSIL in implementing the Lomé
Agreement. We emphasize that it is precisely this factor, in
our view, that is decisive regarding further international
support for the peace process in Sierra Leone. In the light
of this approach, Russia is ready to continue to render
assistance to United Nations peacekeeping efforts in Sierra
Leone. At present, we are at an advanced stage in our
negotiations with the Secretariat regarding the allocation to
UNAMSIL of a Russian air-support unit.

First, regarding the deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), there have
been reports of obstruction of UNAMSIL forces, seizure
of arms from UNAMSIL troops and refusal to cooperate
with UNAMSIL by rebel groups, in particular by
elements of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This
is totally unacceptable. UNAMSIL must have freedom of
movement. All parties must also cooperate fully with
UNAMSIL during its deployment and discharge of
mandate.

In expressing our satisfaction with the high level of
participation by the international community in the
settlement of the conflict in Sierra Leone, we take particular

We believe that only the early establishment of a
credible peacekeeping mission throughout the country can
create the security conditions and the climate of

We would like particularly to thank Ambassador
Greenstock for his statement at the outset of our debate,
in which he shared with us his first-hand experience with
regard to the situation as it exists now in Sierra Leone.

However, as the Secretary-General has mentioned in
his report, much clearly remains to be done to further the
peace process in Sierra Leone. We have a number of
concerns. They are in five broad areas.

7

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
confidence that are essential for the successful conclusion
of the peace process. Since a substantial part of the
deployed UNAMSIL troops are actually forces that had
been with the Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) mission, it may be
important for Mr. Annabi to comment on how smooth and
effective was the inclusion of ECOMOG troops in
UNAMSIL operations.
Secondly, a particular concern remains about the intent
and activity of the RUF, particularly its leader Mr. Sankoh.
He has been quick to pledge his total commitment to the
peace process, but his deeds have seldom matched his
words. In recent months, his activities and those of the
RUF have been particularly suspect. RUF is yet to provide
a list of combatants and has handed over very few of its
weapons. We understand that it possesses a credible force
that can break the peace at any time. We believe that the
Council should be prepared to take specific measures to
force Mr. Sankoh and the RUF to comply fully with the
Lomé Peace Agreement. In my capacity as the Chairman of
the Sierra Leone sanctions committee, I am doing my best
to enforce the sanctions imposed on Mr. Sankoh and his
colleagues.
Thirdly, the slow disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process remains a concern. The
Secretary-General has mentioned in his report that the slow
deployment of UNAMSIL, administrative aspects relating
to the functioning of the camps and the lack of a realistic
target date and awareness about the modalities of the DDR
programme have all been hindrances in this regard. While
improving those would help, the success of the programme
will ultimately depend on the ability of the Government of
Sierra Leone, through its National Commission on
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration and in
cooperation with its national and international partners, to
set up its efforts to implement all aspects of the DDR
programme, which will be important.
In this regard it is also important, as the SecretaryGeneral has also pointed out, to address the question of
restructuring of the police and armed forces. Genuine DDR
can be achieved only through a national process, under
credible authority and with the participation of all parties.
In this connection, I would like to ask Mr. Annabi whether
he sees a short- or medium-term possibility of the Sierra
Leonean police becoming an effective force. Is there any
possibility for their deployment in the DDR sites?
Fourthly, the extension of state control over the
territory of Sierra Leone is a must for a sustainable peace.

8

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
This aspect is closely linked to my previous point. Unless
a democratically elected national Government has
administrative control over all the provinces, including the
Northern and Eastern Provinces, as well as on economic
activities, including the exploitation of the country’s
strategic resources, there cannot be a successful DDR
process, reintegration of former combatants or an end to
illegal mining of diamonds and other resources that
continue to boost the ability of former rebels to renew
hostilities. UNAMSIL, as is pointed out rightly in the
report, has no mandate to step in to prevent illegal
economic activities. I believe that the Council can look at
this limitation closely in future.
Fifthly and finally, the continued violation of the
human rights of Sierra Leoneans, including abductions,
and the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the country
are matters of concern. Recent reports that former rebels
have committed atrocities near areas where UNAMSIL
has been deployed are indicative of the relative impunity
they enjoy. Also, humanitarian personnel have been
obstructed and assistance has not reached people in need.
We consider that these are among the priorities that need
to be looked at by the Council.
In conclusion, let me thank Mr. Annabi for his
excellent presentation. We agree with him about the
proposal to extend the periodic reporting from 45 to 60
days.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Sierra Leone has asked to
speak. I invite him to make his statement.
Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): May I, through you, Sir,
thank the Council for giving us the opportunity to speak
in this meeting of the Council on the situation in Sierra
Leone. It is a pleasure to see you, Sir. I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
this month and to thank you for your initiative in
convening this open briefing. We believe that these
meetings serve as useful barometres of the interest which
the Council and the whole international community attach
to the plight of the people of Sierra Leone and their
fervent hope for lasting peace.
Please allow me also to pay a tribute to your
predecessor, the representative of Argentina, for directing
the affairs of the Council last month.

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
My delegation would also like to say a word of
welcome to Ambassador Greenstock, who has just returned
from Sierra Leone. I should like to thank him sincerely for
giving members of the Council a lucid and candid
assessment of the current situation in our country. His
remarks were an unofficial but credible addendum to the
report of the Secretary-General. On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to commend the United Kingdom
for sending such a high-level delegation to assess the
situation on the spot. This latest initiative by the
Government of the United Kingdom is exemplary and
timely, especially in the context of what needs to be done
in facilitating the peace process.
Allow me to say a few words to Sir Jeremy about a
compatriot of his. A few weeks ago I had the opportunity
to travel with High Commissioner Penfold, who is fondly
called “Chief Komrabai” by the people of Sierra Leone. We
went to Bo, Pujehun and Kenema. Allow me to express our
thanks to him. We understand that he is leaving. He has
done a fantastic job, and we wish him well in his new
assignment.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General’s latest
report, and the update provided orally to the Council by Mr.
Annabi this morning, and we thank him for his
clarification. We also acknowledge the general conclusion
that the peace process as a whole has been slow and that
there has been little progress in disarmament in the northern
and eastern parts of the country. For its part, the
Government of Sierra Leone has consistently demonstrated
its commitment to all aspects of the peace process.
Regrettably, as Ambassador Greenstock stated this morning,
we cannot say the same for the other party to the Lomé
Peace Agreement. Indeed, the finger should be directed at
the main stumbling block, the main obstacle that stands in
the way of the peace process.
That is why we welcome the Secretary-General’s
assessment that serious doubts remain about the
commitment of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) to
the peace process. Events on the ground — as we have
heard from Sir Jeremy — and certain utterances by the
RUF leader, in our view, justify the observation — indeed,
the conclusion — in the report that the RUF should
immediately take convincing measures to dispel these
doubts. In this connection, we welcome the statement which
you, Mr. President, made to the press last week on behalf
of the Council. In our view, it was a forthright message to
Mr. Foday Sankoh to take disarmament seriously — and it
is about time. The people of Sierra Leone are encouraged

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
by this approach, which obviously complements the
activities of UNAMSIL on the ground.
I should like to add that the people of Sierra Leone
also welcome the firm stand which the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative in Sierra Leone,
Ambassador Olu Adeniji, has been taking in Mr.
Sankoh’s encounters with the United Nations.
As part of the Government’s confidence-building
measures, President Kabbah recently undertook the first
in a series of disarmament campaign visits to several parts
of the country. He visited Bo, Pujehun and Kenema. He
wanted to help break the cycle of distrust, suspicion and
misconception. I want to emphasize the word
“misconception”, because there are certain misconceptions
about the whole disarmament process. He also explained
the benefits of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants. In the areas he visited,
and in response to his appeal, there was an impressive
disarmament exercise by the Civil Defence Forces (CDF)
which was not merely symbolic. The CDF told us of, and
demonstrated, their willingness to disarm completely and
speedily in the interests of peace in our country. We had
hoped that the RUF and others would not merely
reciprocate but would fulfil their obligations under the
Lomé Peace Agreement.
President Kabbah has challenged all ex-combatants,
wherever they are, to disarm for the good of the nation.
He has challenged all the commanders to urge their men
and women in arms to join in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). The President
challenged all those who say “There is no more war in
Sierra Leone” but who refuse to disarm, to remove the
threat of war, namely the weapons. We hope that Mr.
Sankoh and others have heard the message and will take
immediate steps to accept the challenge. We also hope
that he and others will heed the message which is
emerging in this Council today. Mr. Sankoh should not
hold the entire nation hostage. We know that thousands of
former RUF fighters are ready and willing to disarm.
Disarmament and demobilization remain the highestpriority issues on the peace agenda. Disarmament and
demobilization are closely linked to the question of
security in Sierra Leone, the protection of human rights,
the unimpeded flow of humanitarian relief to victims of
the rebel war and, of course, to the capacity of the nation
to concentrate on rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
economy and other aspects of the life and livelihood of
the nation.

9

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
The planting season is rapidly approaching. The
farmers want to go back to their farms to grow food to feed
the people. How can we speak of national reconciliation
when the combatants are still holding on to their weapons?
How can we expect the victims of atrocities to forgive,
when the perpetrators are still equipped with the weapons
of war? In this regard, we fully endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s view that there is a general, clear need for all the
stakeholders to agree on a realistic target date for the
completion of the disarmament and demobilization of all
combatants. We agree that as a first step, the RUF should
provide, as a matter or urgency, full and complete
information on the number of RUF combatants under its
command and ensure that they comply with the DDR
process. We urgently need a target date for disarmament
and demobilization. The process cannot and should not be
prolonged indefinitely.
The President: I thank the representative of Sierra
Leone for the kind words he addressed to me and my
colleagues.
I shall now give the floor to Mr. Annabi to respond to
some of the comments which have been made here and the
questions raised.
Mr. Annabi: I shall begin with the questions asked by
the Ambassador of the Netherlands. As regards the
reference in paragraph 26 of the report to the launching of
a community rehabilitation and reintegration programme
last month, this refers to a number of projects which
include training in vocational skills and employment
opportunities through the promotion of small businesses and
small business credits, accelerated eduction programmes
and programmes designed to encourage literacy, as well as
social counselling programmes to people who may have
suffered during the civil war. These projects are to be
financed through the World Bank and the African
Development Bank.
As regards the reference in paragraph 48 to the
establishment of mechanisms to allow the Government and
people of Sierra Leone to reap the benefits of the country’s
strategic resources, I apologize for the somewhat cryptic
sentence. What it really means — and this is something that
is shared by everyone — is that we would very much like
to see the benefits that have been reaped from the diamond
exploitation and have been used to prosecute the war now
used to support the peace process and the development and
reconstruction process.

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
The Commission for the Management of Strategic
Resources, National Reconstruction and Development,
which is chaired by Foday Sankoh, has been formally
established, but the problem is that it has not really
started working. It has not yet adopted a proper plan of
action or programme of work. It has not started to follow
up on the Government’s own efforts in terms of taxation,
legislation and various measures that are needed to
control the diamond exploitation activities to ensure that
these resources can be effectively put to use to support
the peace process and the reconstruction process.
In response to the questions of the Ambassador of
Jamaica regarding the national commission on strategic
resources, I am not sure whether the reference by the
Ambassador of Jamaica to hearings refers to hearings of
the commission itself — I indicated that the commission
had not started its work — or to the hearings held
recently in the Sierra Leone Parliament. Foday Sankoh
and Johnny Paul Koroma were both invited to attend
hearings of the national Parliament. Mr. Koroma did
attend, as requested by the Parliament, but Mr. Sankoh
did not come and did not respond to the invitation
extended to him.
Regarding the deployment of civilian police
personnel, we hope to deploy — as members of the
Council will recall — some 60 civilian police officers. I
must say that we have offers for perhaps half of that
number at this point. So additional offers would be
welcome, and of course we will start deploying those
civilian police officers from countries that have made
these offers on the understanding that we need to keep an
acceptable geographical balance in this regard. So we will
start the deployment soon and hope to receive in the
meantime additional offers from interested Member
States.
The Ambassador of Jamaica also expressed concern
about the withdrawal of two humanitarian organizations
from Kabala and another location in the northern part of
the country. While it is true that these two organizations
have withdrawn as a result of the attacks by
Revolutionary United Front elements against them on 7
May, my humanitarian colleagues have asked me to stress
that humanitarian operations, which have been recently
established in Makeni, are continuing and that further
work is being undertaken to expand humanitarian
assistance wherever access becomes possible.
In regard to your own questions, Sir, on the
incorporation of the ECOMOG troops, we have currently

10

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000

three ECOWAS countries who were participating in
ECOMOG and are now providing troops to UNAMSIL:
Nigeria, Guinea and Ghana. As you know, initially two
Nigerian battalions were inducted into UNAMSIL. An
additional two other battalions and a tank company are also
in the process of being incorporated into UNAMSIL. A
battalion from Ghana and a battalion from Guinea have
been inducted. We are working actively with these
contributors, both here and in the field, to ensure that the
equipment shortfalls are met as soon as possible, so that
these troops are fully equipped to perform the mandate
given to them by the Security Council.

In this connection, and to conclude, I would like to
mention that Mr. Miyet, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations — who is currently on an
important mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to prepare for the deployment of the operation
authorized by the Council at the end of last month — will
also visit Freetown, as part of his current trip to Africa.
We expect him to arrive there over the weekend. The
point of his visit is to take a firsthand look at the work of
UNAMSIL and meet with all the parties concerned and
see what we can all do together to further this peace
process and improve its chances of success.

I think that the contingent for which the incorporation
has been less smooth, perhaps, was the battalion from
Guinea, which was not deployed as expeditiously as we had
hoped. As you know, as this battalion was on its way to
join UNAMSIL it allowed RUF elements to take away a
large part of its weapons and equipment. So we are
working on all these issues to try to improve the capacity
of UNAMSIL to meet the challenges before it.

The President: I thank Mr. Annabi for his response
to various issues raised during our debate this morning
and later this afternoon. I believe that we can agree on
the following course of action.

As regards the Sierra Leone police, it is a fact that
their activities remain limited to the western part of the
country. The police force in Sierra Leone suffered greatly
from the war, and it is not that easy to recreate a police
force. Nevertheless, the police are active in the western part
of the country, as well as in Freetown. They very much
lack the necessary equipment and other facilities that they
need to be able to fulfil their tasks. Any support that may
be provided by individual donors would be very much
appreciated.
We hope that as access throughout the country
improves and as security conditions improve, the police will
be able to deploy further, with the help of the important
programme of assistance that is being provided by the
Commonwealth Police Task Force and by the UNAMSIL
civilian police advisors that will deploy to support and
advise the Sierra Leone police in their work.
I would like to thank the members of the Council for
their understanding and support regarding the reporting
schedule. We will therefore, with the Council’s
concurrence, submit the next report to the Council by 7
May, which is exactly 60 days from the last one. We will
do this on the understanding, of course, that we will always
be ready, on a regular basis, to provide oral updates or
briefings to the Council on any significant developments
that may occur.

First, we can agree on a statement to the press to be
made following our debate, and I will identify the
elements right now. Secondly, we can agree to extend the
time limit for the periodic reports from 45 to 60 days. As
Mr. Annabi has said, the next report on Sierra Leone
would therefore be available on 7 May.
Perhaps I can at this point identify the elements for
the press statement. As many representatives have
mentioned, during his presentation Ambassador
Greenstock identified four elements, and subsequently
Ambassador Soderberg in her statement identified two
elements, which can be included in the press statement.
We will say, then, that members of the Security
Council endorse, in general, the conclusions of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2000/186). The second point
is that the Council members place great weight on the
early implementation of all aspects of the Lomé Peace
Agreement and commend the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Oluyemi
Adeniji, and of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) to this end. The third element would
be that Council members express their disappointment at
the slow progress being made in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process in
particular.
The fourth element would that the Council members
call upon all signatories to the Lomé Agreement, and in
particular upon Chairman Sankoh and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), to reaffirm and demonstrate their
concrete commitment to the Lomé peace process by
allowing the extension of State authority throughout

11

Security Council
Fifty-fifth year
Sierra Leone, in full cooperation with UNAMSIL and with
the United Nations team as a whole, and by instructing the
RUF membership to disarm and to surrender all weapons,
including their heavy weapons, mines and anti-aircraft
equipment.
The fifth element would be that Council members urge
Member State strictly to enforce the travel ban imposed by
the Council and to remind concerned Sierra Leone leaders
of their obligation to obtain exemptions before travelling
abroad, without exception. The final element would be that
Council members welcome the upcoming donor conference
in London on 27 March and urge Members to participate
and contribute generously to the peace process and
development efforts in Sierra Leone.
These are the elements that can be incorporated in the
statement to the press after the conclusion of our meeting.
I hope that this is acceptable to all.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

12

4111th meeting (Resumption 1)
13 March 2000
