UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/17
12 April 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3516th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 April 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
concerning Western Sahara", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council notes the report of the Secretary-General dated
30 March 1995 (S/1995/240). It welcomes progress achieved so far in the
identification and registration process, in particular the acceleration in
the rate of identification, and emphasizes the need to continue that
acceleration. It endorses the Secretary-General’s goal of achieving a rate
of at least 25,000 per month. However, the Council regrets that progress
was not sufficient to enable the Secretary-General to recommend 1 June 1995
as the date for the commencement of the transitional period.
"The Security Council also notes with concern the delays resulting
from the failure to ensure the continuous presence at the identification
centres of the necessary sub-fraction representatives. It welcomes the
agreement on a method for choosing alternative sub-fraction representatives
when necessary and it expresses the hope that this will contribute to
further acceleration of the process with a view to holding the referendum
in January 1996. The Council supports the Secretary-General’s call upon
both parties to cooperate fully with the Identification Commission in the
performance of its work, in particular by abandoning their insistence on
strict reciprocity in the number of centres and on the linkage of a centre
on one side with a specific centre on the other.
"The Security Council expresses its concern about the slow progress on
the other aspects which are relevant to the fulfilment of the Settlement
Plan and must be implemented before the referendum can take place. It
calls upon both parties to cooperate fully with the Secretary-General, with
his Deputy Special Representative, with the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), and to coordinate such cooperation
to ensure prompt and full implementation of all aspects of the Settlement
Plan.

95-10754 (E)

120495

/...

S/PRST/1995/17
English
Page 2

"The Security Council hopes to see continuous and rapid progress by
the time of the Secretary-General’s next report in May 1995, which would
enable it to consider favourably the possible extension of MINURSO’s
mandate."

-----
