UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

1829

th
MEETING:

6 JUNE 1975

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1829) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

Y...

S/PV. 1829

,

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjcial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1829th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,
President:

Mr. Abdul Karim

AL-SHAIKHLY

(Iraq).

delegation of the United Nations Council for Namibia
to take places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
1.

Adoption

2.

The situation
The meeting

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Talvitie
(Finland) and other members of the delegation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia took places at
the Security Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to inform members of
the Security Council that I have received a letter
dated 5 June 1975 from the representatives of the
United Republic of Cameroon and the United Republic
of Tanzania [S/11712], which contains a request that
the Security Council extend an invitation
under
rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure to
Mr. Abdul S. Minty of the Anti-Apartheid
Movement,
of London. If I hear no objection I shall take it that
the Council agrees to extend the invitation
under
rule 39, as requested, to Mr. Minty. At the appropriate
moment in the Council’s proceedings, I shall invite
Mr. Minty to make his statement.

agenda (S/Agenda/l829)

of the agenda
in Namibia

was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation

6 June 1975, at 4 p.m.

in Namibia

it was so decided.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Security Council at previous
meetings, I now invite the representatives of Algeria,
Bulgaria,
Burundi,
Cuba, Dahomey,
the German
Democratic Republic, Ghana, India, Liberia, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Romania,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, United Arab Emirates, Yugoslavia
and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order that they may
participate in the current discussion without the right
to vote. When any of them wishes to address the
Council, he will of course be invited to take a place
at the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the
attention of members of the Council to a draft resolution which was submitted this morning by the delegations of Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania, the United Republic
of Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania
[S/11713].
5. Before calling on the first speaker, I should like
to indicate that the seven speakers on the list include
all those members of the Council who have not yet
spoken in the current discussion. Accordingly,
it
would seem to me that the Council might find itself
in a position to proceed to a vote this afternoon on
the draft resolution. It is my hope that that suggestion
will meet with the wishes of all the members of the
Council. At the appropriate stage, therefore, I shall
proceed, if there is no objection, to put the draft
resolution to the vote.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fasla (Aigeria), Mr. Ghelev (Bulgaria), Mr. Mikanagu (Burundi),
Mr. Alarcdn (Cuba), Mr. Adjibade’
(Rahomey),
Mr. Neugebauer
(German Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Boaten (Ghana), Mr. Jaipal (India), Mr. Dennis
(Liberia), Mr. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. Matin (Pakistan),
Mr. Datcu (Romania), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Djigo (Senegal), Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Hussein (Somalia),
Mr. Humaidan
(United
Arab Emirates),
Mr. Petri6
(Yugoslavia),
and
Mr. Mwaanga (Zambia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): Mr. President,
may I first congratulate you upon your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council. This is a
debate of the utmost importance,
and we are particularly glad that you, with your long experience as
a diplomat, should be in the chair.

2. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with a further
decision taken at the 1823rd meeting, I now invite the

7. May I also say how glad my delegation was that
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana was able
1

to preside over the opening of our debate on the
question of Namibia last Friday [1823rd meefing]. In
doing so he displayed the qualities that made him
the unanimous choice of the members of the Commonwealth to perform the important and demanding
task of Secretary-General
of that body. As a fellow
member of the Commonwealth
we salute his appointment. We are glad that his long experience will
henceforth be at the disposal of Commonwealth
members to guide them through the challenging
demands of the next few years. We are also glad that
Mr. Jackson’s knowledge of the problems of Namibia
has been at our disposal during this debate.

most closely concerned. For I share the view of the
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia [1823rd
meeting] that the question on our agenda today,
namely Namibia, is not one which can be considered
in isolation, irrespective of what is going on elsewhere
in southern Africa. A setback in Rhodesia cannot
but affect the course of events in Namibia
and,
conversely, if we can make progress towards the
free exercise by Namibians
of their right to selfdetermination and independence, this in turn must have
a helpful impact on the situation in Rhodesia.
Il.
May I recall the relevant paragraphs of the
communique
of the Heads of Government of all the
countries of the Commonwealth
when they met in
Kingston a month ago. These read as follows:

8. In his speech the other day my good friend and
colleague the representative of Saudi Arabia quoted
from Shakespeare [1826th meeting, pat-a. 1231. He
urged us, in the words of Polonius in scene III of
act 1 of Hamlet:
“to thine own self be true, and it
must follow, as the night the day, thou canst not then
be false to any man.”
9. I felt this at the time to be a singularly appropriate quotation,
for Mr. Baroody is perhaps the
Polonius of the United Nations. In Shakespeare’s
play that character was, after all, a man old in
experience, wise in the ways of the world and much
given to offering advice. But the other day, as
Mr. Baroody was quoting those splendid lines I have
just read out, I thought I remembered two other lines
from the same speech. From my long-past school
days I seemed to recall another piece of advice given
at the same time by the same character to the same
son. And indeed it was so. There appear in the same
speech the following lines which I feel should be
shared by the Council: “Look thou character. Give
thy thoughts no tongue, . . . Give every man thy ear,
but few thy voice.”
10. Much has happened in southern Africa since the
Council
met last December
[1811th and 1812rh
nwetings]. I cannot pretend that the situation in
Rhodesia has developed as far and as fast as we should
have liked. Yet, when we look back from today,
it is, I think, striking to see how the pattern of
events has changed. A little more than a year ago no
one could have forecast the sudden and dramatic
changes in Portugal and the events which have led
to the impending
and welcome independence
of
Mozambique and Angola. A few months ago no one
could have forecast that the leaders of the main
African political parties in Rhodesia would have been
released from prison at long last-and
high time too,
may I say-or that they would now be holding talks,
as equals, with the Smith regime. Rhodesia, we
believe, is now set on a course from which there can
be no drawing back. We welcome, once again, the
constructive
contribution
that Rhodesia’s
African
neighbours, and I include South Africa, have made
in bringing together all the parties. My Government,
for its part, will do all it can to promote peaceful
change in Rhodesia, in co-operation with the countries

“The Heads of Government
were deeply concerned that South Africa continues to occupy
Namibia illegally, in total disregard of the resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council. and the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice of June 1971,’ and in defiance
of world opinion. Reaffirming that the fragmentation
of Namibia was unacceptable,
they recalled the
obligation
of the international
community
to
maintain the integrity of the Territory
and the
right of its people to self-determination
and independence.
“The meeting looked forward to the time when
the Government
and people of Namibia
might
themselves be welcomed into the Commonwealth,
if that was their wish”.
12. We fully associated ourselves at Kingston with
,the views expressed in that communique.
We believe
that South Africa’s occupation of Namibia is unlawful
and that it should withdraw from the Territory.
We
-believe that the Territory should not be split up into
homelands in accordance with the policy of apartheid.
*That would be a division of their country, to which
.Namibians have never assented and indeed on which
they have never even had an opportunity
of making
,-their views heard. We believe that the Territory’s
future should be decided by the freely expressed wish
of all its inhabitants, and that they should be given
the opportunity
to express these wishes as soon as
possible.
13. This in turn implies, in our view, a number of
preconditions.
First, it means that every political
r group in Namibia, including the South West Africa
People’s Organization (SWAPO), whatever the future
structure of government it advocates, must be allowed
to campaign for its views throughout the Territory,
%when it likes, where it likes, and to have full and
unfettered freedom to carry out peaceful political
activities. It means, secondly, that we think it right
for the United Nations itself to be associated with
the process of observing any popular expression of
the views of the people of Namibia on their future,
2

whether through an election, a referendum
other democratic form of consultation.

or any

young men to live and work in compounds cut off
from their families or which divides Namibians into
those who have valid documents and those who do not
is bound to create justified resentment and discontent.
The consequences of such a system can be seen most
recently in the shootings at Katutura.

14. We are thus in entire agreement with the views
expressed by the members of the Council and by all
the distinguished statesmen who have intervened in
this debate, concerning
Namibia’s
right to selfdetermination
and independence.
We stop short,
however, of suggesting what form of government the
people of Namibia themselves should choose. It is up
to the people themselves to decide and to declare
what it is they want. But democratic elections require
the necessary freedom within which they can take
place. Otherwise, any form of popular consultation
is meaningless and bound to be regarded with suspicion by the United Nations and by the Council.
But once Namibians
are truly free to decide upon
their future, and once they have declared what they
wish that future to be, we for our part-and
we are
sure the United Nations as a whole-will
respect that
choice.

18. As the Council knows, a study group was
appointed by the all-white Executive Committee
.of
South West Africa, with the support of the Legislative
Assembly, to investigate
“measures and practices
standing in the way of the advancement
of good
relations between black and white” [ibid.]. According
to press reports, that group has produced some interim
recommendations
which the Executive Committee has
accepted on the removal of a number of discriminatory
practices in Namibia. It again appears, however, that
the essential elements of the influx-control
laws will
remain in being, though judgement must naturally be
reserved until the full details are available. There are,
of course, other rumours of impending change which
have perhaps not yet come formally to the Council’s
attention. According to some reports, 450 officials
in the local administration
were briefed on 12 May to
expect substantial alteration in the social and constitutional framework of the Territory,
and a smaller
group was then chosen to carry this message throughout Namibia. These may be matters of significance.
At present, it is difficult to be certain one way or the
other.

15. It is impossible not to be profoundly disturbed
by the present situation in Namibia. My Government
has tried to promote peaceful and rapid-and
I stress
the word “rapid’‘-change
in the Territory.
The
representative of France [182&h meeting, para. 861
has already referred to the dhmarche which the
Governments of France, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America made to the South African
authorities on 22 April, in which they set out their
views on Namibia and urged an early solution of the
question. My own Government
has also spoken to
the South African Government in similar terms.

19. I do not deny that some changes may well take
place in Namibia under the present defacto administration. But I do legitimately
question whether, in the
complete absence of any international
observation
of what is happening, the authorities there will embark
upon the change that Namibians
actually wantnamely, granting them their right to decide their own
future in their own way. Moreover, the recent statements of the South African authorities on the future
of Namibia raise a number of questions to which,
as yet, there are no clear answers.

16. In the light of our attitude, we have therefore
carefully considered the events which have taken
place in Namibia since the Council met in December
1974. Within Namibia itself, we have the impression
that fundamental change is in prospect but that so
far there has been too little, it has been too late and,
moreover, its direction is still unclear. The constitutional conference composed of representatives
of
Namibia’s
ethnic groups will shortly meet and no
doubt will make recommendations
about the Territory’s future. We have, like other delegations, taken
careful note of Mr. Vorster’s statement that all options
are open to Namibia, but we still have reservations
about the conference’s framework
and about its
purpose.

20. The Council now has before it two statements of
South African intentions
[ibid.]. I am, of course,
pleased that the South African Government decided
to address a letter to the Secretary-General in response
to Security Council resolution 366 (1974); but I must
say that we had hoped for a much clearer indication
of South African policy.

17. We have also tried to assess to what extent there
has been a real change in Namibia’s
repressive
internal legislation and administrative
practices. It was
said in Mr. Muller’s letter [see S/l I7011 that on 9 April
various proclamations long in force were repealed or
amended because “they were obsolete or embodied
unnecessary restrictive or what might be termed
discriminatory
aspects”. This may be so, and indeed
any change is, I suppose, welcome, but as far as we
can judge the essential elements of the pass law system
still remain in being, and any system that condemns

21. In the second paragraph of Mr. Muller’s letter
he said that all options were open to the peoples of
South West Africa, including that of independence as
one State, if that is what they should choose. That
statement in his letter should presumably be read in
conjunction with the passage in Mr. Vorster’s speech
at Windhoek on 20 May;when
he said:
“ . . . As far as the OAU is concerned, in principle
and bearing in mind what I have already said, we
have no quarrel with their points of view concerning
3

self-determination,
independence
and the maintenance of the territorial integrity of the Territory.”
But that phrase “territorial
integrity”
is itself susceptible of a number of interpretations.
It could, for
instance, simply mean that Namibia’s present frontiers
should be regarded as inviolate,
and perhaps
Mr. Vorster clarified his Government’s
views on this
matter when, in the course of that same speech, he
said, “We, that is to say South Africa, do not claim
for ourselves one single inch of South West Africa’s
soil”,
22. But the phrase “territorial
integrity”
can also
mean-and
most members of the Council would,
I think, interpret it to mean-that
Namibia
should
proceed to independence as one State and not be
fragmented into a number of mini-States along ethnic
lines.

administer the Territory only as long as the inhabitants so wish. This is indeed a strange remark, for
the inhabitants of Namibia have never been given the
opportunity
to tell them South African Government
what they wish. We hope they will soon be permitted
to do so, and when that happens we shall look to the
South African Government to carry out its promise.
The Government of an independent Namibia may or
may not decide to maintain some continuing links of
a practical nature with South Africa. That is up to
them to decide in the light of their own best interests.
What is fundamental, however, is that the principles
of early independence
for Namibia
and of South
African withdrawal from the Territory
should be
conceded from the start.
26. I come finally to what we regard as one of the
most important elements in Mr. Muller’s letter and in
Mr. Vorster’s speech, namely the South African
Government’s
offer of discussions on the future of
Namibia
with a representative
of the SecretaryGeneral, with the newly created Special Committee
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and with
the President of the Council for Namibia. We assume
that any such discussions would be unconditional.
They could not, for example, be confined merely to
an examination of the preent situation in Namibia-a
sort of African visiting mission. The discussions; to
be useful, would have to encompass the future constitutional and political development of Namibia itself.

23. Mr. Muller says that if Namibians freely choose
independence as one State, then the South African
Government will not interfere. Taking that assurance
at its face value, we nevertheless believe that if
Namibians are to be able to decide their future as they
would wish, there have to be free elections, there
has to be freedom for all political parties in Namibia
to campaign for their own particular constitutional
proposals, there has to be freedom of expression, and
there has to be freedom of association. And, in the
light of past history, there has to be some assurance
that the elections, or the referendum, or whatever
other method of consulting the Namibian
people is
eventually decided upon, should be conducted in a
way that would satisfy international
scrutiny. I should
perhaps add that my own Government makes no secret
of its preference for a single Namibian State, though
it is of course content to leave this matter-as it should
be left-to
the wisdom of the people of Namibia
themselves.

27. We have therefore asked ourselves what the
Council should now do in the light of a response to
its resolution 366 (1974), a response that is at times
ambiguous,
at times obstinately
at odds with the
current of world opinion, but which at the same time
does seem to offer certain hopes of making further
progress. We believe that the Security Council should
be firm, not unrealistic. Our aim is to exert effective
pressure upon the South African Government
to
change its policies. We believe that this should be
the aim of the Council too, and that the Council
should avoid action that would weaken, not strengthen,
its’ ability to influence events in Namibia. I do not
claim for one moment that South Africa’s reply to
resolution 366 (1974) was satisfactory. It was not.
But that resolution,
adopted unanimously
in the
Council, and the subsequent international
pressure
that followed it, has nevertheless brought about some
movement, some recognition that there will have to be
fundamental changes in Namibia. Our task is surely
to push that door wider open.

24. I turn next to the statement in the letter of the
South African Minister for Foreign Affairs [ibid.] that:
“ . . . Any political group in the Territory is free to
campaign for and propagate any constitutional
changes it likes and to participate without hindrance
in any peaceable political activities, including the
election of representatives
to the proposed conference on the constitutional future of the Territory,
provided only that they do so within the requirements
of law and order.”
It seems to us that this point made by Mr. Muller
in his letter is one of general application and it is not
possible to confine it solely to the proposed constitutional conference. If so, we hope this promise is
carried out and that all political parties in Namibia
will be free to campaign for the policies in which they
believe.

28. Many delegations have mentioned other forms
of pressure. I must make it clear that my Government
does not regard the situation in Namibia as a threat
to international
peace rind security, and that we will
therefore oppose any resolution of the Council to that
effect. We would equally oppose any attempt to
prejudge now what action the Council should take if
and when it reassembles to consider Namibia later
this year.

25. In a more obscure passage of his letter, Mr. Muller
writes that South Africa will remain in and continue to
4

I

29. At the same time, my Government will continue
to maintain its own embargo on the export of arms
to South Africa. The representative of Japan suggested
[1827th meeting] that all Members of the United
Nations might publicly declare their intention not to
sell arms to South Africa. I am happy to do so now.
30. We are trying to build upon the realities of the
situation.
As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Zambia remarked [1823rdmeeting],
the main stumbling
block in Namibia is the South African presence, and
no solution can be found until this external factor has
been removed. The South African Government
has
now declared itself ready to hold talks with the Special
Committee of the OAU, the President of the Council
for Namibia and a representative
of the SecretaryGeneral. As I said earlier, we hope this offer is
unconditional,
though we cannot be sure.
31. The OAU, for its part, laid down certain preconditions for any contacts that its Special Committee
might have with the South African Government,
Wheter these preconditions,
or at any rate the first
two of them, have been entirely met by Mr. Muller’s
letter is, of course, for African States themselves to
decide. But, like the representative
of France and
others who have spoken, we too consider that the
time may have come for such contacts to take place,
despite the wide gap that undoubtedly
still exists
between the two parties’ respective positions. Let
me try and dispel one or two doubts that may exist
about the purpose of such discussions as we see
them. We are not arguing in favour of talk for talk’s
sake. In our view, the purpose of engaging South
Africa in discussions is to bring home directly to that
country the full force of world opinion and the need
for the rapid decolonization-I
use that word deliberately-the
decolonization
of Namibia. We are not
trying to assert that this is a purely African problem.
Far from it. The ideas we have tried to develop this
week envisage the association of some members of
the Security Council with any such discussions. I do
not think, however, that the power of African
countries to influence South African policy should be
underestimated,
particulariy at a time when the word
detente is heard so often in that part of Africa. We,
for our part, will continue to do all we can to urge
the need for change upon South Africa, in whatever
way seems to us likely to be most effective.
32. Members of the Council will know that some of
us have this week been considering a draft resolution
which would authorize renewed contacts with the
South African Government,
but point them in what
. we believe to be the correct direction right from the
start. That resolution would have condemned South
Africa’s failure to comply satisfactorily with the terms
of resolution 366 (1974). It would have condemned
its illegal occupation
of Namibia.
It would have
condemned its illegal application
of racial discriminatory and repressive laws. That resolution would
have demanded an end to the policy of Bantustans,

and South Africa’s urgent withdrawal
from the
Territory.
It would then have called upon South
Africa to enter into early contact with a committee
to be established by the Security Council for the
purpose of working out procedures
for moving
forward peacefully to the early attainment
of the
independence
of Namibia
within a constitutional
framework
determined
by the freely expressed
choice of its inhabitants
in conformity
with the
relevant resolutions
and decisions of the United
Nations, and in particular it would have established
procedures for the free exercise by the people of
Namibia of their right to determine their own future.
33. That draft resolution,
had it found favour,
would have declared that these procedures should
include the holding of free elections at the earliest
moment and, in any event, on a date to be decided
in consultation with the committee to be established
by the Council, such date to be announced not later
than 1 July 1976, under the supervision of the United
Nations, in which SWAP0
should have the unimpeded right to participate on equal terms.
34. The contact committee which we envisaged might
have consisted of representatives
of States to be
selected from among the members of the Council,
together with the President of the Council for Namibia
or a representative of his, and a representative of the
Secretary-General.
I say “might”
because of course
we were open to suggestions on its composition.
Finally, the draft resolution would have envisaged a
further meeting of the Council on or before 1.5 October
of this year for the purpose of reviewing South Africa’s
compliance with its terms and, in the event of noncompliance, for the purpose of considering the whole
range of measures available under the Charter which
the Council might then be prepared to take.
35. I have only two comments to make on this proposal, which sadly proved unacceptable
to other
members of the Council. Had such a draft resolution
been adopted by consensus, the whole weight of the
Security Council would once again have been invoked
against South Africa’s
continued
occupation
of
Namibia.
More important,
the Council would have
been able to record its general agreement on the way
in which it hoped the situation would develop, namely
towards free elections under United Nations supervision. The proposed contact committee would have
had terms of reference to that effect, firm on essentials,
but not so restrictive that the gap between its position
and that of the South African Government
would
have been widened unnecessarily before discussions
had even taken place.
36. I much regret that we could not all go forward
on that basis. I believe-and
I think I must say this
to the Council-that
we have lost a real opportunity,
and at this moment I must say to the Council that I
do not know when such an opportunity
will occur
again. I hope it will, and I must make it clear that

the proposals I have just mentioned are serious ones
based on the firmly held convictions
of my Government. In saying how sorry I am that it was not possible
to reach agreement, I should at the same time like
to thank all those with whom we have been discussing
the terms of a resolution over the past week. We
respect their views, even if we cannot wholly agree,
and I hope that they in turn will respect ours. May
I also say how much my delegation has welcomed the
closeness of the consultations
between the various
parties and, indeed, the spirit in which those consultations were conducted. Nex time, perhaps, our joint
efforts will be crowned with more success.

friend Mr. Ivor Richard, who was an active supporter
and member of the Anti-Apartheid
Movement in the
1960s. Our movement has consistently supported the
policies of the United Nations and the OAU and,
in so far as it has been within our power, we have
done everything possible to alert public opinion in
Britain and the world to the dangers inherent in the
southern African conflict.
42. Since 1960, immediately
after Sharpeville, where
British Saracen armoured cars were used in the
massacre of Africans at Sharpeville and Langa, we
set about organizing a world campagin for an international arms embargo, and to a certain extent we
have some success to show.

37. But this is not the end of the story and the South
African Government must not consider it so. It is now
time that South Africa finally realized the weight of
international
opinion that is ranged against it and the
depth of feeling with. which those opinions are held.
Mr. Vorster himself said in 1967, and repeated in his
Windhoek
speech: “What is considered anathema
today’ may well become sound practical politics
tomorrow”.
We believe that South Africa’s own true
interests lie in peaceful transition and in early withdrawal from Namibia.
Indeed this is precisely what
the South African Government itself is now saying in
words. Their response to this debate and to the proper
concern expressed
by the whole international
community
is, in our view, a touchstone of the
genuineness of their intentions.
We all expect and,
we have a right to expect, that their words will now
become deeds and that Namibia indeed does achieve
its early freedom and its independence.

43. I have not come to New York to tell the Security
Council what to do about Namibia: that is for members
of the Council and other Member States to decide
on the basis of their own commitments
to the people
of Namibia, and of what SWAPO, the recognized and
authentic representative of the Namibian people, asks
of the United Nations. My purpose is to share with
the Council our understanding
of the Namibian
problem and provide certain information
which may
assist it effectively to discharge-its solemn responsibilities.
44. Our movement has, since its inception, been
concerned with the problem of Namibia. In 1966 we
held an international
conference in Britain on South
West Africa. That Oxford conference, under the chairmanship of Mr. Olof Palme, the present Prime
Minister of Sweden, reached the conclusion that there
existed a clear moral, political
and legal basis for
securing South Africa’s withdrawal from the international Territory, and recommended the termination
of the League of Nations Mandate. It unfortunately
also reached the conclusion that what was absent,
what was lacking, to assert this responsibility
was
political will on the part of the major Western Powers.

38. The PRESIDENT:
It will be recalled that the
Council agreed earlier at this meeting, as requested
by the representatives
of the United Republic of
Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of the prov.isional
rules of procedure to-Mr. Abdul S. Minty of the AntiApurrheid Movement,
London.
I therefore invite
Mr. Minty to take a seat at the Council table to make
his statement.

45. In October 1966, the General Assembly, in its
resolution 2145 (XXI), terminated the Mandate, called
on South Africa to withdraw from the Territory, and
declared that the Territory was a responsibility of the
United Nations. Since then, the persistent refusal of
the upurtheid regime to relinquish its control over
Namibia,
and its illegal and brutal actions in that
Territory have, if anything, made stronger the grounds
for international
action against the illegal occupying
Power.

39. Mr. MINTY (Anti-Apcrrrheid Movement): I wish
to thank the Security Council for this opportunity to
make a statement, and in particular the delegations
of the United Republic of Cameroon and the United
Republic of Tanzania for proposing a hearing.
40. It is a privilege to address the Security Council,
and in 1972 1 was grateful to have had a similar
opportunity
in Addis Abeba [1634th meeting], under
the sponsorship of the OAU. This privilege is a special
one for me as a South African, and more particularly
as a representative
of the British Anti-Apartheid
Movement, which was established in I959 to campaign
for. an end to qxrrtheid
and white domination
in
southern Africa.

46. Yet we witness once again a total absence of
will on the part of the major Western Powers to take
any meaningful action. With the assurance of this kind
of Western support South Africa’s letter to the
Secretary-General
[see S/11701], which I have read
carefully, seems to reveal no desire on the part of the
Pretoria regime to withdraw from Namibia and hand
it over to the United Nations. Worse still, in that letter
the Vorster regime claims to have found, between

41. If I may say so, it is also perhaps appropriate
and fitting that I should speak immediately
after my
6

‘.

December and now, what it calls the “true leaders”
in the Territory,
and it is prepared to engage in
discussions with those “true leaders” to facilitate
South Africa’s policies of apartheid in Namibia.

of the official South African press party-the
first
such group allowed into the anti-terrorist war zonethe message was loud and clear: South Africa’s

47. Pretoria, as we know, rejects SWAP0 totally.
There is talk of elections to reveal SWAPO’s support
here in the Security Council and elsewhere; but, in
our view, we should be very careful to be clear as
to whom we need to convince that SWAP0 is the
authentic organization of the people of Namibia. The
United Nations and the OAU have already recognized
SWAPO. So are we here to try and prove to the
illegal occupying Power the authenticity of SWAP0
before it concedes the rights of the United Nations
over that Territory? For South Africa, if it is genuine,
the question is simple: withdraw from Namibia and
leave it to the United Nations to conduct the process
of decolonization.
This they reject totally.

The report mentions the C-160 Transall aircraft, which
is a joint French-German
product sold by France to
South Africa, and about which representations have
been made by all movements,
by the OAU and
indeed by President Kaunda to the leaders of those
countries.
51. In the same journal, the Digest, there are several
photographs. One is a clear one of a helicopter used
by military patrols in Namibia.
I identify it as a
Super-Frelon helicopter supplied by France. Whenever
the French Government has been called upon not to
supply weapons to South Africa it has responded by
suggesting that French weapons are not to be used for
internal suppression in southern Africa, and in any
case the United Nations does not have a mandatory
embargo on the qustion. Last year we were heartened
when the newly elected President of France told the
world that France would -not supply weapons for use
against people who are fighting for self-determination.
I know that it often takes a Government a long time
to implement its policies, but one year is a long time
even for the French Government.
Here is clear
evidence of French weapons being used in Namibia
to preserve South Africa’s illegal occupation. These
weapons are utilized to suppress the struggle of the
Namibian people for self-determination
and independence. In the light of this evidence-and
there is
much more that we can provide from South African
sources-what
has the French Government done? In
the unlikely event that the Paris Government did not
know of it, and in the light of this evidence that I am
submitting today, what does it propose to do? I do not
expect that the French Government wishes to behave
dishonourably
in this respect and it will, therefore,
assure the Council that it will forthwith cease the
suppl-y--to South- Africa-of-all
military equipment and
spares for those weapons. I hope too that the French
Government
will, as a result of its own experience
of the Pretoria regime, which has apparently violated
French conditions
regarding the supply of these
weapons, immediately
announce a complete arms
embargo
against South Africa and send South
Africa’s arms buyers, who I know are at this moment
negotiating to buy more weapons at the Paris Air
Show, back home to South Africa. This, in our view,
is the minimum
that the. world and no doubt the
French people expect of the Government of France,
and we await the response from Paris.

48. In the Security Council and in other organs,
South Africa has been characterized as a police State,
and the full force of its terrorism has been inflicted
on the Namibian people as well, However, in recent
years, with rapid militarization,
that police State has
also become a garrison State. In recent years, the
occupying Power in Namibia
has been forced to
respond to the resistance of the Namibian people by
sending ever-increasing contingents of the army and
the air force in order to preserve its control. In June
1974 the Pretoria regime announced that large contingents of the defence force had been dispatched for
duty in Namibia. Also, for the first time, the regime
openly boasted about its military bases in the occupied
Territory.
49. The South A.fiican Digest of 21 June 1974, issued
in Pretoria by the-South African Government-a
copy
of which I have here and will be pleased to provide to
the permanent members of the Security Council in
particular-stated:

“The South African Army is fully operational in
the Caprivi area on an effective low-intensity war
footing. . . . From strategically situated bases in the
area, trained national servicemen are regularly lifted
by helicopter to selected spots for patrol duty.”
50. In a special report in the same journal about
vigilance on the border, the Digest describes the situation dramatically;
I quote from page 8:
“The South African air force giant C-160 Transall
troop carrier taxied to a stop at Mpacha Air Base,
Caprivi. . . . Hundreds of splendid-looking
South
African soldiers were perched atop armoured
vehicles and trucks. Armed to the teeth, the casualseeming attitude of the troops belied their obvious
state of instant readiness.

52. Recently we have received certain documents
which appear to be authentic evidence that the North
Atlantic
Treaty Organization
(NATO)
system of
codification
of military equipment
and spare parts
now extends
We have presented
___ _.- _ __to.- --South
- ----Africa.
this material to the Chairman of the Special Committee
against Apcrrtheid, and it was released here in New

“It was a wonderfully
reassuring sight. Here
indeed were solid men at the front. To the members
7

York on 1 June 1975.2 The South African regime has
installed a modern military communications
system
with headquarters not far from Simonstown,
and a
substation of this communications
system is based in
Walvis Bay in Namibia. This system, on which I have
done considerable research, monitors and can establish contact with all aircraft, ships and submarines
throughout the South Atlantic Ocean and the entire
South Pole area and across the Indian Ocean well
beyond India. Various military journals have reported
that it is directly linked up to London and Washington.
The documents we have show that the initial arrangements for the system were made by certain West
German firms and the West German Defence Ministry.
They show too that the NATO code for equipment
and spares has been used for this Advokaat system.
I refer to NATO Form AC/l25 No. 8 (revised), which
is the NATO form for the codification of spare parts.
Since announcing this information
a few days ago,
our offrce has received a further document, which
apparently is in the hands of the South African
authorities,
entitled “NATO
Codification
of Equipment, Initial Exchange of Information”.
The number
of this is described as NATO Form AC/l35 No. 8
(revised). These two forms are therefore complementary.

6.

Her Majesty’s Government
have recognized
that Walvis Bay is an integral part of the Cape
Province of the Republic of South Africa and that
the Caprivi Strip is part of South West Africa
(Namibia).
Walvis Bay was never part of the
mandated Territory but was part of the Union of
South Africa before the mandate was granted in
1920.”
. . .

I submit that the British Government,
therefore,
should be pressed to explain what it understands by
the need to preserve the territorial
integrity
of
Namibia.
54. I have earlier referred to the militarization
of
Namibia.
The bases which are established in the
occupied Territory are not only for the purpose of
securing Pretoria’s
control; they are major bases
equipped for attacks against African States to the
north. The Star of Johannesburg of 19 April has this
quotation from Angola’s Minister of the Interior,
Mr. Kabangu: “South Africa has installed near our
district one of the most modern bases in Africa, in
which rocket launchers have been installed-all
pointing in the direction of our country.”
55. South Africa has thus sent its armed forces in
large numbers across the border of the international
Territory of Namibia,
which is subject to the legal
authority of the United Nations. Bases established
in the occupied Territory
are to facilitate
attack
against neighbouring States as well as the Namibian
people. In our view, the illegal occupation of Namibia,
the militarization
of the Territory, the establishment
of major military bases there and the admission of
such establishment
amount to a clear breach of the
peace and constitute an act of aggression as well as
a threat to international
peace within the meaning
of the Charter.

53. NATO has admitted in the past that it has
prepared plans for operations around southern Africa,
but all NATO members, as well its Secretary-General,
have denied that South Africa has any links whatsoever with NATO. We should like to know how it
has then come about that South Africa, which is not
a member of NATO and is far outside its treaty area,
should have this codification
system which is only
meant for NATO members. Who provided South
Africa with the code? Does this mean that the principal
NATO Powers have already placed such a high degree
of reliance on South Africa’s defence role in the
southern hemisphere that they propose to treat South
Africa as if it were almost a NATO member? Are we
to conclude from the advertisements placed by South
African embassies in NATO capitals that it is only a
matter of time before Simonstown is used as a NATO
base? There have been grave developments
recently
where certain Western Powers have indicated publicly
their desire to rely on South Africa for south Atlantic
and Indian Ocean security, thereby conferring upon
the upcrrtheid regime the role of a major regional
Power in that hemisphere. These developments pose
very real dangers for all the States in Africa and
the littoral States not only in the south Atlantic but
also in the Indian Ocean. This Advokaat ,communications system, as I have said, has one of its substations
in Walvis Bay in the occupied Territory, so that those
who are using this communications
system are relying
on South Africa’s continued occupation of that region.
In this connexion we wish to draw the attention of the
Security Council to a letter we received from a
Minister at the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office in
London dated 3 April 1975 which alarms us. That
letter states:

56. In 1960 we were campaigning on arms in Britain,
as I have said, and on 17 March 1963 the newly elected
leader of the Labour Party and then a member of
the Anti-Apartheid
Movement,
Mr. Harold Wilson,
accepted an invitation from us to join our campaign
to stop the supply of weapons to South Africa. He
was the main speaker at a rally that we organized in
Trafalgar Square at that time, and he had this to say:
“Act now” -this was an appeal to the British Government-“and
stop this bloody traffic in the weapons
of oppression.”
He went on to say that there was not
time for the Labour Government
to get into oftice
because the matter was supremely urgent and that
Mr. Macmillan ought to act immediately.
57. Now I should like to know what has happened
in southern Africa since 1963 to make it less of a threat
to peace, to make this kind of action less urgent. I
have already explained the position in Namibia. The
representative of Britain spoke about the Rhodesian
problem, but failed to mention under this section the
supreme violation
of British sovereignty over its
8

colonial territory by the dispatch of armed forces on
the part of South Africa to Rhodesia. That is a clear
breach of the peace. Why then no action on that
question, as recommended
in Chapter VII of the
Charter?

members of the Council have a sacred and solemn
duty to preserve international
peace and security, and
just because of their close economic and other relationships with South Africa they are placing those
interests above any objective
assessment of the
situation. Therefore, when the present threat to peace
leads to a major conflagration
of catastrophic proportions, the responsibility
for that will not only rest
in Pretoria, but also in London, Paris and Washington.

58. Since 1963, the South African budget has shot up
fantastically. We do not believe that the British leaders
are those who support upurtheid,
and therefore we find
it difficult to understand the difficulty they seem
to have in determining that there is a threat to peace
in southern Africa as a result of the military build-up
and thereby asking for mandatory action with regard
to the arms embargo. They already claim to implement
the embargo. Indeed, when we were all at Kingston
a few weeks ago, the Heads of Government of other
Commonwealth
countries welcomed the strict arms
embargo that is supposed to be implemented by Britain
and also welcomed
the announcement
that the
Simonstown Agreement was terminated. What then is
the problem?

63. We believe that since it has been resolved that
responsibility
for Namibia
rests with the United
Nations, South Africa has to end its illegal occupation.
It has refused to do so. The Council, in our view,
therefore, has the clear duty to take steps to expel
the occupying regime. That, we are told by people
in higher positions,
is impossible
because the
permanent
members will never contemplate
such
action.
64. Meanwhile, in recent years, the Western Powers
have claimed that their special relationship
with
Pretoria leads them to believe that changes are likely.
That was also said at the Special series of meetings
of the Security Council in 1972 [1627th to 1639th
meetings].
But we seem to be told even now that there
is still a chance and that we should give South Africa
yet another opportunity.

59. Since 1963 the United States has informed us
about its decision on implementing
the arms embargo.
We know that that decision is not complete and that
there are major violations
in that embargo. But
nevertheless the United Kingdom
and the United
States say that they apply an arms embargo, unlike
France. What then is the difficulty?

65. The South Africans say that they do not want a
single inch of Namibia.
But how is it that over all
these years, with all the international
pressures that
have been put on South Africa, it has not seen fit to
release to the United Nations one single inch of
Namibia?

60. The great Powers in the West seem to be saying
to us throughout
that their policy with regard to
Namibia, their policy with regard to Rhodesia and their
policy with regard to South Africa is based on what is
in the interests of South Africa, and therefore they
reach the conclusion that they must have no confrontation with South Africa on any of these questions,
whether it be Namibia or Rhodesia or apartheid.
In
their anti-liberation
policies, over the years this has
moved them to a position whereby they come into
direct confrontation
with the liberation forces. They
describe those policies as peaceful change, which in
effect means only that change which the South Africa
Government will decide on, at the rate that the South
African Government decides on, at the pace that the
South African Government
decides on and in the
direction that the South African Government decides
on. That is the only change they accept within the
limitations of what the apartheid
regime can do.

66. That is the central issue. Who controls the
inches, the miles and the entire territory of Namibia?
South Africa has to withdraw, and therefore the
absolute minimum that needs to be done by outside
Powers is to deny all military arms and equipment
and end all military relationships
so that the illegal
occupying Power is denied the military
assistance
with which it is illegally occupying that Territory.
67. We are told about new changes, of movements
in certain directions, of shifts in South African policy.
But the issue is not one of ending some discriminatory
policies only; it is one of ending white domination in
southern Africa.

61. We feel that there is a more dangerous situation
now’because of the evolving military alliance between
South Africa and the major western Powers, which
will with every day that passes make the prospect of
international
action even more difficult in the months
and the years to come.

68. Finally, it is possible that the Security Council
will once again be paralysed, and it appears so. In
our view, we are not totally disheartened by this
simply because we have faith in the fighting spirit
and strength of SWAPO. We shall continue to support
them. We shall continue to carry on the campaigns
not only in Britain, but also in other parts of the
world where anti-apartheid
movements exist. We shall
continue to support United Nations and OAU policy
on this question.

62. It appears to us that whenever the Security
Council has before it items on southern Africa, the
Western permanent
members
immediately
begin
dusting their vetoes in readiness to block any
meaningful action that is proposed. The permanent
9

69. But I should like to .conclude by once again
the anthology of the Organization
on the subject of
posing the problem on southern Africa with regard to.
upnrtheid.
the Western Powers with the same_wo& .w&h which.. _.. .._
we concluded our submis.&nto
the 1972 session of
75. We have read, heard and reflected much on
the Council. On whose side are the Western Powers?
what continues to take place in southern Africa.
Are they on the side of Africa and the United Nations
We have rebelled; we have expressed, decided on,
and the liberation struggle, or on the side of the racist
implemented
and multiplied
ways and means and
regimes in southern Africa? In our view, it is an
devised ever more promising approaches to secure the
answer to that question that will determine whether
triumph of law and democracy in that part of the
the Council can be effective in discharging its responworld. We have hoped, imagined,
initiated
other
sibilities with regard to southern Africa.
processes; but, when it comes time to take stock, the
reality has always remained unchanged.
70. Mr. OYONO
(United Republic of Cameroon)
(interpretcltion
from French): Mr. President, I should
76. South Africa has not given up one inch of the
like to begin by expressing my delegation’s
keen
soil of Namibia which it continues to occupy illegally,
pleasure at seeing you occupy the high office of the
and it continues to apply its policies of upartheid
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
in that country. Need one recall here yet again the
Your country, Iraq, which shares the ideals of peace,
report prepared by the Odendaal Commission aimed
independence
and freedom with my country, has
at fragmenting
the territorial
base of Namibia into
played and continues to play a particularly
valuable
Bantustans-on
the understanding,
of course, so far
role in our great family of non-aligned nations. For
as concerns the desert but diamond-rich
part of the
us it is a happy coincidence- that you should- now
country, that 40 per cent of the land would be
occupy the presidency at the very moment when the
allocated to Africans and 60 per cent to Europeans,
problems of southern Africa are once again under
who represent some 100,000 inhabitants
out of a
consideration.
We are aware of your outstanding
population of SOO,OOO?
qualities as a diplomat and the high esteem that you
enjoy among the members of the Council. We are
77. And why should South Africa budge? It will for
convinced that our proceedings are in good hands.
a long time yet be able to rely on certain permanent
members of the Security Council whose dedication
71. I should also like to avail myself of this opporis truly fraternal, even if they class themselves among
the liberals, and which provide weapons and other
tunity to extend our sincere thanks to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Guyana,
Mr. Ramphal,
and
evidence of their solidarity
within the framework
Mr. Jackson, who directed the proceedings of the
of other organizations.
Council
last month
with noteworthy
skill and
effectiveness.
78. But one realizes here and has realized for years
that it is not sufftcient to speak this truth, to demon72. In participating at this stage in the debate that the
strate it, and to rescue it from the well in which
Council, enhanced by the presence of Ministers of
some have wished to bury it-and
that not without
State and of Foreign Affairs of the non-aligned
truly extraordinary
courage and astuteness. And one
notes, not without sadness, that it does not suffice
countries, is undertaking for the 10th time, and now
to present that truth here; that one must then secure
almost a week has been--devoted
to- the -question
its acceptance by all-and
that, it seems to me, is an
of Namibia,
I would like to assure members ‘that,
towards the end of a long day of speeches, the delegaeven more difficult task.
tion of the United Republic of Cameroon will not
abuse the attention that the Council has been kind
79. .There is talk, there is debate; but the die is
enough to grant to it.
already cast, the coalition has been or is being shaped
against what the great majority of the nations think.
73. If there is one anachronistic,
tragic, and grave
One can then easily understand the tranquil assurance
question facing the international
community
about
of Mr. Vorster with regard to the feelings, the concerns
which it is all too easy to tell the truth here, it is that
and the threats of the international
community aimed
of Namibia, for it is a test case-for the United Nations,
at his abominable regime, because he is well aware that
for the continent of Africa and for the most elementary
there has always existed, there exists now and there
human rights.
may well continue to exist-if
we do not put an end
to it-within
the Organization
a glaring discrepancy
74. Having defined, analysed and debated them here
between our statements our words and our deeds.
and elsewhere, again and again over the years, we
That is why Pretoria has taken no more notice of
are only too well aware of the historical co-ordinates,
resolution 366 (1974) than it has done of all the resoluthe geographical,
economic and social factors from.
tions adopted here during more than 30 years.
which the situation which is-unanimqusly-rec~gnized
’ 80. Pretoria’s reply of 27 May [see S/11701], has
as intolerable,
inhumaue, *-repugnant
and base
proceeds-I
shall spare you the other epithets with
been the subject of ample and brilliant comments here
which other delegations have continually
enriched
in an admirable display of rhetoric. Some have wished
10

..

to see in it a sign, a ray of light, have detected the
first step towards breaking the deadlock, and have
invited us to follow on this road by conceiving and
initiating another process whereby we would be finally
and definitively
alerted to the thoughts and the true
ulterior motives of Mr. Vorster-this
is one way of
confining
us to casuistry-and
that although
Mr. Vorster has cynically limited himself to offering an
apologia for the Pretoria arguments; although he has
declared-so
far as concerns the exercise of’ the
Namibian
people’s right to self-determination
and
independence, which, for that matter, in Mr. Vorster’s
eyes, does not exist as such-that
this must take place
without what he dares to call “the interference of the
United Nations or of any other external entity”. The
invitation extended at the same time to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations-who
enjoys our every
confidence and our deepest respect and whose untiring
efforts in behalf of international
peace and ,security
we much appreciate-to
appoint
immediately
a
representative to go to the scene and see what has
been accomplished clearly points to a manoeuvre on
the part of Mr. Vorster, who wishes to get the nod
for his policy from the Organization
from the very
fact of the appointment
of such a representative.
We
are all the more sceptical about the possible result of
such .an approach as it has already been tried in the
past and has come to nothing.

(i) Any supply of arms and ammunition
Africa;

to South

(ii) Any supply of aircraft, vehicles and military
equipment for use of the armed forces ..and
paramilitary
organizations of South Africa;
(iii) Any supply of spare parts for arms, vehicles
and military equipment used by the armed forces
and paramilitary organizations of South Africa;
(iv) Any activities in their territories which promote
or are calculated to promote the supply of arms,
ammunition,
military
aircraft and military
vehicles to South. Africa and equipment and
materials for the manufacture and maintenance
of arms and ammunition
in South Africa and
Namibia”.
84. The Council must decide that all States shall give
effect to the decision set out in subparagraph (h) ii
of paragraph 9 of the draft resolution, notwithstanding
any contract entered into or licence granted before the
date of this resolution, and that they shall notify the
Secretary-General
of the measures they have taken
to comply with the aforementioned
provision. The
Council must decide also that the provisions of the
above-mentioned
subparagraph shall remain in effect
until it has been established to the satisfaction of the
Security Council that the illegal occupation of the
Territory
of Namibia
by South Africa has been
brought to an end. We wish to make it clear that such
an arms embargo against South Africa must be total,
strict and without distinction between offensive and
defensive weapons.

81. For my delegation, the contents of Mr. Vorster’s
letter are meaningless. However, we are not surprised
that others have managed to find something in the
letter that could be exploited for the just and noble
cause of Namibia, because texts are like inns: you find
there what you bring to them.
82. My delegation would rather go along with the
interpretation offered by my brother Mr. Sam Nujoma,
President of SWAPO, to Mr. Vorster’s letter. He saw
it as a further attempt to procrastinate and to prevent
the Security Council from taking practical and lawful
measures against the occupation of Namibia by the
minority regime.

85. The pressure of the international
community
must be sufficiently firm to reflect our determination
to ensure that the rule of law is restored in Namibia.
It was in that -spirit that the group of non-aligned
countries engaged in the intensive and constructive
consultations with the other members of the Security
Council that led to the formulation of draft resolution
S/11713, which I now have the honour to introduce
on behalf of my colleagues.

83. For the non-aligned
countries,
the Security
Council is in duty bound to restore and to reaffirm
its authority and credibility
vis-&vis South Africa.
The action of the Council must be based on paragraph 5 of resolution 366 (1974), which is to say, the
application to South Africa of the appropriate measures
provided in the Charter. And with regard to those
appropriate measures, the Council must go beyond
mere condemnation,
appeals and exhortations; it must
envisage applying far more energetic measures, those
provided in paragraph 9 of draft resoluticn S/l 17 13;
namely, it must:

86. In this context the Security Council, having noted
that South Africa has not made the declaration
demanded in paragraph 3 of its resolution 366 (1974)
but that, on the contrary, the racist regime is intensitiying daily the structures of repression, exploitation
and clprrrtheid in Namibia
designed irreparably
to
compromise the national unity and territorial integrity
of the country, should clearly condemn the Government of South Africa for its failure to comply with
the terms of Security Council 366 (1974), for its
continued
illegal occupation
of the Territory
of
Namibia and for its illegal and arbitrary application
of racially discriminatory
and repressive laws and
practices in Namibia.
The Council should further
demand that the Government of South Africa put an
end forthwith to its inhuman policy of Bantustans and

“(a) Determine that the illegal occupation of the
Territory of Namibia by South Africa constitutes
a threat to international peace and security;

“(h) Decide that all States shall prevent:
11

proceed urgently with the necessary steps to withdraw
from Namibia.

to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the representative of Guyana for the way in which they conducted
the meetings as President last month.

87. The Council is called upon to reaffirm the legal
responsibility
of the United Nations over Namibia
and to demand that South Africa take appropriate
measures to enable the United Nations Council for
Namibia to intervene with a view to facilitating the
transfer of power to the people of Namibia so that
that people may decide its future without any external
pressure. It is imperative
that free elections be
organized under the supervision and control of the
United Nations as soon as possible, and in any case
not later than 1 July 1976. The Council also would
reaffirm its support for the struggle of the people of
Namibia.

92. The world community is once again witnessing a
tense and protracted discussion in the Security Council
on the question of Namibia.
During that discussion
statements have been made by the representatives
of more than 30 States, including the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of a number of African countries.
Statements have also been made in the Council by the
President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, and other
patriots and freedom-fighters
against South African
racism.
93. But it is not only the scope of the discussion
that is important:
it is also the very nature of that
discussion. Everyone is becoming more and more
aware of who is taking which position, who is truly
siding with the peoples fighting for the final liquidation of colonialism and racism, who is truly siding with
the people of Namibia and its representatives,
and
who has not yet drawn the lessons from history and is
continuing as before the futile struggle to delay the
process of the final emancipation
of Africa from
colonialism and racism.

88. On that specific point, the Secretary-General is to
be requested to report to the Security Council concerning the implementation
of paragraph 9 and other
provisions of this text. It is understood that this
mandate entrusted to the Secretary-General
implies
no form of dialogue between South Africa and the
United Nations.
89. After having taken into consideration
the constructive suggestions put forward by some members
of the Council, the co-sponsors of the draft resolution have refrained from providing in their text for
mandatory economic sanctions or the expulsion of
South Africa from the United Nations. Nevertheless,
as may be seen from paragraph 14, if there is no
serious attempt to comply with this resolution, the
Council is to meethon 30 September 1975 at the latest
to decide on the full range of other enforcement
measures against South Africa that are provided for
in the Charter.

94. The question of the attitude taken towards Namibia and the fate of its people is not an ancillary
question; it is a question of principle and of policy.
95. Our delegation
was much impressed by the
statements of representatives of African States. Even
if we take only certain short extracts from those
statements, it will suffice to give a convincing picture
of the intolerable situation in Namibia and to indicate
the racist nature of the policies of South Africa as
practised in that country. Here are just some of them:
“South Africa is conveniently
avoiding the basic
issues, which are the self-determination,
independence
and territorial integrity of Namibia”
[182.3rd meeting,
para. 201; that was said by the President of the Council
for Namibia.

90. That, then, was what I had to say to the Council,
on behalf of the non-aligned countries, with regard to
the draft resolution
now before the Council for
consideration.
We are convinced-for
the winds of
freedom and independence are now blowing on the
southern part of the African continent-that
the
adoption and application
of the present text by the
Security Council, as well as the victories which
SWAP0 has already won in its noble struggle for
liberation, with the massive aid and the no less massive
support of Africa, the Third World and the freedomloving peoples, can hasten the accession of the valiant
people of Namibia to the exercise of its undeniable
and inalienable right to independence.

96. The statement that “South
Africa ‘does not
occupy [the] Territory but is present at the request
stressed by the representative
of
of its people”,
Somalia,
the country that now holds the chairmanship of the OAU, “makes a mockery of past history
and present facts” [ihid., para. 461.
97. In his statement, the representative of Burundi,
the Chairman of the African Group of countries in
the United Nations, noted “the continued occupation
of Namibia by South Africa is an act of aggression
-as the General Assembly has already stated-and
a threat to the peace in that part of Africa” [ibid.,
pura. 601.

91. Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic)
(interpretation
from
Russian): The delegation of the Byelorussian
SSR
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to express its satisfaction that the difficult and
responsible work facing the Security Council during
this month of June will be done under your guidance.
We should like also to express our sincere appreciation

98. The attempt by the South African racists to
perpetuate the policy of Bantustans was described
.by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia as an
12

obvious attempt to promote”
the continuation
South Africa’s political and economic domination
the Territory”
[182&h meeting, para. 171.

of
of

104. The Byelorussian SSR supports all the decisions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council
aimed at the earliest possible liberation of Namibia
from South African rule. We have repeatedly pointed
out that the basic reason for the deadlock in the
question of Namibia
and also the reason’ for the
outrageous behaviour of the racists of South Africa is
to be found in the fact that the South African
authorities and their policies vis-a-vis Namibia enjoy
the direct support of a number of Western Powers.
It is also universally known that the granting of freedom
and independence to the people of Namibia is being
prevented by the avid aspirations of the transnational
monopolies that are engaging in predatory plunder of
the irreplaceable natural wealth of Namibia and are
cruelly exploiting its people.

99. Speaking of the reasons for South Africa’s
failure to comply with the Security Council’s decisions,
the representative of Ghana declared: “Those resolutions might have had the desired effect but for the
economic,
political
and military
connexions
that
existed and still exist between South Africa and
certain Western countries” [ibid., para. 671.
100. The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Tanzania
stressed:
6‘ . . . in whatever way one conceives the current
situation in Namibia
arising from South Africa’s
continued defiance of the will of the international
community
and its brutal repression of the people
of the international
Territory
of Namibia,
the
problem is one which seriously threatens the peace,
security and tranquillity of the area. It is one which
cries for a prompt, decisive and definitive decision
by the Council.” [1826th meeting, para. 911
101. Our delegation also listened carefully to the
statement by the representative of Algeria, a son of
Africa and a representative of the Arab world, when
he told us that the Ministers for Foreign affairs of
the countries members of the Co-ordinating
Bureau
of Non-aligned
Countries, in the document that was
adopted at the Havana meeting, required, among other
things, that “the oppressive regime of the white
minority in South Africa apply the resolutions and
decisions of the United Nations on Namibia...“,
declared their support for “the legitimate struggle of
the people of Namibia
under the direction of its
liberation
movement,
SWAPO”,
and called upon
the Security Council “to discharge its responsibility
and to adopt all the necessary measures, including
those provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter”
[1828th meeting,
para. 741. We consider this a very
important
international
document testifying to the
support for the people of Namibia by the non-aligned
States that are playing a tremendous positive role in
international affairs.
102. My delegation expresses its strong support for
the peoples of the African,countries
and other States
that are calling for an end to colonialism and racism
in southern Africa. There now exist most auspicious
conditions for this, since the collapse of the Portuguese
colonial empire.
103. The position of the Byelorussian SSR on the
question of Namibia has been repeatedly stated in the
United Nations. The Byelorussian
SSR has consistently favoured the granting to the people of Namibia
of its inalienable right to self-determination
and independence and has always favoured preservation of
the territorial integrity of Namibia and supported the
struggle of its people against illegal occupation of
the territory of Namibia by the South African racists.

105. In its resolution 366 (1974), the Security Council
called upon South Africa, among other things, to
make a solemn declaration that it would comply with
the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations
and the Advisory Opinion of the International
Court
of Justice of 21 June 1971’ in regard to Namibia and
to recognize the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation; to take the necessary steps to effect
the withdrawal of its illegal administration
maintained
in Namibia and transfer power to the people with the
assistance of the United Nations; to take steps to
release all Namibian political prisoners; to abolish all
racially discriminatory
and politically repressive laws
and practices in force in Namibia, particularly those
concerning Bantustans and homelands; and so forth.
106. The Government of South Africa has now had
sufficient time to respond positively to resolution 366
(1974) of the Security Council. However, the South
African racists are going in a different direction, as
may be seen from their official reply [see S/1170f]
in connexion
with the abovementioned
resolution
’ of the Security Council. They are endeavouring to
perpetuate their rule over Namibia by carrying through
the policy of Bantustans and homelands and at the
same time staging a farce in the form of so-called
planned changes in Namibia which some members of
the Council in their defence of South Africa have
characterized as encouraging and as paving the way
for negotiations and so on and so forth. The so-called
new policy of the South African racists in Namibia
was described by the London newspaper Africa in
its issue No. 42 for 1975 in the following terms: “A
realistic appraisal of the new policy shows that it is
made up of the familiar components of sophistry and
brute force.” According to the same newspaper, the
Pretoria authorities “are determined to cut off independent Ovamboland
from the remaining territory
of Namibia,
which would form a confederation
of
mini-States under the rule of the wealthy white region.”
107. In the efforts of the United Nations to put an
end to the colonial racist policies of the South African
regime there has been no deficiency, no inadequacy.
But those efforts have failed for a reason long under13
.- . -

stood by everyone. The reason is that South Africa
continues to enjoy direct support and protection from
a number of Western countries. The time has come
for. the Security Council to take the most decisive
measures against the South African regime, up to and
including
the application
of mandatory
sanctions
envisaged in the Charter, in order to compel that
regime to carry out the provisions of the United
Charter and the decisions of the Security Council,
and to liberate the Territory of Namibia and give its
people their freedom and independence. The efforts
in that direction must not be weakened but rather
strengthened.
At the same time our delegation
recognizes the lawful right of the people of Namibia
to continue the struggle by all the resources available
to them against the occupation of their territory, the
policy of apcwtheici and the plunder of the country’s
natural wealth.

Mr. Jackson,
consultations.

who

was in

charge

of

unofficial

113. The Security
Council
is dealing with an
important
matter now about which there has been
much debate in the past. The question of Namibia is
one of those items which over the years has most
occupied the attention of both the General Assembly
and this Council. In spite of the fact that the United
Nations has given constant attention to the question
of Namibia, whenever the matter comes up for debate
once again, one feels a kind of frustration when one
compares what the United Nations has done and the
insignificant results produced.
114. The position of the United Nations on Namibia
is fully supported by my delegation. We believe that
it is already pointless to go into the background of
the question of the United Nations rights over the
Territory of Namibia and the obvious illegality of the
South African presence there. As a founding Member
of the Organization, we have witnessed and contributed
to efforts, undertaken for the decolonisation
of those
peoples who were subject to colonialism.
We
welcomed the independence of all the new African
nations which today have their seats in the United
Nations, and we wish to stand with them in their
struggle to see to it that other African countries still
under colonial domination
will soon be able to enjoy
their legitimate right to independence;

108. My delegation listened with great interest to the
statement
by the representative
of the United
Republic of Cameroon,
who just introduced
draft
resolution S/l 1713, speaking on behalf of the five
sponsors, non-aligned States members of the Security
Council. Our delegation has the deepest sympathy
with this draft resolution and supports it.
109. Finally, our delegation would like once again
to stress that the Byelorussian SSR, like other socialist
countries, is consistently and unswervingly in favour
of the complete emancipation
of Africa .from colonialism and neocolonialism
and wants to see not one
single region, not one territory remaining
in the
continent of Africa where colonialism,
racism and
crpartheid
continue to hold sway.

115. Although the pace of decolonization
has been
moved forward and has received quite considerable
momentum
from recent events in Portugal, which
created favourable conditions
for independence
in
Guinea-Bissau and gave rise to great hopes that Angola
and Mozambique
too will soon obtain independence,
there are still colonial redoubts in southern Africa
which point the need for us not to desist in our efforts
in order to free those countries peoples,still subjected
to colonial domination.

110. We would also like to voice our appreciation to
those representatives of African countries who in their
statements have offered high praise for the position
taken by the socialist countries and expressed apprecia- l
tion for the assistance and support they have afforded
the peoples of southern Africa in their struggle for
freedom and independence.

116. The question of Namibia has posed the most
outstanding challenge to the United Nations. Since the
General Assembly in its resolution 2145 (XXI) decided
to put an end to the Mandate of South Africa over
the Territory
which later came to be known as
Namibia and to assume direct responsibility
for the
Territory until independence,
in various resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
there has been a repetition ud nuuselI/n of the illegality
of the presence of South Africa in Namibia.
South
Africa has been called on time and time again to withdraw its illegal administration
over Namibia.
Thus
far, however, all warnings have fallen on deaf ears
because the South African regime persists in its illegal
occupation of the Territory.

111. Mr. SALAZAR
(Costa Rica) (interpret&m
f%m Spcrnish):
Mr. President, my delegation would
like to associate itself with the congratulations
which
have been offered to you as you take up the presidency
of the Security Council this month. Your skill and tact
have been displayed in your splendid conduct of our
deliberations
and my delegation is prepared to give
you our co-operation
as you exercise your noble
functions.
112. We would also like to join in the praise which
was expressed to the delegation of Guyana for its
performance in the presidency of the Security Council
last month. The Minister
for Foreign Affairs of
Guyana, Mr. Ramphal, ~demonstrated the interest of
his country in the Security Council’s affairs by coming
to New York to preside over the meetings of the
Council.
A special tribute
should be paid to

117. This situation cannot continue indefinitely
as
it involves a flagrant flouting of the resolutions of the
Genera1 Assembly and the Security Council that
inevitably undermines the prestige which all Assembly
resolutions and decisions of the Council should enjoy.
14

118. The moment must come ‘when those of us who
have confidence in the moral force of the decisions
of the General Assembly and the binding nature of the
decisions of the Security Council must ask ourselves,
whether South Africa’s recalcitrance
is not only
preventing the people from obtaining independence,
but also-and
this is perhaps the most regrettable
thing-whether
with its stubborn refusal to support
those decisions it is not also undermining the integrity
and power of the United Nations.

of South Africa to support the decisions of the General
.
Assembly and the Security Council.
124. Mr. KANE (Mauritania)
(intevprefa~ion fiorn
French): Mr. President, at the outset I should like to
tell you how pleased my delegation is to see you
presiding over the Security Council this month. You
have to discharge this lofty responsibility
at a time
when the Council is dealing with a problem of primary
concern to Africa-not
only because of its location,
but also because of the political implications
of the
problem. Both as a Mauritanian
and an African, I can
only be pleased that it is the representative of Iraq,
a country with which the Islamic Republic of Mauritania has always had cordial and confident relations
based on friendship over the centuries, who is assuming
the great responsibilities
which are now yours. There
are indeed very few countries, which, like yours,
have understood that the greatness of a nation does
not depend solely on the power of its economy or on
its having discovered the secret of the atom, but
primarily on its steadfast and sincere support of the
universal moral values which underlie relations among
the peoples of the world. It is with great pleasure and
satisfaction that we have followed your positive action
in the Security Council and in the system of the United
Nations. Your personal qualities, your wisdom, your
competence and your objectivity have made a major
contribution
to the success of the work of your
delegation.

119. For a country such as the one my delegation
represents, which entrusts the maintenance of its own
security at the international
level to organizations
like the United Nations which can at any given
moment command
the moral and coercive force
necessary to counter any aggression of which we might
be the victims, because we have decided to remain
unarmed and thereby vulnerable to any foreign threat,
failure to respect decisions of the United Nations
and the resultant undermining
of its authority could
have terrible consequences that for many countries
would threaten their own survival.
120. Costa Rica, because of it constant support
of and commitment
to the process of decolonization,
and because of its devotion to the role which the
United Nations should play throughout the world,
vigorously condemns South Africa’s conduct. We
believe that the time has come to take necessary
action to compel South Africa to respect the decisions
of the General Assembly which have- been adopted
with a view to the achievement of speedy independence in Namibia. While realizing that in the attainment of this primary goal it may be necessary to have
additional contacts with the regime of South Africa,
my delegation believes that after the adoption of
resolution 366 (1974), which the Security Council
adopted almost six months ago, the fields open for
negotiation are not very broad.

125. Once again we are gathered together to consider
the situation in Namibia. Regardless -of the outcome
of our debate, I am sure you will agree with me that
there have been very few subjects which have so
much concerned the Organization
and occupied the
attention of world public opinion. The problem of
Namibia has had much written about it; it has aroused
great anger and indignation.
It has dashed many
hopes, and at times we have even doubted the usefulness of the Organization and the value of its objectives.
The plight of the Namibian people and the plight of
the Palestinian people are a kind of gangrene which
every day undermines the moral health of the Organization.

121. It should be recognized that resolution
366
(1974) laid down a certain framework and certain
conditions which the South African regime should
fulfil. However, as many have said, it is well-known
that South Africa has failed to abide by the most
recent demands of the Council; and so, the area for
negotiations is very limited, in spite of recent official
declarations of the South African Government [ibid.].

126. South Africa and Israel-which
should, after all,
be mentioned by name-are
continuing to flout the
Organization, in spite of the resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and the Advisory
Opinion of the International
Court of Justice.’ If,
since the League of Nations to the present, the
situation in these parts of the world has remained
frozen, it is because Israeli Zionism and South African
racism-which
are the natural extensions of the power
of money-continue
to enjoy the solid and self-serving
support of some in the United Nations. No effort
has been spared, from the north to the south of Africa,
shrewdly to maintain the status yrrc) there because it
suits those who childishly still dream of turning Africa
into the private preserve of foreign monopolies. After
having drawn a parallel between those two systems

122. The illegal occupation by South Africa of the
Territory
of Namibia has reached a critical point.
We believe that pressure should be increased on
South Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the
Charter. The Council may wish to decide on the type
and scope of the sanctions it wishes to impose, but
we believe that it should start with a binding embargo
on shipments of arms to South Africa.
123. Some action of this kind is necessary, so as to
reassert the authority of the United Nations, which
obviously has been reduced by the stubborn refusal
15

-Zionism
and racism-which
are basically identical,
obviously, because of their similar motivations,
I will
now turn to the specific question of Namibia which
is at present before us.

have also learned to howl with the wolves. If there is
any lesson to be drawn from the position of the South
African Government-and
it is high time that one
be drawn-it
is that that Government never had and
does not have any intention of withdrawing from
Namibia.
Why so much courtesy and deference to
the Government of South Africa, when it every day
insults the United Nations by flouting its decisions?
South Africa’s arrogance and defiance of the United
Nations may be explained, however, by the support
it receives from some of the members of the Security
Council. Even today, some ventured to say that the
situation in Namibia
is no threat to international
peace and security, and that consequently there is
no reason for the Security Council to adopt a decision
against South Africa. But that approach is definitely
unrealistic and unwise. The fundamental
role of the
Council is to prevent anything which remotely or
immediately
might endanger international
peace and
security.

127. Here I will not discuss the overly long history
of Namibia, for that would take days or even weeks.
I shall merely begin at the point where the Security
Council provisionally
halted its work on Namibia
-that is, with resolution 366 (1974). In adopting that
resolution, which may be added to the very many
earlier resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, Africa once again wished to give an
additional opportunity
to the South African regime
and, at the same time, to spare the feelings of those
members of the Council which felt that this additional
period of time could be used to bring the South African
racists to see the light.
128. Let us add, a year ago, the Pretoria regime
said that it needed six months to change the conditions
in southern Africa and act in accordance with the
frequently
expressed desires of the international
community.
But instead of six months, an additional
period of nine months was given South Africa, in
accordance with United Nations resolutions.
Once
again, the mountain has laboured and brought forth a
mouse.

132. Unless it wishes to maintain an anachronistic
colonial structure and consequently encourage South
Africa’s domination of Namibia, the Security Council
has a duty to reach the awaited decision which has
long been desired by the Namibian people, the United
Nations and, indeed, the international
community.

“As far as the question of South Africa’s withdrawal from the Territory and arrangements for the
transfer of power is concerned, it follows from the
policy enunciated above that South Africa will
remain in and continue to administer the Territory
only as long as the inhabitants so wish.”

133. Nothing can justify domination and the exploitation and humiliation of one people by another. For the
Namibian people every day brings with it grief, untold
suffering and misery, and the Namibian people cannot
much longer tolerate the illegal and unjustifiable
presence of South Africa in the national Territory of
Namibia. Too many economic interests are at stake
for those who today base their prosperity on the
exploitation
of that part of Africa to agree on their
own to put pressure on the South African Government
in an attempt to bring it to its senses.

Further on, the South African Government
stated
that it was unable to agree that the United Nations
had any supervisory rights as regards South West
Africa. I think you will agree with me that that reply
could not be clearer or more precise.

134. Regardless of the position of those Powers,
Africa will remain true to itself without any passion,
without any hatred; it will bear its responsibilities
before history, assisted by other peoples that love
peace and justice.

130. South Africa’s position really should surprise
no one, for it ties in very well with the “logic”
of
policies that have been pursued for more than a
quarter of a century, namely, to arouse hopes in order
to gain time. Suddenly it seems that the people of
Namibia
have become a people unable to decide
on their own future! The Government of South Africa
has carried cynicism to the point of even trying to
make people believe that Namibia prefers colonization
to sovereignty,
exploitation
to prosperity,
brutal
police methods to freedom, and division to unity.

135. If there is not a decision on the part of the
Security Council, history itself will restore the truth,
as indeed it has restored truth and justice in other
parts of the world. A great people has been kept
away from the mainstream of events for more than a
quarter of a century by the relentless propaganda
of imperialism.
Today it is a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations, and has a seat in the Security
Council. Peoples have established truth by fire and
sword and with great sacrifices on the part of their
worthy leaders, who not so very long ago were called
rebels and driven from power by imperialism.

131. There is no doubt about it: the South African
racists are short on inventiveness, for their methods
are mere carbon copies of the methods of the colonialists. They also, and I mean the South Africans,

136. There are significant political changes taking
place in the world as a result of irreversible logic.
People everywhere have taken their own destiny into
their own hands. The independence of Guinea-Bissau,

129. On 27 May 1974 [ihid.], in its reply to the
Security Council, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa declared:

16

Mozambique,
Angola SBo Tom6 and Principe, won as
a result of a great struggle, have brought about
qualitative and unexpected changes in Portugal itself.
Today the liberated people of Portugal and African
peoples have joined forces in order to usher in a world
of justice, equality and peace.
137. The struggles of the Namibian and Palestinian
peoples are all part of this process. Palestine and
Namibia will not be exceptions to the rule. Those
who will let nothing stand in the way today of their
support for the colonialists and racists in South Africa
should try to learn the lessons of history.

143. As the Security Council is about to conclude its
debate on the item before it, it is not the intention
of my delegation to go into the history of the question
of Namibia.
The debate has provided us with an
opportunity
to review the situation in Namibia in
great detail. My delegation appreciates the contribution
of all the parties which have participated in the debate
and particularly the highly important and enlightening
statement made by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
whose very presence here underlined the seriousness
of the situation.
144. It has been evident throughout the course of the
debate that there is a general agreement that the South
African reply to resolution 366 (1974) of the Council
[ihid.] is vague and contradictory
and in fact constitutes a categorical rejection of the decisions of the
United Nations, its role and its responsibilities
in
Namibia.
Resolution
366 (1974) was in effect an
ultimatum
pronou’nced unanimously
by the Council.’
The question before us now is how should the Council
proceed in view of the unsatisfactory reply of the
South African regime.

138. After
having
supported
and maintained
unpopular regimes which have finally been driven from
power, imperialism
should finally understand that its
best and most productive
investment in a country
is first and foremost the confidence of the people of
the country, and that can be won by giving assistance
which will free the people, rather than maintaining
domination over them and exploiting them.
139. The comfortable
situation in which financial
Powers are wallowing in southern Africa will not last
forever. Sooner or later they will be driven from that
part of Africa, as indeed they have been driven from
other parts of the world.

145. The members of the Group of non-aligned
States in the Council have held ,long and arduous
consultations
among themselves
and with other
parties in an effort to produce a draft resolution which
would embody the logical actions to be taken by the
Council at this juncture in view of the latest developments in the Namibian
situation. The serious differences which arose between the members of the nonaligned Group and three permanent members of the
Council concerned the mandatory nature of the arms
embargo against the South African regime. Whether
such an embargo is to be mandatory or not depends,
of course, on whether or not the Council considers
that the situation in Namibia constituted a threat to
international peace and security.

140. As I said before, regardless of the outcome of
our debate, African representatives
and those here
who have defended the cause of peace and justice
will emerge from this room with their heads held
high. The injustice at present in Namibia is not the
work of the people. It is the work of systems and
generations. The failings of a system or a class of men
cannot be blamed on an entire people. A system or
a generation of men may commit certain errors, but
the people will always restore truth and justice.
History,
morality and justice are working against
South Africa, -and indeed they are working against
those who have assumed the heavy responsibility
of
supporting
the racist regime of Pretoria
in the
Organization.

146. As long ago as 1971 the Council, in paragraph 9
of its resolution 301 (1971), had already declared that
any further refusal of South Africa to withdraw from
Namibia “could create conditions detrimental
to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region”.
That was the considered judgement
of the Council
four years ago and cannot now be taken for granted
or passed over in silence. In the view of my delega.tion, not only the continued refusal of the South
African regime to withdraw from Namibia, but also
the persistence of that regime in its policies and the
recent developments in that region and in the whole
of the African continent, turns the threat in Namibia
into one of truly international
dimensions.

141. In this conflict, which is pitting the whole world
against the racist regime in South Africa, it will not
be Namibians
or Africans or peace-loving peoples
that will emerge victorious,
but it will be justice,
truth and dignity which will win out over injustice
and lies. History has shown that a people determined
to fight, to live in freedom or to die, cannot be brought
to its knees. The status quo that imperialism
has not
been able to impose on certain parts of Africa, Asia
or Latin America will not be imposed on the southern
part of Africa or the Middle East. The heroic struggle
of the Namibian
people under the leadership of
SWAP0 will end in triumph, for there is no force in
the world that can stem the tide of history.

147. As for the importance
of imposing an arms
embargo on South Africa, I would refer to an even
earlier resolution adopted by the Security Council,
namely resolution 282 (1970), which stated in the
preamble that the Council was convinced that

142. The PRESIDENT:
As there are no further
speakers, I shall make a statement in my capacity
-. as representative of IRAQ.,

“the constant build-up of the South African military
and police forces, made possible by the continued
17

’

acquisition
of arms, military
vehicles and other
equipment and of spare parts for military equipment from a number of Member States and by local
manufacture of arms and ammunition under licences
granted by some Member
States, constitutes
a
potential threat to international peace and security”.

tional peace and security, then the Council itself would
have failed to take account of the situation in Africa
and in the world.
153. Iraq, for its part, shall continue, in the best
way it can, its support for the legitimate struggle of
SWAP0
for the liberation
and independence
of
Namibia from the illegal occupation of the racist South
African regime.

148. The Security Council later adopted resolution
283 (1970), which reaffirmed
the aforementioned
resolution on the arms embargo against South Africa
and emphasized the significance of that resolution
with regard to the Territory of Namibia.

154. Speaking
as PRESIDENT
of the Security
Council, I should like to indicate that the list of speakers
for this discussion has now been exhausted. Some
members of the Council have requested, however,
to speak in explanation of vote before the Council
proceeds to a vote on draft resolution S/11713, and
I shall now call on them.

149. In view of those resolutions, and taking into
consideration
the intransigent attitude of the South
African regime, my delegation believes that the Council
not only could but should now consider the illegal
occupation of Namibia
as a threat to international
peace and security. My delegation further regards the
very refusal of the South African regime over the
years to comply with the unanimous demands and
decisions of the Council as in itself constituting
a
challenge and a threat to the highest international
body entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security and thus a threat aimed directly
at that same international
peace and security.

155. Mr. CHUANG
Yen (China) (trunslation from
Chinese):
The Chinese delegation’s
position
of
opposing the so-called “dialogue”
with the South
African racist regime is known to all, and it has been
stated on many occasions in the past. In the opinion
of the Chinese delegation, the wording of operative
paragraph 13 of draft resolution S/11713 does not
authorize, and can in no way be construed as authorizing, the Secretary-General
to enter into any socalled “dialogue”
with the South African authorities.
Moreover, the Chinese delegation has reservations on
paragraph 7 of the said draft resolution.
With the
above statement, the Chinese delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

150. The sponsors of draft resolution S/l 1713 before
the Council went a long way in trying to accommodate
the views of the Council members who objected to
certain provisions of the draft. As the consultations
progressed, it became evident, however, that certain
members would not, now or ever, be willing to
consider that the illegal occupation of Namibia,
if
continued, could constitute a threat to international
peace and security. It became evident that they would
not consider even remotely the possibility
of the
application of Chapter VII of the Charter against South
Africa, now or ever. Such were the impressions of
my delegation.

156. Mr. RYDBECK (Sweden): The Swedish delegation will vote in favour of draft resolution S/l 1713.
We do so since we consider that it is now essential
to increase the pressure on South Africa in order to
put an end to the illegal occupation of the Territory
of Namibia
by South Africa. We made it clear
yesterday that in the opinion of my Government the
application of Chapter VII of the Charter is justified
and we gave our reasons for this view. However,
we are not entirely satisfied with the present draft.
We would have wished to have a text much more
explicit with regard to United Nations contacts with
South Africa in order to explore the possibilities that
may exist to promote a peaceful movement towards
the goal of a free and independent nation of Namibia,
an independence based on free elections conducted
under United Nations supervision and control.

15 1. Such an attitude on the part of certain members
of the Council could only strengthen the resolve of
those who are fighting for freedom and independence to intensify their struggle by all means available
to them and to disregard the sacrifices and the consequences, whatever they might be. The members of the
Council should not fail to take this likely development
into account, when the situation would then deteriorate beyond redemption and we would be confronted
not with a threat to international
peace but with an
armed conflict, the international
dimensions of which
no one can camouflage.

157. Still, we note that paragraph 13 requests the
Secretary-General
to report to the Security Council
concerning
the implementation
of paragraph
7
regarding the supervision of free elections in Namibia
by the United Nations.-That
implies, in our view, that
the Secretary-General
must make all the contacts he
deems necessary in that context in order to create a
base for his reporting to the Council regarding
implementation.

152. The representative of France pointed out, in the
statement he made before the Council last Monday,
that “the South African reply does not sufficiently
take into account the requirements of the situation in
Africa and in the world” [1824th meeting, pcrru. 921.
My delegation sincerely believes that if the Council
fails to take cognizance of the fact that the situation
in Namibia does indeed constitute a threat to interna-

158. Intensive and open, constructive
and frank
consultations
have preceded today’s meeting when
18

we are about to take a vote. My delegation is, 1 am
sure, not alone in having hoped that a greater measure
of agreement could have been achieved during those
consultations.
We want to emphasize, however that
we do not regard the lack of agreement as signifying
a lack of agreement as regards the goal that has to be
achieved by the United Nations for Namibia.
The
debate shows the contrary. The differences concern
the assessment of the situation and the paths to be
pursued to reahze this goal. We trust that when the
time comes in a perhaps not distant future ‘for the
Security Council ‘to review again the question of
Namibia, it will prove possible to mobilize the full
support of all members for measures that will finally
move South Africa to accept and give its full and
unequivocal co-operation in the establishment of the
free and independent State of Namibia.

a threat to international
peace and security under
present circumstances, which, in the considered view
of my delegation, still offer the possibility of a peaceful
solution through talks between the parties directly
concerned.
164. To the regret of my delegation, the result c:i
our deliberations this week is that the Council has failed
to take concrete action against South Africa, which
has not complied fully with the provisions of resolution 366 (1974). However, the Council’s
position
regarding Namibia is quite firm: all members of the
Council agree that the presence of South Africa in
Namibia is illegal and that it is under obligation to
withdraw from Namibia.
The position
taken by
members of the Council on these points is firm and
unshakable, and South Africa should be aware of the
Council’s unanimity on these fundamental points. The
only difference within the Council is over the methods
to be applied against South Africa.

159. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. If no other representative wishes to speak at this stage, may I take it
that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
draft resolution S/ 117 13?

165. For vears the Government
of Japan has
effectively enforced an arms embargo against South
Africa in compliance with the recommendations
in
the relevant Security Council resolutions, and I wish
to declare in this Chamber that Japan will continue
to do so. In this connexion, I am encouraged by the
declarations
of the representativese
of the United
States of America and the United Kingdom that their
Governments
will not permit the export of arms to
.South Africa.

160. As there are no further speakers, I shall now
put to the vote the draft resolution submitted by
Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania,
the United Republic of
Cameroon and the United Republic of Tanzania, which
is before the Security Council.

In fctvour: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, Guyana, Iraq, Mauritania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Republic
of Cameroon, United Republic of Tanzania.

166. In concluding, my delegation wishes to make an
urgent appeal to South Africa to respond to the strength
of this feeling in the Council, and indeed everywhere,
and comply in good faith with the provisions of
resolution 366 (1974).

Aguinst: France, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Ahstcrining:

167. Let us now again unite and consolidate our
efforts to induce South Africa to comply with the
Security Council resolutions dealing with the situation in Namibia. The delegation of Japan will extend
full cooperation with the Council to this end.

Italy, Japan.

The &oft resolution wc~snot &opted, the negcttive
votes being those of permrrnent members of the
C&ncil.

168. Mr. PLAJA
(Italy): Italy’s
position in the
current debate was clearly stated here on 4 June
[1826th meeting]. My delegation said then that Italy
supports the right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination
and national independence;
reaffirms
that the unity and territorial integrity of Namibia must
be preserved; condemns. racial discrimination
and
repressive laws and practices in Namibia; considers
that the present ocupation of Namibia is illegal and
demands that it should be put to an end urgently; is
convinced that the transfer of power to the Namibian
peopie must be accomplished in co-operation with the
United Nations, which has legal responsibility
for it;
and that such transfer of power must be the result
of peaceful developments based on negotiations.

161. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
delegations which have asked to be allowed to explain
their vote after the vote.
162. Mr. SAITO (Japan): My delegation abstained
in the voting on draft resolution S/11713. My delegation found difficulty in supporting the provisions of
operative paragraph 9, which invoked Chapter VII
of the Charter.
163. Although, as I said in my earlier statement
[1827th meeting], my delegation is gravely concerned
over the situation in Namibia and understands the
strength of the demand for certain specific action
against South Africa, we found it difficult to accept
the finding that the situation in Namibia constitutes

169. The Italian delegation has also indicated its great
disappointment
and dissatisfaction with the reaction
19

of South Africa to resolution
366 (1974). It was
accordingly ready to participate in what had grown,
it seemed, to be quite a consensus in the Council
on the necessity at this time of putting additional
pressure on South Africa to give a straightforward
and positive answer to the requests contained in
resolution 366 (1974). We were comforted in our view
by what has been said in the Council by several
prominent African leaders. In substance, the granting
to South Africa of another short delay to probe its
willingness to comply with its international obligations
should be accompanied by the kind of strong pressure
which could have only derived from a joint unanimous
decision by the Council. Unfortunately,
this has not
been the case; and I regret it sincerely, mainly because
I think that the cause of the Namibian
people
themselves would have benefited by a display of
unanimity in the Council.

tions which we believe to exist and to act accordingly
within the Charter of the United Nations, which all
of us have pledged to uphold.
175. As I said on behalf of the United States in my
opening statement on 3 June [1825fh meeting], we
cannot accept the view that there exists a threat to the
peace in Namibia in a situation where the wrongdoer,
South Africa, has offered to enter into discussions,
even if on terms not entirely to our linking, with the
organized international
community
on the objective
of self-determination
for Namibia.
176. The United States wishes to draw attention to the
praiseworthy efforts of several members of the Council
in seeking to draft a resolution which all members
could have supported. These delegations sought over
many hours to point the way for the Council to adopt
practical measures to advance the struggle for freedom
and justice in Namibia. The goal of a resolution which,
unhappily, never was tabled could, in our view, have
led to visible progress rather than a debate ending in
dispute and deadlock.

170. Although it appears from what I have stated
that the Italian delegation supports most of the provisions of the draft resolution on which we have just
voted, it was not able to support those which referred
to action under Chapter VII of the Charter. As a matter
of fact, to the Italian delegation,
the problem of
Namibia is still one of illegal occupation of a Territory
by the administering Power and of violation of human
rights for which the Charter makes provisions under
other rules.

177. My delegation is gravely disappointed that these
serious efforts to find an acceptable middle way have
failed. In this situation we feel compelled to ask:
who will benefit from the inability of the Council to
take the effective action which would have been
possible today? Once again, in contrast to the usefulness of the Council’s unanimity in the case of resolution 366 (1974), we have today yielded to the lure of
rhetoric, which should never be mistaken for effective
action in the real world. Who will find comfort in the
failure of the Council? Certainly not the United States,
which has a long record of working for universal
recognition that Namibia is a serious, solemn intemational responsibility.
As 1,said in my inaugural speech,
the United States for 12 long years has followed a policy
of banning all arms and military supplies to South
Africa. We have done so voluntarily,
as a matter of
principle-deliberately-to
avoid encouraging Pretoria
to think that the United States will sacrifice national
principle for military or financial gain. We will continue
to uphold principle.
We pray we have not lost
momentum in the struggle for freedom and justice in
southern Africa.

171. I shall add that the Italian delegation would have
favoured a reflection in the text of the idea suggested
from various sources during the debate for the
establishment
of some contact with South Africa,
believing that it could have a useful role in promoting
movement along the lines of resolution 366 (1974).
172. I shall conclude by stating that Italy will stick
to what it considers its obligations as a Member of the
Organization, that is to say, it will pursue all possible
efforts to have the Government
of South Africa
urgently implement
resolution 366 (1974) and will
strictly observe the arms embargo in accordance with
resolution 3 I1 (1972).
173. Mr. SCALI (United States of America): On
behalf of my Government, I have voted “no” on draft
resolution S/l 1713 with grave reluctance and concern.
The power of the permanent members of the Security
Council to cast a veto is a right that must be exercised
after the most careful and solemn consideration.
Indeed, this occasion marks only the seventh time in
the 29-year history of the United Nations that the
United States has found it necessary to do so.

178. Mr. WILLS (Guyana): The Guyana delegation
of course voted in favour of the draft resolution. We
did so not merely because we were one of the
sponsors, but because we felt that in principle it was
the kind of thing we could support. It did not meet
all our expectations, but we felt that it was a limited
enough objective to enable us to support this kind of
resolution.

174. But my Government believes that the situation
in Namibia,
however illegal, however unacceptable
to the international community,
does not constitute a
threat to international
peace and security.
We
recognize that many of the States represented around
the Council table have a different view. But we are
obliged to make our own careful estimate of the condi-

179. I have been advised, and I recollect, that this is
the second time that a triple veto has been passed in
this chamber. If that is indeed so, it is rather significant
that it is the racists in Pretoria who have caused
such a situation.
20

180. I am aware that we are not in a position to
make-indeed
we do not have to make-forays
into
casuistry or to indulge in any kind of mental calisthenics. We should like to express our thanks to those
delegations that supported the draft resolution and in
that way positively
identified
themselves with the
aspirations of the non-aligned members of the Council
on the question of Namibia.

an ethos peculiar to minorities.which
often produces
results in favour of South Africa. I said in my statement
yesterday that “the logic South Africa understands
best is the logic of local armaments and international
pressure, and we believe that the time has come to
intensify both the armed struggle and international
pressure” [1828th meeting, para. 1181.
187. The actions of some members today have for the
time being closed the door of the Security Council’s
participation
in the intensification
of international
pressure. But it would be naive for South Africa to
take too much comfort from today’s expression of
indecision by the Council. For they should be aware
that the support given to the people of Namibia, led
by SWAPO, in this struggle to recover its freedom and
independence
grows from day to day-and
I am
referring to the support from the majority of States
Members
of the Organization,
and even more
importantly,
from an ever-increasing
number of
peoples the world over, even among those who did not
see fit today to support this draft resolution.

181. Some delegations that voted in favour of the
draft resolution have served in the Council for some
time, and their consistent positions on the question of
Namibia,
as manifested over the years, have been
confirmed by their actions today. We wish to thank
those delegations for their support. And I wish to
express special thanks to the delegation of Sweden,
which, under very trying and very difficult circumstances, maintained throughout a position of principle
that is admirable in the extreme.
182. For the past few days the non-aligned countries
in the Security Council, among which Guyana has the
honour to be numbered, have been engaged in long
and arduous informal consultations
in an effort to
reach a consensus among the members of the Council
on a decision in relation to Namibia. Unfortunately
such efforts have not been successful, and we deeply
regret that. But on the basis of those consultations
and in the light of the position of some members that
emerged during the course of the debate, my delegation
believes that the Council was frustrated from taking
what we would term a correct decision because of
a lack of political will and anabdication of international
responsibility.

188. It will come as no surprise to my delegation
when the implications
of the action that the Security
Council failed to take today become more widely
understood and when expressions of support for the
people of Namibia come from unexpected sources.
189. Guyana, for its part, pledges and will continue
to pledge its support for the people of Namibia, for
SWAP0 and for the final liberation of the people of
Namibia,
until that time when the dark infamy of
South African repression recedes from the globe.

183. It is indeed strange that arguments based on a
legal interpretation
of the Charter were the reocks on
which our efforts foundered. It is in fact one of the
sorry chapters in the history of Namibia that legalism
and the use of law as a question of political tactics
run through the whole history of our attempts to give
the Namibian people the right of self-determination.

190.

Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
The delegation of France has taken an
active part in this debate, to which it could not remain
indifferent in view of its interest in and sympathy for
the just cause of Namibia,
as I have already said.
That is why, after having clearly taken note of the
deficiencies and ambiguities
in the South African
declarations,
it attempted, along with other delegations, to seek means by which the Security Council
could promote some progress towards a settlement of
this question. It had many contacts with the representatives of other groups, in the hope of reaching
realistic solutions. In particular, it sought to determine
what benefit could be derived from the establishment
in Dar es Salaam of a committee
entrusted with
following up the question of Namibia,
and from
Mr. Vorster’s offer to meet with the representatives of
that committee.

from

184. I say “strange” because such arguments about
law did not seem to prevent those very members who
now advance the arguments from using them in 1965,
when the question of sanctions against Rhodesia was
considered in this chamber. We can see no legal
difference-at
least no significant legal differencebetween the situation in Rhodesia in 1965 and the
situation in Namibia in 1975.
185. Those who have been privileged
to see the
Caprivi Strip would find it rather difftcult to agree that
there is no threat to international
peace and security
there and that South Africa is not the author of that
threat-and
it is indeed a serious threat.

French):

191. Those efforts, on which the representative
of
the United Kingdom gave some details during his
statement this afternoon, were regrettably in vain. The
draft resolution on which the Council has just voted
could not receive our support and, to our great
regret, we had to oppose its adoption. That text,
indeed, contains a number of condemnations
and
demands which, although justified for the most part,

186. Put simply,
those who oppose the draft
resolution, basing their opposition on legal considerations, have in reality exercised their political judgement, to my mind, in favour of South Africa. That is
21

are likely to strengthen
South Africa’s negative
attitude rather than open the way to the flexibility
for which we still had reason to hope.

198. I should emphasize
that the consultations
were extensive as well as protracted, and while we are
very thankful to our colleagues for the courtesy they
have displayed towards us in the exchanges we have
had with them, I must be candid and say that we
are disappointed by their basic approaches as regards
the substance and the requirements of the situation.

192. France, for its part, will not stop exerting
pressure on the Government of Pretoria in the direction
we all desire. It has stressed to that Government
the
need rapidly to achieve a peaceful settlement to the
problem of Namibia. Moreover, it has recently been
reaffirmed by the President of the Republic that it will
in no way infringe on the cause of the freedom and the
right of that people to self-determiantion,
and it has
prohibited any sale of weapons to South Africa which
would be contrary to its fundamental principles.

199. Now, am I really going to condemn them for
their abuse of their responsibilities
under the
Charter? I shall not do such a thing. As I said in the
General Assembly last year, when I spoke as the
Chairman of the African Group3 expressing Africa’s
dismay at the scandalous troika veto which saved
South Africa’s membership in the Organization,
we
are prepared to let history and world public opinion
be the judges of their actions and, above all, to let the
American people, the British people and the French
people see how this action of their Governments
in
defence of South Africa measures with the great traditions and histories of their respective countries.

193. Our main reason for divergence
with the
sponsors of the draft resolution-I
wish to stress thisrelated to the question of knowing whether there exists
in Namibia a threat to international peace and security.
As I have already said, there is a serious difference
here due to the persistent lack of understanding
that has prompted South Africa to eschew the necessary dialogue. Nonetheless we should not confuse the
chapters of the Charter by introducing,
without
sufficient reason, the concept of international
peace
and security. We do not think that concept is now
jeopardized or involved in the circumstances prevailing
in Namibia. I said that in my first statement in this
debate [182&h meeting]. The introduction of a contrary
affirmation in the draft resolution that was submitted
to us compelled us to reject that text.

200. Thus, while I do not wish to be ajudge of the
tripartite alliance to shield South Africa’s intransigence, I must at least make our position clear with
regard to what has been said in the Council
201. First of all, I cannot resist the temptation
to
make a curious observation. I understand the French
opposition to the arms embargo. For, firmly opposed
as we are to that Government’s
continued commerce
in arms and weapons, arms which escalate tension in
southern Africa, arms which encourage south Africans
to be intransigent and arrogant, arms which above all
effectively contribute to the repression of our brothers
both in South Africa and in Namibia,
we recognize
the fact that France still sees fit to supply South
Africa with arms. I have here the latest Reuters
dispatch, dated 5 june, and with the Council’s patience
and indulgence I should like to quote from it. It
says:

194. We condemn without reservation South Africa’s
attitude and its delaying tactics in the case of Namibia,
but it is continuity and unanimity of pressure which
seem to us the best means of prompting the South
African leaders to abide by the duties incumbent
upon them.
195. I can assure the Council that so far as it is
concerned my Government will continue tirelessly to
impress upon the South African authorities the urgent
necessity to practice in South Africa a policy of positive
and good neighbourly relations and also to fulfil the
commitments
it has undertaken vis-a-vis the Namibian
people.

“South Africa wants to buy more submarines
from France, French officials said today.
“Negotiations
for the purchase of three of
France’s ,new 1,200-ton attack submarines of the
Agosta class are nearing completion, they said.

196. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania): I
had not really desired to speak, but the triple veto
and the explanations made by our colleagues before
and after the voting in an attempt to rationalize the
second major defence of South Africa on the part of
the three permanent members of the Security Council
compel me to speak.

“The South African navy has already three
Daphne-class
submarines
built in the French
Dubigeon-Normandie
shipyards at Nantes. They are
the deep-diving submarines Maria van Riebeeck,
Emily Hobhouse
and Juhanna van der Met-we,
each of 850 tons.

197. To say that we are disappointed
would be a
serious understatement.
Yet we were not surprised,
because the threat of a triple veto, or, if you wish,
a troika veto, loomed large over our shoulders the
moment we started our debate on this crucial item and
during the consultations
we had with many of our
colleagues.

“The new Agosta submarines could be delivered
towards the end of 1978 or early 1979, a spokesman
for Dubigeon-Normandie
said.
“South Africa is one of France’s best arms
clients. The South African Air Force already has
22

more than 50 French-built Mirage IIIfighter
bombers
in service and has just received its first squadron
of France’s latest combat aircraft, the Mirage F-l.
“The South African army is equipped with French
AMX-30 tanks and Cactus ground-to-air missiles.”
Of course, we do not accept the French explanation
that there are arms that Can be used for external
defence and arms that can be used for internal repression. I believe the representative of France would be
the first one to agree that we have never accepted that
explanation.
202. Thus we find the French veto consistent with
France’s current policy on the question of an arms
embargo. So while we are disappointed
by their
action, as we are with their policies concerning the
continued sale of arms to South Africa, we must at
least give them credit for being consistent, systematic
and logical. But what of Britain and the United
States? Why are they opposed to a mandatory arms
embargo, if, as they have told us, and we have no
reason to doubt their words, they are in fact not
supplying arms to South Africa?
203. I remember some time ago a respected British
paper, a daily paper, complaining
bitterly that the
British were always put in the dock by the Africans
for their policies on southern Africa. It was then
asserted by this paper that France has been able to
get away with anything and has had little criticism
while continuing to supply arms to South Africa. Now
without giving any judgement
as to the merits or
demerits, the accuracy or validity of this paper, I
wonder how they would interpret the British veto,
particularly
when it relates to a mandatory
arms
embargo.

Namibia, and the linkage between these two developments. Yet the analysis as presented by the representative of the United Kingdom seems to my delegation to suffer from a number of serious omissions
and in fact in some cases some flaws. And so perhaps
it may be useful, for the benefit of the Council, to
understand our position with respect to what is
happening in southern Africa.
206. First, let me state categorically that the changes
that have taken place and are taking place in southern
Africa, and which have made the Lusaka discussions
possible, have been due to the triumph of the freedom
fighters, principally
in the Portuguese-dominated
Territories.
It is their sacrifice, their resilience,
which brought them that victory and ‘which has
radically changed the geopolitical situation in southern
Africa.
207. Secondly, we also must not ignore the sacrifice
and the contribution made by the liberation movement
in Zimbabwe in creating the necessary atmosphere.
It is not therefore, and it could not under any stretch
of the imagination
be considered that the situation
in southern Africa is a result of a change of heart on
the part of the racists. But they are realists and they
see the handwriting on the wall.
208. Africa-I
do not want to be presumptuous and
speak on behalf of Africa, but I speak on behalf of
Africa only to the extent of quoting what the OAU
said at its Ninth Extraordinary
Session, held in Dar
es Salaam from 7 to 10 April 1975. It made it clear
that it desires a peaceful change if that peaceful change
were possible. But this preparedness on the part ,of
Africa to negotiate should not be misconstrued
for
weakness or be misconstrued
for preparedness to
capitulate.

204. It is perhaps equally important to restate our
position with regard to the determination
by the
Security Council that the situation in Namibia constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. We
in Africa know the dangers that are inherent in the
current situation there. We believe that the continued
illegal occupation constitutes a real threat to intemational peace and security. We do not for one moment
consider it necessary to have an international
conflagration before the Security Council can be convinced
of the danger of the situation.
We are therefore
astonished by the evaluation
of those who fail to
recognize this clear danger. We are even more
astonished, and we find it all the more disturbing,
that in the process of our consultations and in the
process of our negotiations,
our colleagues,
the
Western permanent members of the Council, refused
even to accept a formulation
that would have stated
that the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa,
if allowed to continue, could create a threat to international peace and security.

209. Africans, like the rest of the international
community,
cannot and will not accept dictates from
Mr. Vorster. To pretend that Mr. Voorster, in his
cynical and basically negative reply to the Council
[see S/l 17013, provides a basis for discussion, may
create just the opposite impression.
210. Thirdly,
while we desire rapid changes in
Rhodesia, it must be understood by all, friends and
foes alike, that the need for change in Rhodesia
cannot be used, should not be used, and can never
be used to compromise the rights of the Namibians.
We desire the complete liberation of both Zimbabwe
and Namibia.
211. Finally-and
this is crucial-we
believe that the
peaceful efforts that are made in southern Africa to
find a solution on Rhodesia can be effectively assisted
by a decisive international action. Equivocation on the
part of the Council, for example, can only hinder,
rather than assist, the progress towards a solution to
the problem. There can be no better authorities for this
than the representatives
of the exploited
people
themselves.

205. Reference has also been made by our British
colleague to the developments
in Rhodesia and
23

212. Bishop Muzorewa,
President of the African
National Council of Zimbabwe; Reverend Ndabangi
Sithole; Mr. Joshua Nkomo-all
legitimate spokesmen
of their people, recognized as such by the OAU and
accepted as such by the overwhelming
majority of
the international
community-told
the Special Committee of 244 at its 998th meeting on 9 May last that
only effective measures by the international
community can help their struggle there.

provisions
of that resolution,
the Council would
consider: “the appropriate measures to be taken under
the Charter of the United Nations”.
We ask our colleagues, particularly
those who have
vetoed the draft resolution: What are those measures?
They have all accepted, in one form or another,
perhaps with differing points of emphasis, that South
Africa has not complied with the provisions of resolution 366 (1974). Logic demands that because of this
failure, the Council then should have proceeded to
take the appropriate measures that it undertook to
take. However, instead of following this logic, we are
told we should not be unrealistic; we are told that we
should explore the minutest
indications
of the
potential for changes-supposedly
for fundamental
changes.

213. Our friends of the United Kingdom, who have
miserably
failed in their responsibilities
as an
administering
Power, should bear this in mind. We
expected and still expect them to take firm positions.
We certainly did not and do not expect them to
rationalize their failure to act in concert with what
we consider are reasonable demands meeting the
requirements of the situation.

219. Who is being judged here: the members of the
Security Council o;Soufh Africa? Listening to some of
the statements, one may even forget that South Africa
is treating the Organization
with absolute contempt,
that it is illegally occupying Namibia, an international
Territory, that it is violating every norm of international
law and conduct.

214. We have no quarrel with the assertion made
by the representative
of the United Kingdom,
Mr.
Richard, that it would have been most timely to have
the weight of the Council to bear on the South African
regime. In fact, the sponsors of the draft resolution
painstakingly
attempted to achieve just that. And I
think that all those involved in these negotiations,
including our colleagues the three permanent members,
would at least accept that if the non-aligned countries
have been lacking in anything, they have never been
lacking in an attempt to compromise and in an attempt
to negotiate with them.

220. Certainly we are not so blind as not to remember
the lessons of history. Capitulation to or appeasement.
of the aggressor has never paid rich dividends. Have
we still to learn from the tragic consequences of
Munich? South Africa sill categorically
refuses to
accept the authority of the United Nations; it treats
the Organization
and many of its resolutions and
decisions, of both the General Assembly and the
Security Council-some
of which, as I said, have
been adopted
unanimously-with
characteristic
arrogance and negativism.

215. But we found, to our regret, that what was being
advocated was not so much a collective meaningful
pressure, but merely circumlocutory
verbiage whose
ultimate result would simply have provided the South
Africans with the satisfaction that in fact their negative
postures have been met with, to say the least, confusion among our own ranks and inaction by the Security
Council.

221. South Africa does not recognize the Organization’s authority, but we are told, ad nauseam, that
we should jump to South Africa’s generosity and to
its dictates; we should be grateful that it is prepared
to meet the African-and
South Africa, with characteristic cynicism, spells it out-the
African Chairman
of the United Nations Council for Namibia; we should
be grateful, that the special committee of the OAU
could have access to the Bantustan leaders and
perhaps take a holiday trip to Namibia.

216. For the worst that the Council can do is to
demonstrate to the South Africans that its resolutions,
even those adopted with unprecedented
unanimity,
are indeed paper tigers and can be tretaed contemptuously as such. And how else could South Africa
treat the Council if, as it would have been the case
had we followed the course of action advocated by
our British colleague, we had acted as if we were
satisfied with the response made by the Vorster regime
with regard to resolution 366 (1974).

222. Why should the Organization
be prepared to
bend over backwards to accommodate Vorster whetrhe
does not show any inclination
to reciprocate that
accommDdation?
How can we seriously justify to the
people of Namibia, to the people of Africa and to the
world community
such obvious attempts at succumbing to Mr. Vorster’s whims and dictates?

217. What sort of collective weight can we talk of
if the Security Council is unable to follow logically
its own decisions? What is the point of making highsounding solemn declarations?
What is the point of
taking unanimous decisions and such other resolutions if members of the Council themselves fail to live
up to the expectations of their own decisions?

223. We must be serious. The Council will only have
the weight which has been alluded to by my colleague
of the United Kingdom
if people throughout
the
world believe in its policies and actions-and,
above
all, believe in its credibility.
There is no weight

218. Paragraph 6 of resolution 366 (1974) specifically
stipulated that if South Africa failed to comply with the
24

without credibility,
and we are convinced that the
erosion of the Council’s credibility
on the flimsy
excuse of maintaining an air of superficial consensus
based on false premises will only do more harm to
the cause of Namibia and to the cause of decolonization, be itrapid or otherwise.

afternoon I set out why we, at any rate, do not accept
the totality of that proposition.
230. Secondly, underlying his whole argument is the
proposition that if there has been non-compliance
by
South Africa with a resolution of the Security Council,
that automatically
makes the situation one in which
there is a threat to international
peace and security
within the terms of Chapter VII of the Charter. That
is not a proposition that I accept, and may I say in
parentheses that when the representative of Tanzania
says that my delegation rejected the proposition that
it could amount to a threat to international
peace and
security, I fear that the somewhat hectic period that
we have been going through this week and the details
of the consultations that we have all been undertaking
have perhaps made my colleague and friend’s memory
slightly inaccurate.

224. I cannot conclude
my statement
without
expressing our thanks to all those who have voted for
the draft resolution. But I want, in the name of my
Government and our people, to single out the delegation of Sweden and to pay public tribute to the role
it played in the negotiations and to the positive vote
it cast. I do so in the clear knowledge that, even when
it became difficult for us to entertain some of the
demands it made, it went along, convinced as it is, of
the justness of our cause. I am sure that Sweden, by
its vote, has lived up to the expectations
of the
African people and to the long and traditional friendship that it has with all the African countries, including
my own.

231. The proposition that was put to us, which we
rejected, and which I have just rejected, was not that
it could, but that it would. The proposition
that it
could, as I am sure all of us who took part in these
negotiations know, was not a proposition which was
ever presented to me, nor, as far as I know, was it
presented to any of the other Western members. But,
in any event, I do not accept, as a matter of interpretation and of law-and this is a proposition which
is nothing new; it is one which my country and various
other countries have accepted for many years-that
non-compliance
necessarily equates with a threat to
international
peace and security.

225. In his statement before the Council, my Minister
for Foreign Affairs [1826th meeting] said that whatever
action the Council takes or fails to take, the struggle
in Namibia,
under the leadership of SWAPO, will
continue, and will continue to receive the crucial and
decisive support of the OAU and all friends of Africa.
We had hoped that action by the Council would help
the escalation towards freedom, justice and peace with
the minimum
sacrifice. Inaction can only lead to
another type of escalation-that
is, towards violence
and greater sacrifices.

232. The third proposition that underlies a large part
of what the representative of Tanzania has said is
that, leaving aside all the legalities, to move into
Chapter VII at this moment-because
that is what this
resolution does, and does in specific, not implicit,
terms-to
move into Chapter VII at this moment is
the best way of putting effective pressure on the
South African Government
and is the best way of
moving forward. I must say to him that it seems to
us-and this is something that I said this afternoon
and which I should have thought had emerged from
everything I have tried to do this week-that
it is
inappropriate,
at a time when the South African
Government has made certain offers, at a time when it
has offered certain contacts, it is quite inappropriate
to take a step as drastic and as far-reaching as the
one he is advocating without first trying to ensure
whether those contacts can produce anything or
indeed whether those statements mean anything.

226. But the Namibians have no alternative: they will
continue to meet the repressive violence of the South
African regime with their resistance. We have hoped
that the Council would help the process towards
independence. As it is, the Council has disappointed
millions in Africa, and in particular the Namibians.
We believe that the permanent
members of the
Council should ponder this. Thus Mr. Scali’s question
[see paru. 177 above] as to who has gained in this
situation appears to us to have been very rhetorical.
He and his colleagues of France and the United
Kingdom should, and must, provide the answer.
227. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of the United Kingdom,
who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.
228. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom): May I say I
had not intended to speak after having spoken once
and at some length this afternoon. Indeed, had it not
been for certain comments made by the representative of Tanzania, I would not have done so.

233. I do not wish to bandy words with the representative of Tanzania and I do not wish to enter into
an attempt to rebut some of the verbal assaults that
he saw fit to make upon my country and upon the
other Western permanent members. I would only
say this to him. I have done him and his colleagues in
the Security Council the courtesy of assuming that in
all their negotiations they were motivated by good
faith and by what they believed to be in the best

229. The speech that he has just made was based
upon three propositions. The first proposition is that
there has been total non-compliance
by the South
African Government-1
emphasize the word “total”with the terms of resolution 366 (1974). At length this
25

interests of the people of Namibia.
I should have
hoped that by now the representative
of Tanzania
would know me well enough to accept that my motives
were the same.
234. The PRESIDENT:
The
Tanzania has asked for the floor.

representative

of

235. Mr. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania):
First, perhaps I should also say that I had not intended
to make a further statement.
It is the statement
made by the United Kingdom representative
which
compels me to reply. Secondly, I have never doubted
his motives. I have questioned his actions. If I might
expound on that, I have questioned his actions and
I have questioned that the result of his actions would
be anything but totally negative in regard to the
situation in the area. Thirdly, I have never argued that
the Council should consider the situation in the area
as posing a threat to international
peace and security
simply because South Africa has failed to comply with
the resolutions of the United Nations. My position
has been that the situation in Namibia as it is poses
a threat to international
peace and security. So the
element of compliance or non-compliance
with the
resolutions simply adds to the situation, to the display
of intransigence and arrogance by South Africa and to
the desire of the Council to take action.

I never knew that there was a phrase added to that:
“in the event of total non-compliance”.
237. Finally, I should like to say that if there has
been a misunderstanding
in the process of consultations, I can assure the representative
of the United
Kingdom that it is not because of fatigue: I have a problem of understanding English at times, since it is
not my mother tongue, but I should frankly and
emphatically
say that at one point in the discussion
-not so much what is contained in the resolution-I
thought I had said “What
about the Rhodesian
This is a point I raised in the process of
formula?“.
private consultations, but anyway what went on in the
private consultations should not really be a basis for
substantive debate at this point.
238. I want to conclude my statement by saying
once again that we are really disappointed
by the
approach that the three permanent members of the
Council have taken. We have tried-and
I say this in
absolute sincerity-in
the process of negotiation,
we have done our level best, to accommodate
some
of the reservations, but of course it takes two to make
a compromise.
We have been making the compromises. I do not think the Western permanent members
made sufficient compromise to warrant our changing
our position.
The meeting

236. Furthermore,
graph 6 of resolution

I should also say that para366 (1974) reads as follows:

“Decides to remain seized of the matter and to
meet on or before 30 May 1975 for the purpose of
reviewing South Africa’s compliance with the terms
of the present resolution and, in the event of noncompliance by South Africa, for the purpose of
considering
the appropriate
measures
to be
taken....”

rose at 7.55 p.m.
Notes

’ Legal Consequences
for States of the Continued
Presence
of
South
Africa
in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notwithstanding
Security
Council
resolution
276 f/970),
Advisory
Opinion,
I.C.J.
Reports
1971, p. 16.

2 A/AC.115/L.508.
3 See Official
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of the

General

Assembly,

Twenty-ninth

2281st meeting.
4 Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

26
Litho in United Nations. New York

00400

82-6 1202-November

1983-2,200
