/

lTNJTF7-I

‘:
/

NATJnATc

OFFICIAL

REC

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 31 MARCH 1983

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2429)

,,,.....,,,.,,,...,,................

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . *.,.*.....

,..,.,.,,..,..,..,,...........1

Letter dated 16 March 1983from the PermanentRepresentativeof Chad to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15643) . . . . . . . .

1
1
1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofjkcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ResoIutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively t,o resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2429th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 31 March 1983, at 3.3Q p.m.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Ghana in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

President: Sir JOHN THOMSON
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland):
Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2429)
1, Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hayford (Ghana)
took the place reservedfor him at the side of the Council
chamber.

of the agenda

2. Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 5643).

3; Mr. NATORF (Poland): We have before us a matter
that directly concerns two countries: the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Chad. Both countries
are members of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The meeting was called to order at 5.45 p.m.

4. The position of my delegation on this issue is based
on the following considerations. First, the African continent has been suffering from many problems which
could be defined, first of all, as vestiges of colonialism.
We look with admiration upon the efforts of the nations
of that continent aimed at overcoming the legacy of colonialism and underdevelopment. Those efforts require an
atmosphere of co-operation and stability in relations
among African States, Secondly, more than once we
have witnessed external, neo-colonialist efforts to spoil
that atmosphere by exploiting the social and political
contradictions that plague this great continent, border
disputes included. This has been reflected recently in
malicious manoeuvres to disrupt the OAU and to foment
an international
anti-Libyan campaign. My country is
resolutely opposed to all destabilizing neo-colonialist
actions based on the ancient Roman principle of divide et
impera. It is the feeling of my delegation that the situation prevailing between Libya and Chad was unnecessarily dramatized by many and the debate artificially
extended in the Council as well. Thirdly, the issues that
may arise in the African continent should be solved, first
and preferably, through bilateral negotiations and within
the OAU.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 16 March 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Chad to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15643)
1, The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the previous meetings on this item [2419th and
2428th meetings], I invite the representatives of Chad and
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to take places at the Council
table; I invite the representatives of Benin, Democratic
Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guinea, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ivory Coast, Niger, Senegal, Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the United Republic of Cameroon to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Barma (Chad) and
Mr. Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) took places at the
Council table; Mr. Soglo (Benin), Mr, Al-Al@ (Democratic Yemen), Mr, Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia),
Mr. Boule (Gabon), Mr. Coumbassa (Guinea), Mr. RajaieKhorassani (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Essy (Ivory
Coast), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Sarre’ (Senegal), Mr.
AbdaiIa (Sudan), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic)
and Mrs. Mairie (United Republic of Cameroon) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

5. On the basis of these considerations, my delegation
welcomed the statement made by the representative of
Libya [2#19th meeting] expressing the readiness of his
Government to discuss the border dispute between the
two countries both on a bilateral level and in the OAU.
Such an approach is fully compatible with the principles
1

not hear at that time, in this very chamber, a virulent;
menacing campaign directed against that country by the
imperialistic Power? Is it not strange for the Council now
to hear that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is responsible
for the military and political tensions in Chad and that it
poses a threat to peace? Has the Council forgotten that
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya made a generous contribution to the restoration of peace to Chad; indeed, it placed
all its potentialities at the disposal of an African State, so
keen were we‘ Arabs that its territorial integrity and independence should be safeguarded. The Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya is accused of posing a threat to peace and
security in the entire area. Has it been forgotten that the
United States naval and air forces constantly violate the
territorial waters and airspace of Africa, especially the
territorial waters and airspace of Libya? Claims against
Libya are unjustified. The representative of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya declared here:

of the Charter of the United Nations. We are pleased to
note that this country, with which we are bound by amicable relations, takes a constructive stand on this issue.
6. The efforts of the OAU, with the indispensable support of Libya and Chad, should be supported by the
Council, as they would lead to the elimination
of
conflicts and tensions in the African continent.
7. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement,
8. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (inferpretation from Arabic): Nearly five weeks ago, the Council
heard a considerable number of delegations voicing in
turn words of right, voicing words intended to call the
attention of the world to the plots being hatched against
a young Arab State, a State which conveys the message
of the masses struggling for freedom, progress and peace,
a State which has pledged to persevere in its revolution
against backwardness, dependence, exploitation
and
hegemony. Thanks to its vitality and on the basis of the
harsh experiences it has had to undergo throughout its
recent history, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has been
able to prove to the world that a developing State can
muster its abilities for reconstruction and advance along
an independent path in accordance with the interests of
its people and the interests of the Arab nation,

“I believe that the Council’s competence is clear in
accordance with Article 33, paragraph 1, of the Charter of the United Nations which stipulates the
following:
‘The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security,
-if such a dispute exists; but even Habre’s representatives did not say that peace and security are being
endangered at all: there. is no dispute between Chad
and Libya-[and
here I underline this fact once more:
there is no dispute between Chad and Libya]-

9. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has been and still is a
target for the enemies of progress. Why did they choose
the Jamahiriya? To us, the Arabs, the answer is obvious
and simple: the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has not hesitated to defend its pristine Arab character and its African
identity, firmly adhering to its vanguard role, embodied
in confrontation and steadfastness, and refusing to bargain at the expense of the Arab nation and the African
nations. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya continues to be a
thorn in the side of the defeatists, profiteers, speculators
and henchmen of imperialism. From the very moment
when their aggressive intentions were unveiled before the
Council, the imperialist circles have engaged in political
incitement against Libya, to the extent of attempting to
cast doubt on Libya’s sovereignty over its own territory,
With the failure, or the freezing, of the attempts to use
force and aggression against Libya, that country, the victim of continuous aggression and foreign military and
non-military
intervention,
has been portrayed as the
aggressor and not the object of aggression.

‘shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own
choice’.“[2419th meeting, para. 73.1
11. Yet Libya is accused of occupation and expansion
and of jeopardizing international peace and security.
12. Libya’s willingness to enter into consultations with
Chad over the contentious issue indicates that the crisis is
artificial. Indeed, this artificially created crisis aims at
prejudicing both Libya and Chad alike.
13. We are indeed aware that the machiavellian principle underlying American strategy is “divide and rule”;
we are also aware that that strategy is based on the threat
or use of force. Suffice it to recall, as an example, that
tension has resulted in our area from the role of the rapid
development forces and the strategic alliances, foremost
among which are those linking Washington and Cairo,
Washington and ‘Tel Aviv, Washington and Pretoria and
others. Those, indeed, are the ones that pose threats to
international peace and security in the region.
‘,
14. Is it not strange that the representative of Egypt,
one of the parties to the Camp David accords, should
accuse the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya of expansion and
interference in Chad? We wonder why they make this

10, They claim that the Jamahiriya commits acts of
aggression. They also claim that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya occupies territory and expands, and thus jeopardizes peace and security. But all of us here know that the
United States imperialist onslaught against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya is escalating on all fronts. Is it logical
that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which constantly
champions the rights of oppressed peoples, should be the
aggressor, while the echoes of its complaint of last month
[S/156151 against the provocations of the United States
and its allies still ring in our memories? Did the Council
7

accusation. Will these accusations help that representative to recover his place within the Arab family? Is that
conduct not proof that the Egyptian authorities persist in
ignoring Arab rights in Palestinian and other occupied
Arab territories? Can Egypt be acquitted just because it
heaps accusations on a bastion of steadfastness and confrontation against imperialism and zionism? Have we
forgotten that the Camp David accords ignored the
rights of the Palestinian people and helped Israel to intensify its aggression and hegemony over our territory under
the American umbrella? Can Egypt accuse Libya, whose
sacrifices help strengthen the bastion of steadfastness and
confrontation? Why does Egypt accuse Libya? What are
the intensions and motives behind that?

20. The item on the agenda today concerns Chad and
Libya, two neighbouring African countries. It is indeed
with great reluctance that we ask to be allowed to participate in the Council’s discussion of this item. At the
outset, we find it imperative to make it absolutely clear
to the members of the Council, as well as to all others concerned, that by our participation we do not in any way
desire to widen the scope of the dispute between the parties. Nor do we wish to side with one or the other of the
two sisterly countries. We shall not, therefore, deal with
the substance of Chad’s complaint against Libya.
21. Chad has been confronted with calamities of one
kind or another for far too long. Libya, an object of
external manipulation itself, was in fact before the Council with its own complaint only a .few weeks ago
[,S/r56rs]. In different ways, these two countries are
examples of the diverse and complex problems that
plague Africa. They are both struggling to overcome the
debilitating effects of colonialism. They share a common
history and pursue similar national goals. As neighbours,
they are also bound by geography and destined for ever
to live together, with no alternative but to harmonize
their overall relations on the basis of good-neighbourliness and co-operation.

15. Those who took part in putting the rights of the
Palestinian people up for sale are trying today, through
their aIliance with imperialism, to conspire against the
independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Libya. But the people of Egypt refuse to acquiesce in this,
and sooner or later they will have to rejoin the ranks of
Libya, Syria and other Arab countries in order to defend
every inch of Arab territory.
16. We conclude then that the question of which we are
seized will not resolve the problem, but rather will lead to
the creation of rifts and aggression among fraternal peoples, which is what imperiafism wants. We believe that
the OAU, whose unity the United States is trying to destroy,
whose prestige and credibility it is trying to undermine and whose role it is trying to end, is the competent
body for consideration of the question of which we are
seized today. We also consider that the attempts at
representing the OAU as an incompetent forum that cannot consider such issues are but a manoeuvre that serves
the interest of those who are most inimical to the Africans
and the Arabs. The Council has to realize all these facts
and have confidence in the wisdom of those who are able
to resolve regional problems in accordance with the
instruments binding the parties, What we are seeking is
to resolve conflicts in the third world by peaceful means
and not to fall into the snare of imperialist strategy,
which is aimed at destroying the bonds linking uscommon bonds-as well as destroying what we are aspiring for-good,
fraternal relationships.

22. At the heart of the contention between Chad and
Libya lies a boundary dispute. As we all know, boundary
disputes are mainly a legacy of the colonial era and as
such are widespread throughout Africa, Asia and Latin
America. They are numerous and, unfortunately, have
often caused wars. Our own national experience in the
subregion calied the Horn of Africa is an extreme case of
expansionism and non-acceptance of the existing boundaries which resulted in wars of aggression and untold
suffering.
23. On balance, however, we are gratified, indeed
encouraged, to observe that most of the African, Asian
and Latin American States have resolved or contained
their boundary disputes through the evolution of rational
and mutually acceptable approaches either bilaterally or
through regional arrangements. This is a trend which
must be upheld and strengthened, There have been few if
any instances in which public debates such as the one
held by the Council on this item on 22 March [2429th
meeting], or even this one today, have contributed to the
resolution of such disputes. We therefore urge the
members of the Council and all others concerned not to
prolong the present debate.

17. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
18. Mr, IBRAHIM
(Ethiopia): Sir, first of all I should
Iike, on behalf of my delegation and on my own behalf,
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency for the month of March. With your vast experience, ability and diplomatic skill, we are certain that
you will guide the work of the Council to the satisfaction
of all.

24. We understand the concerns of Chad and commend
it for its faith in the United Nations, demonstrated by its
request for a meeting of the Council; but we should also
not lose sight of the complementary and important role
played by the OAU, specifically in its efforts to resolve
the very question now before the Council. The principles
of the inviolability of State frontiers and respect for the
territorial integrity of States are universally accepted
international norms embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations and explicitly reaffirmed in the regional
instrument, the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity. Moreover, they are basic tenets of the Movement

l9. I should also like to pay a well-deserved tribute to
your predecessor, Mr. Troyanovsky, the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, for the brilliant manner in which he presided over the Council’s
proceedings during the month of February.
3

29. We are concerned because this kind of dispute
results only in the erosion of the unity of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and strengthens the aspiration
of the imperialists to divide the third world. We are also
concerned because the OAU today more than ever needs
unity in its ranks, and we believe that all its members
must spare no effort to strengthen that regional body,
which, because of its universal nature, constitutes a
model of what some of us would like to have in our own
regions, particularIy when continental Powers that do
not have the same problems or share the same aspirations do not participate in their deliberations.

of Non-Aligned Countries. We emphasize these facts if
only to show that there is no dispute over the principles
involved.
25. The fact that the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU, meeting in its first session at
Cairo in July 1964, solemnly declared, in resolution
AHG/Res.l6
(I) [S/15649, annex Xlrj, that all member
States pledge to respect the borders existing on the
achievement of national independence is of the utmost
importance in the search for a solution of the dispute
between Chad and Libya. Neither the members of the
Council nor the parties to the dispute can fail to recognize the full weight and importance of this African principle, which provides the key to solution of the present
problem.

30. We have considered the complaint submitted by
Chad. We have tried to keep up to date on the events,
and we have calmly examined the nature and details of
the matter in dispute. We believe that there are two fundamental aspects that deserve special attention. The first
is the alleged occupation of the territory of Chad by the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in the Aouzou Strip. In this
connection, purely juridical arguments have been put forward by both sides, and we believe that basically this is a
problem in which this body does not really have a substantive role to play. The second aspect concerns “the
repeated acts of aggression” that Libya has allegedly perpetrated against Chad, according to the letter from the
representative of Chad requesting the convening of the
Council. In this connection, we have conducted some
research on the basis of the means available to us, and if
we are to be candid we must say that it has not been
possible for my delegation to establish with certainty the
existence of repeated acts of aggression or even threats of
aggression.

26. It is also a fact that the OAU has been and continues to be seized of this question. Actually, the question
of Chad is regarded by many as a test case for the OAU.
We believe that the OAU has not been afforded the
opportunity to exhaust the possibilities open to it in its
search for a resolution of the problem. The question of
the national unity and territorial integrity of Chad is also
on the agenda of the next session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the OAU, which is
scheduled to take place soon. In our view, both the
Council and the parties concerned have a duty to protect
and enhance the complementary role of that African
organization in matters which are primarily African both
in origin and in substance.
27. The Charter of the United Nations itself encourages
this view. Article 33, paragraph 1, provides that:

31. There is no evidence that the present situation on
the border between Chad and Libya now poses or might
pose any danger of confrontation.

“The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall, first of all, seek a
solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of
their own choice,”

32. Africa, like our Latin America, does not need confrontations or disputes. Its peoples have suffered centuries of poverty, plunder and exploitation, Today, as in
the past, it is necessary to struggle to overcome the barriers that keep us in ignorance, misery and underdevelopment.

We therefore urge the parties to the issue at hand to
exercise maximum restraint and to avail themselves of all
peaceful means and in particular to give their regional
organization, the OAU, a chance to exhaust its possibilities and finalize the efforts it has undertaken in this respect. Meanwhile, we wish to express the hope that the
Council will exercise maximum caution in the discharge
of the responsibility entrusted to it and that it will make
use of the occasion to demonstrate its confidence in and
respect for the OAU by acting on the basis of Article 33,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations, which
enjoins the Council to call upon the parties to settle their
disputes by such means,

33. We believe that renewing bilateral contacts, as well
as reactivating and giving new impetus to existing
machinery that has already been used in the past, could
lead to the definitive solution of the differences that
might exist and, in this manner, could avoid exacerbating
the situation that might otherwise lead to a truly dangerous state of affairs.
34. The moment at which this agenda item has come
before the Council is a particularly sensitive one. The
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has been the subject of a continuous, sustained and perWent campaign of aggression on
the part of the ‘United States within the framework of its
violent and warlike imperialist strategy against free, revolutionary and progressive peoples. What the United
States has done to the Libyans is to make them the
targets of their attacks in the economic, political and

28.

Mr. CHAMORRO
MORA (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, as a non-aligned coun-

try, Nicaragua deeply regrets that two non-aligned
countries find themselves at opposite ends of the matter
now before the Council.
4

military fields. Moreover, cynically, it has disparaged the
leaders of the Libyan revolution.
35, The Reagan Administration’s
order to the North
American petroleum companies to cease operations in
Libya, the aggression of August 198 1 in the Gulf of Sidra
against Libyan airplanes, the dispatch of the aircraftcarrier Nimitz to the Gulf area and the sending of
AWACS aircraft to neighbouring countries to spy on
Libyan territory, the allegation of acts of aggression
against neighbouring countries and the perverse story of
an alleged assassination attempt against President Reagan with the support of the Libyan leaders-all of these
things are to be viewed within the framework of the strategy of imperialism.
36, In the view of my delegation, the present situation,
despite the will of those responsible, could be part of that
same pattern and be for the benefit of those same
interests.
37. The constant acts of conspiracy by the United
States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) directed against
vanguard forces should not be made more fruitful
because of our differences.

43, I wish I were wrong, but, on the other hand, if we
find in our deliberations and common endeavour some
elements of truth, in my delegation’s view, we should all
then be sorry to see that a meeting of the Council has
been requested in order to serve a purpose slightly different from the objective which is openly expressed. Manipulation of the Council should not be tolerated under any
circumstances.
44. The present situation in Chad is no different from
what it was last month or two months ago, No one can
deny the existence of rather perennial problems in the
area, The Libyan contention as to the occupation of
some Libyan territory by Chad is not something new.
Political differences between the two countries have not
been escalated so significantly as to make the call for a
meeting of the Council particularly reasonable.
45. My brief experience in the United Nations tells me
that a meeting of the Council is usually due to some very
important and urgent events, not simply to perennial political problems or border differences, which cannot be
settled in a meeting of the Council anyway. Otherwise,
the Council would be meeting permanently
about
Palestine.

38. We are pleased with the willingness of both sides to
resolve their differences by peaceful means, and we know
that those intentions are sincere, Nicaragua, which
enjoys the friendship of the people and Government of
Libya, far from feeling that Libya poses a threat to the
peace and security of the area or that it may be a danger
to the stability of the region, believes that it is Libya’s
own stability and security that are constantly being jeopardized by imperialist aggression, and we do not hesitate to express once again our full solidarity with it.

46. All of us know of much more serious political and
military developments in parts of the world in the face of
which the Council maintained its patience, tolerance and
self-restraint, And to see all of a suddent the convening
of the Council to debate some perennial, routine problems demonstrates that something more than the professed objectives has been intended. That is the theme of
my delegation’s statement this afternoon, and I hope that
my contribution will be helpful and effective.

39. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, I invite him to take
a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

47. The Washington Post of the 18 February informs us
that the United States intended to increase its aid to
some countries which have happened to have rather cold
relations with Libya, among them Egypt, for instance,
and the Sudan.

40. Mr. RAJAIE-KHORASSANI
(Islamic Republic of
Iran): I take refuge in God from Satan the Outcast, in the
name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
“And soon will the injust aggressors know what vicissitudes their affairs shall take.“’
41. My delegation has been following the Council’s
debates very attentively. I have not yet found myself fully
convinced of the absolute necessity for convening the
Council.
42. From the procedural point of view, everthing is perfect, Some Member States have insisted that at least a
debate on the problem of Chad, as defined in the agenda
item under consideration, is necessary or may be helpful;
hence the meeting of the Council. It is not really the
procedural aspect which is of particular concern to my
delegation. It is, rather, the actual substance of the matter which, if I am allowed to say so, with all respect
sounds unrealistic or may be very artificial and
superficial.

48. The WaN Street Journal of 18 February informs us
of an interview by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Sudan in which he proclaimed the readiness of his country to go to war against Libya.
49. Mr. Vernon Walters, a former senior official of the
CIA, had been in the area on 18 February, according to
The Wail Street Journal.
50. In an article in The New York Times of 28 February,
entitled “Chad Senses Menacing Libya Shadow”, we
read the following:
“The editorial noted that Mr. Habrc, in a recent
visit to Khartoum to confer with President Jaafar
Nimeiri of the Sudan, had made it clear that Chad and
the Sudan were prepared to fight Colonel Qaddafi.”
51. We also remember very well the presence of the
airborne warning and control system aeroplanes

57. We also strongly support all liberation movements,
in particular those in Africa. We believe that freedom
and independence belong primarily to, and must be
enjoyed by, the oppressed masses and only through them
by their representative Governments, and not the
reverse.

(AWACS) and the Sixth fleet, which is a pretty powerful
combination,
and some “commodites”
of the same
nature and use in the area, in particular around Libyan
waters.
5’2. But in spite of all that, we observe that a case has
been brought here against Libya. Let us therefore pray
that some good permanent members of the Council have
not been using the entire international body in order to
divert international attention from a threat or plot that
probably is being skilfully cooked up against the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya.

58. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has also been accused
of intending to seek an Islamic Government for the
people of Chad. As a Muslim representing the Islamic
Republic of Iran, I cordially congratulate the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya for this praiseworthy intention.

53. If my prayers come true, there are still further good
reasons for those who are behind the scenes of the entire
orchestra, They want deliberately to undermine and destroy the position of Libya in the OAU. They desire also
to see the OAU weakened and, in fact, broken down.
Some are also trying to find excuses and justification in
order to increase military aid, even selling more AWACS
and more sophisticated aeroplanes, which some poor
third-world countries would be ostentatiously happy to
posses. Further shipments of arms to the area need additional excuses, and what would be better than a very
important Council meeting for convincing some permanent members that the situation is awfully dangerous in
that part of the world?

59. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ghana. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
60. Mr. HAYFORD (Ghana): Since my delegation had
the opportunity only two days ago to express its pleasure
at seeing you presiding over the Council, Sir, I will
simply join with the many other delegations which, at the
end of your tenure as President, have congratulated you
warmly on your brilliant stewardship.
61. Ghana speaks on this issue with a sense of regret
that a matter involving two sister African countries-the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, with which my country has
very warm ties of friendship and co-operation, and
Chad, a sister country member of the OAU and of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries-should
be an
issue before the Council at this time.

54. My delegation is aware of the blatant and open
support of the French Government. In my delegation’s
view, the French Government’s support is rather signiticant, We therefore invite the attention of the Council to
an important historical fact, which is that in all agreements concerning Chad and its neighbouring countries,
including the Cairo and Lagos accords, both of which
were signed by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and President Habre, who was then Prime Minister, it was explicitly stressed that France must leave the area fully and
completely. Moreover, under the present economic circumstances, France probably also needs to deliver some
of those “peaceful” Exocet missiles to maintain “international peace .and security” in the area. For these and
other reasons, the entire political drama, in which even
the Security Council of the United Nations has been
manipulated, thanks to the presence of imperialism and
its lackeys in the area, is taking place, and therefore the
Council meeting must have been very necessary.

62. Our regret stems from Ghana’s long-standing conviction that African problems must of necessity have
African solutions, because regional arrangements have
the best chance of success in such matters. Moreover,
there are African modalities for addressing disputes
between sister African countries within the framework of
the OAU.
63. The dispute between Chad and Libya concerning
the Aouzou Strip is of long standing, and it is well known
that the OAU is fully seized of the matter, Ghana would
therefore support the many delegations which have proposed that the problem be left within the OAU for settlement. In this context, it would be appropriate for the
Council to refer the issue, through the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, back to the OAU for further
attention.

55. In my delegation’s view, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is not a danger to Chad or to any other country in
the area. The two countries can solve their differences
peacefully. It is the master-mind of imperialism which is
the greatest danger to all of us.

64. As has been pointed out by numerous previous
speakers, the dispute under consideration here will be a
major subject at the forthcoming session of the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, to he.
held at .Addis Ababa in June. It would therefore be
appropriate to allow these regional arrangements to continue efforts for achieving an equitable settlement of the
dispute.

56. As for the position of my Government in regard to
the substance of the matter, we fully support the position
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. The Jamahiriya is a
revolutionary country; the Government of Libya is working hard and the Libyan people fully support their
Government and regime. If others do not enjoy this privilege and do not feel immune from their dissident masses,
then they should not blame Libya for that.

65. In conclusion, Ghana would like to reaffirm its
commitment
to and belief in the peaceful settlement of
disputes between States and the fullest use of regional
6

organizations such as the OAU in the resolution ofproblems between neighbouring countries.

We do co-operate with Italy as a neighbouring country in
the Mediterranean, but we cannot accept trusteeship
from any party or circle.

66. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, on whom I now call.
67. Mr. TREIKI

(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

74. I believe that the representative of France will allow
me to state Chad’s view of French colonialism there. I
did not make it up, This is derived from Chadian documents. The Lagos Accord on National Reconciliation in
Chad of 18 August 1979 [S/14378, annex+-and
I shall
read from the French text, although I am not well versed
in French because I was not subjected to French
colonialism-states
the following in paragraph 7:

(interpreta-

tionjiwm Arabic): Mr. President, on behalf of my country

and on my own behalf, I wish to express our gratitude
and appreciation to you for the excellent manner in
which you have guided the Council’s work during the
past few days, as well as for your objectivity.

“The Chadian Parties unanimously recognized that
the continued presence of French troops in Chad is an
impediment to finding a peaceful reconciliation and
solution to the Chadian problems. The Chadians
therefore agreed that the Transitional National Union
Government when formed shall effect the withdrawal
of the French troops.“*

68. I believe that we have now uncovered the conspiracy that has been engineered against the Council, the
same sort of conspiracy that had been engineered against
my country. Those who have disregarded the Council
and encouraged the aggressors to disregard United
Nations resolutions are encouraging them also to persist
in their occupation of Namibia, Palestine and Lebanon. I
refer to those who wish to put an end to the role of the
United Nations, particularly that of the Security Council.
They have rejected a United Nations role in Lebanon,
but have unilaterally sent their troops there in disregard
of the international
forces in Lebanon. They have
mocked the Security Council and the United Nations.
We see what is published in today’s issue of The New
York Times about the United Nations and the Council.

[The speaker continued in French.]

75. And by whom was that accord signed? It was signed
by, among others: Abdoulaye Adam Dana, of the First
Volcan Army; Fatcho Balam, of the National Democratic Union; Mahamat Abba Said, of the First People’s
Army; Acyl Ahmed, of the Revolutionary Democratic
Council; Moussa Medela, of the West Armed Forces;
Aboubakar Abdel Rahane, of the Popular Movement of
the Liberation of Chad; and Hissein HabrC, of the Armed
Forces of the North-yes, his signature is there.

69. This conspiracy has turned into a farce, unveiled by
the forces of good and the progressive forces within the
Council,

76.

70. During the past few days, pressures have been
exerted, threats made, ambassadors summoned
to
Washington
and pressures brought to bear against
States. Unfortunately, this has taken place even in Paris.
I say that most regrettably because we are linked by good
bonds of co-operation with France,

So that is what the Chadians think of France.

[The speaker resumed in Arabic.]

77. I wish now to quote from a joint declaration issued
on 27 May 1980 at Lagos. In its fourth paragraph, that
declaration states:

71. But, as The Christian Science Monitor has stated,

“We denounce the presence of French troops in
Chad and call for their immediate withdrawal and
their replacement by African troops. We denounce
French military intervention in Chad with the aim of
dividing that country.”

the United States has been able to win what are called
francophone countries and keep them away from
France. Probably-and
I refer here to what we have
already rejected-one should repeat that Africa is not an
object to be divided among the imperialists. The time of
imperialism and spheres of influence has ended.

78. Another document was signed by the following
representatives of neighbouring countries of Chad:
Sadou Daoudou, Minister of State for the Armed Forces
of Cameroon; the Vice-Premier of what was then the
Central African Empire; Ali Treiki of Libya; Moumouni
Djermakoye
of Niger; Yussuf Mukhtal,
Sudanese
Ambassador in Lagos; and Major-General Shaikhu fro
Ado, Vice-President of Nigeria. That declaration reveals
what the neighbouring countries think of the situation in
Chad:

72. Today I listened very carefully to what the representative of France said [2428th meeting]. We heard that
France, a previous colonizer of Africa, still had a keen
interest in Africa, An interest in Africa? Well, to be more
exact, in uranium, manganese and economic colonialism,
The representative of France said that France does have
a responsibility and a role-a role that is embodied in
interference in central Africa, “Operation Barracuda”,
an attempt at returning to Africa through the window
after having been expelled through the door.

“After considering the complex situation in Chad,
we note the continued intervention by foreign French
troops in Chad, which could internationalize
and

73. We Libyans are linked by bonds of friendship and
co-operation with Italy, but we reject the notion that
Italy should have a role or responsibility in our country.

* Quoted in French by the speaker.

7

render complex an internal problem
ble to solution.”

84. France colonized southern Libya after the war and
the United Kingdom colonized the northern part. France
refused to withdraw from Libya until the conclusion of
an agreement permitting it to take parts of Libya and
annex them to what it used to call its French African
territories,

which is amena-

79. That is what France gave Chad. It also gave Chad a
civil war in which the French army interfered for about
seven years against FROLINAT
[Natibnal Liberation
Front of ChanJ in northern Chad. Then France was
forced to withdraw, When Nigeria sent troops to N’Djamena, France turned over N’Djamena airport to Hissein
HabrC, who besieged the Nigerian troops, which Nigeria
was then forced to withdraw.

85. The

Laval-Mussolini
treaty (Treaty of Rome)
annex VI., in fact, was agreed to by the
French Parliament, but, according to France, it became
null because instruments of ratification
were not
exchanged. but the agreement between Ben Halim and
France, to which the Libyan Parliament refused to
agree -that agreement, they claim, is in force, Such is the
logic that is being used,
[S/15649,

80. It is against that background that we must assess
the objectivity of what was stated by the representative of
the French Republic, a country which, I wish to underscore, is linked with my country by ties of close cooperation.

86. Throughout the Ottoman period, and the Karamanli period before it, and throughout the Italian period,
France-and I mention France because of French Equatorial Africa-had
no sovereignty whatsoever over the
Aouzou Strip.

81. He spoke of agreements based on “historical
responsibility”: Africa, of course, is incompetent; it has
not come of age, so France has to be the trustee for
African and other colonial countries. In short, he lectured us. He referred to conventions that were signed,
but by whom? By France and some other colonialist
countries intent upon dividing up Africa. I would mention the agreement of 1885, which sought to divide the
African continent and to parcel out African territory. Is
there another continent with such a mosaic-like character
resulting from that sort of divisions? They even divided
up certain peoples. France served Algeria pretty well, to
be sure: it killed over a million Algerians, which speaks
very well indeed of France. We think that our friend
France should forget about the past and start with a
clean slate of co-operation, not imperialism.
We had
hoped that at least the Socialist Party of France would
take such a position, different from that of past
governments.

87. I have plenty to say concerning the legal aspect and
we have many documents to substantiate that. We can
submit them, and we shall do so in order that they can be
distributed as official documents of the Council. But we
do not think that one of the tasks of the Council is to
consider legal issues, or controversies over legal interpretations, or over agreements. Libya inherited its territory
from Italian colonialism-it
respects the territorial integrity of other countries-and it signed the Cairo convention. But I say that we paid an extremely high price for
winning our freedom, We are not at all ready to give up
that freedom or even one inch of our territory. Libya
sacrificed more than 1 million martyrs-that
is more
than half the population of Libya-between
1911 and
1932. During that period, we were fighting Fascist Italian
imperialism. If some are ready to sell their sovereignty to
the previous colonizer and give him bases, as well as the
economy of the country and other facilities, Libya will
not belong to those. Furthermore, as the leader of our
revolution mentioned in Benghazi in 1973, at a liberation
movement conference, Libya considers its independence
incomplete unless the rest of the African continent is
liberated. Liberation here is not political liberation,
because independence is not a flag; it is not a particuiar
president, but independence in the full sense of the word.

82. Libya was a part of the Ottoman Empire. At that
time, there was no Chad, no Niger; there were French
colonies. France wanted to engulf the larger part of the
weak Ottoman Empire, including Libya; it did not want
to create such countries as Chad or Niger or any other
African countries. Those countries, in the final analysis,
are Libya’s sister countries. France wanted to exploit
that weak old empire, and Italy, too, had aspirations to
colonize Libya. It was not in Libya’s interest that Italy
interfered with France; it was rather to halt French
expansion so that it could have its share in the region,
and that is just what happened. Then came the competition between the Italian and the French colonizers for the
spoils. France wanted a portion of Libya to be annexed
to French Equatorial Africa rather than Chad. Mussolini
wanted to preserve nostra terra, the Italian expression
including Libya as part and parcel of Italy.

88. A few days ago, while you, Sir, were presiding over
the proceedings of the Council, scores of States made
statements vis-d-vis the American imperialist intervention against Nicaragua. The whole world denounced that
intervention. The whole world also denounced the American imperialist intervention against Libya. This is the
role of the Security Council. The Council, I wish to
stress, cannot be turned into a stage to be used by the big
imperialist Powers at their whim. They reject its resolutions concerning Palestine, southern Lebanon and
Namibia. They want to manipulate the Council as a tool
to cause dissent among third-world countries and their
neighbours.

83. I challenge the representative of France to state
before the Council that after the Second World War,
when French troops arrived in southern Libya, Aouzou
was part of Chad. The Council may summon the representative of Italy, who is present here,
8

*89. We have lived with Chad for thousands of years
and shall continue to do so. As the proverb says, you can
divorce your wife, but you can never divorce your neighbour. We are closer to each other than we are to France,
I believe; we are brothers, unless France is an African
State. We in Africa will not be deceived by what has been
stated by French imperialism: that Africa is divided into
white Africa and black Africa. There are no blacks or
whites in Africa: we are all Africans defending our cause.
We are all brothers. We shall not allow the seeds of
dissension to be sown among our ranks.

by the OAU; we shall work towards achievement of unity
and peace in Chad, and we shall maintain the best relations possible with the fraternal people of Chad, with
whom Libya has many agreements of co-operation and
for whom Libya sacrificed the blood of its sons in order
to put an end to the civil war in Chad,
95. Thank you for your patience. I believe that you all,
through an awareness of your responsibilities, have
deprived the colonizers-both
new and old-of
an
opportunity to use the Council as an instrument for their
purposes and designs.

90. Certain people have been impelled under pressure
to say certain things that I am not going to comment on,
but before concluding I wish to repeat to the Council
what President Omar Bongo of Gabon said at the most
recent session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the OAU, held at Nairobi:

96. In the next few days the Council will be asked to
take up the question of Israel’s occupation of Arab territories, the killing of Arab women, the poisoning of Arab
schoolgirls and the killing of children-a
l7-year-old
martyr was killed today. That is the responsibility of the
Council. Colonialism, both old and new, wants to lead
the Council into new mazes for the benefit of
colonialism.

“Africa must thank Libya for what it has done in
Chad. We have all failed to provide assistance to
Chad, but Libya is the only African country that was
able to do SO.I call on you to thank Libya and for the
continuation of the Libyan forces to help the people of
Chad.”

97, The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
France, who has asked to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
98. Mr, LOUET (France) (interpretation from French):
I shall try to be brief. First of all I should like to refer to a
rather extraordinary sentence in the statement just made
by Mr. Treiki. He told us-in fact he devoted about a
third of his statement to presenting “Chad’s view” [para.
74. And that is what he shamelessly strove to do for 10
minutes.

91. Former OAU Chairman Siaka Stevens had this to
say:
“We are proud of what Libya has done and of the
help it has provided to a neighbouring countryChad.”
92, Libya does not usurp the resources of Africa,
neither manganese, nor uranium, not even phosphate.
Libya provides support. One hundred companies that
have Libyan capital work in Africa to help Africa for its
benefit. That is our duty. Those who fish in troubled
waters cannot succeed. We have to counter their designs,

99. Chad is seated at this table. It has just made a complaint against Libya, and Libya, without embarrassment,
without shame, explains to us the supposedly true views
of Chad, and, having done that, talks of colonialism’s
intervention in internal affairs. Well, Sir, you can be the
judge of this, and I don’t think I have much to add on
this point.

93, In conclusion, I wish to express the gratitude of my
country for the forces of good within and outside the
Council that have realized the gravity of the conspiracy
and of this scenario meant to divert Africa’s attention.
They are trying to divide the continent; they are trying to
prevent the continent from meeting as one. They spoke
as if they had succeeded in that attempt, but Africa, in
the final analysis, will emerge victorious, The South African rCgime will come to an end. The economic colonization of Africa will come to an end, Uranium cannot
continue to be turned into electricity to light the Elyste
Palace and the Champs ElysCes, while Africa is deprived
of light, because Africa needs light and electricity.

100. The representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
referred to my statement of this morning [242&h meeling], in which I am supposed to have talked about conventions and historical responsibility. I do not think I
said anything of the kind, and I very much regret that. I
did not, and I should have, and I should like to thank
him for having reminded me of my duty.
101, I was a little brief this morning in presenting the
French view. With the Council’s permission, I should
like to expand a little on what I said this morning.
iO2. The basic principles upon which the solutions we
desire should be based are those enunciated by the OAU
on the inviolability
of the frontiers that existed at the
time of independence, respect for the territorial integrity
of States and non-intervention in the internal affairs of
another State.

94, I wish now to confirm that the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is always ready to co-operate fully with any African sister country to solve whatever dispute there may be
between us, or between any two African countries. We
shall never give up, even if we have to sacrifice the last
Libyan in defence of our territory and our honour, whatever the result may be and whatever the reasons may be.
We shall continue to support fraternal Chad within the
framework of its legitimate Government, as recognized

103. In this case, there is a frontier dispute between
Chad and Libya with regard to the Aouzou Strip. As far
9

came to power. I should simply like to refer the representative of Benin to the extremely relevant developments
mentioned with regard to the notion of legitimacy by my
dear brother and colleague the representative of the
Revolutionary
People’s Republic of Guinea.

as France is concerned, the situation with regard to the
existing frontier between the two States at the time of the
independence of Chad is very clear. The frontier between
the two countries was indeed defined by a series of juridical acts. These were, successively, the France-British
Declaration of 21 March 1899 and the France-British
Convention of 8 September 1919, interpreting that declaration [S/15649, annexes II and Vj, and the exchange of
letters between the French and Italian Governments of
17 December [ibid., annex VIII] and 25 December 1938.
The Treaty of Friendship and Good-Neighbourliness
between the French Republic and the United Kingdom
of Libya of 10 August 1955 [ibid., annex 4 refers to the
frontier line governed by the France-British Convention
of 8 September 1919. That frontier is precisely that which
France bequeathed to Chad in 1960, at the time of its
independence.

109. We are well aware that Benin is unfortunately contributing to the destabilizing efforts undertaken by Libya
against Chad, but we refuse to consider that aspect of the
problem, which is very far from the real subject.
110. We agree with those who believe that the problem
raised by Chad is of a juridical nature. Thus, we wonder
why the Council should not shoulder its responsibilities
and refer the parties to the International Court of Justice
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. Why is Libya frightened of going
to the Court if it is so sure of its right, as indicated by the
statement of its representative? He himself recognizes the
Laval-Mussolini
treaty [S/15649, annex VIrJ is void and
he has other documents to be circulated as documents of
the Council, After all, Chad has published its own documents for a week now.

104. What I have just recalled is what the representative of France said on 17 February 1978, during informal
consultations of the Council. I have done so to demonstrate to the Council, and to help Mr. Treiki understand,
that France’s position has not changed and that, whatever
the circumstances, it remains absolutely unchanged.
There is no reason for it to change and it has not
changed.

111. I think that the members of the Council are not
being taken in by this untruth. By its statement Libya
showed that it is determined to perpetuate its military
occupation of part of Chad’s territory against all international rules.

105. Finally, I should like to make a third point. The
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
has
reminded us that it is not the role of the Council to deal
with the juridical aspects of a problem. That did not
prevent him from expatiating on the juridical arguments
that support his case, and I have no complaint about that
because I have just done exactly the same thing myself.
But there is a juridical conflict between two countries. It
seems to be a very clear-cut dispute; we have two letters,
one from Chad and the other from Libya, which are very
clear in this respect. Chad tells us that Libya has been “in
military occupation of that part of Chad territory commonly known as the ‘AOLJZOU Strip’,” [see S/1.5643], and
Libya states that the “AOUZOU Sector is an integral part of
Libyan territory” [see S/15645]. In circumstances such as
these, it would appear that if Libya were really
concerned to settle the clear-cut dispute existing between
it and Chad it should, as it has done in other cases, take
the matter to the International Court of Justice.

112. I will let the Council be the judge, and I should
like officially to draw the attention of the international
community to the conduct of one of the States Members
of the United Nations that is supposed to respect the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
113. In these circumstances, there are two comments
that must be made at the conclusion of this debate. First,
everyone has unreservedly recognized that there does
exist a frontier dispute between Chad and Libya, a dispute whose prolongation is liable to jeopardize peace in
the region and, hence, international peace and security at
large, whether or not the representative of Syria, who
asserted that there was no dispute, likes it-and what
proof he was basing himself on I do not know.
114. The statement of the representative of France, the
former colonial Power, this morning [242&h meeting] is
clear as to the ownership of what is known as the Aouzou Strip. It belongs to the Republic of Chad.

106. That was the purport of the appeal we addressed to
the two delegations this morning, and which I now
repeat.
107. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
Chad, who has asked to speak in exercise of his right of
repiy.

115, Secondly, all those who have spoken have
appealed to the parties to the controversy to settle it by
appropriate peaceful means, both bilaterally and regionally. This final comment should enable the Council more
easily to understand the situation by tracing all the futile
efforts that have been employed heretofore, both bilaterally and regionally, to find a peaceful solution to this
distressing situation.

108. Mr. BARMA (Chad) (interpretation from French):
I really do not wish to exercise the right of reply regarding any particular statement made this morning or this
afternoon in the Council, except to point out for the
benefit of the representative of Benin that we have no
lesson to learn from anyone in Africa-anyone,
least of
all the representative of Benin-with
regard to legitimacy, for we all know how the present Benin regime

116. The Council will recall that in the course of his
statement on 22 March, Mr. Idriss Miskine, Minister for
10

Foreign Affairs and Co-operation
following:

of Chad, stated the

124. The Chad side proved that the exchange of instruments of ratification had not taken place and that, therefore, that treaty was legally non-existent. Libya
maintained its position and went so far as to accuse Chad
of harbouring annexationist claims on its territory.

“That is why, inspired by our desire to resolve the
problem through peaceful channels, Chad is today
addressing the Council in order to obtain its assistance
in recovering its territorial integrity so that it may live
in peace within the borders it inherited from colonization. It is requesting that Libya withdraw completely from the territory of Chad.” [2419th meeting,
pura. 35.3

125. The Libyan side declared that that was “an insult
to the Libyan revolution” and accused Chad of ascribing
imperialist designs to it. It stated that it would not tolerate such an insult and demanded a public retraction by
Chad.

117. It was this determination to settle by peaceful
means the problem of the military occupation of Tibesti
by Libya that prompted Chad to seek a solution by both
bilateral and regional means,

126. No compromise took place and it was agreed that
a joint technical commission should be established to
study the problem and propose solutions. As we shall see
later, that commission met at N’Djamena. The two delegations went their separate ways without issuing a transcript or a communique. The Libyan delegation blocked
the discussions because it did not want some of its statements to be recorded in a transcript that might bring out
some of its contradictions.

118. Bilaterally, what happened? In August 1974, Mr,
Bruno Bohiadi, then Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Chad, and Mr. Mahamat Yakouma, Secretary of State of
the Presidency for Internal Affairs, met at Tripoli. During their stay in the Libyan capital, they met the Libyan
Minister of Information and Acting Minister for Foreign
Affairs, the Minister for Economic Affairs and the Prime
Minister. In the course of their talks, the delegations of
Chad and Libya referred to the problem of Libya’s occupation of Tibesti.

127. The Joint Technical Commission established on
the occasion of the mission of the Vice-President of the
Higher Military Council to Tripoli met. as scheduled
from 23 to 27 June 1977 at N’Djamena. The Libyan
delegation was headed by Mr. Ahmad Elatrach, Deputy
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs in the Secretariat
of State for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation. There was
only one item on the agenda of the Joint Technical Commission: “Search for ways and means of improving COoperation between Chad and Libya”. In fact, the
essential issue was the problem of the occupation of
Tibesti by Libya.

119. The Libyan side stated that it was not the Libyan
army but rather the Libyan police that was in Aouzou to
ensure the security of the peoples of both countries.
120. The Chadian side asserted that there was no question that a military detachment was in Aouzou and that
under no circumstances could Libya unilaterally carry
out operations for the maintenance of order in that part
of Chadian territory.

128. The Libyan side immediately stated at the meetings that there was no frontier problem between Chad
and Libya and that, even if there was, it would not prevent the implementation of co-operation agreements. It
asserted that Libya’s present borders were in conformity
with international agreements, in particular the LavalMussolini treaty of 1935.

121. In the course of these talks, the Chadian delegation pointed out that the Libyan side showed a clear
determination
to minimize the problem of the occupation of Tibesti in favour of questions relating to economic co-operation between the two countries.

129. The Chad side argued that, although the LavalMussolini treaty had been signed by France and Italy,
there had never been any exchange of instruments of
ratification, so that the agreement hd never existed
legally. The legal non-existence of the 1935 treaty was
particularly obvious from the fact that when, in 1955,
France and the United Kingdom of Libya signed the
Treaty of Friendship and Good-Neighbourliness
[S/
156&( annex 4, they had not deemed it necessary to
mention the Laval-Mussolini treaty in the list of international agreements relating to the frontiers between the
territories of Tunisia, Algeria, French West Africa and
French Equatorial Africa, of which Chad was an organic
part before its accession to independence.

122. From 29 July to 5 August 1976, Colonel Mamari
Djime Ngakinar,
at that time Vice-President of the
Higher Military Council and Minister of State for Internal Affairs, went to Tripoli at the head of a large delegation to discuss officially the problem of the occupation of
Tibesti by Libya.
123. In the course of those discussions, the Libyan side
stated that there was no frontier problem between the
two neighbouring countries but that, if Chad considered
that a problem did exist, it was prepared to discuss the
matter. Libya produced two maps, including one in an
Oxford atlas of 1956, dating from the time of the
monarchy, which included the “Aouzou Strip” in Libyan
territory. The Chad delegation objected to Libya’s questioning of the border between the two countries and
stated that Libya’s claim was based only on the stillborn
Laval-Mussolini
treaty.

130. Paradoxically, the Libyan side stated that, between
1951 and 1969, Libya had not reaHy been free and that,
accordingly, all decisions had been imposed on it by
colonialism.
11

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of each State and
for its inalienable right to independent existence; and the
peaceful settlement of disputes by negotiation, mediation, conciliation or arbitration.

131. Are we to understand by this that all international
commitments contracted by Libya have been repudiated
en bloc? In that case, the very fact that Libya belongs to
the United Nations and to the OAU should be
reconsidered.

137. Paragraph 1 of the recommendation is of primary
importance in that it reaffirms resolution AHG/Res.l6
(I), adopted at Cairo on 21 July 1964, on the inviolability
of the frontiers inherited from the colonial Powers and
the fundamental principles of non-violation of sovereignty and respect for the territorial integrity of member
States.

132. In the face of the impasse reached in the negotiations at N’Djamena,
Chad proposed a draft general
agreement to govern all relations between the two countries. This was flatly rejected by Libya on the ground that
that text had very wide political implications and that it
preferred to refer it to the Tripoli authorities for instructions. Since those instructions never arrived, the two delegations parted, as on previous occasions, without
drawing up minutes or issuing a communique.

138. Paragraph 2 deals with the establishment of a subcommittee composed of jurists and cartographers to
study the problem of the frontier between Chad and
Libya in all its aspects. The Sub-Committee was to visit
the capitals of the parties to the dispute and also to proceed to the region under dispute in order to evaluate the
situation on the spot.

133, As we pointed out before, the Libyan delegation
has always refused to discuss frankly the substance of the
problem, that is to say, the occupation of Tibesti, and in
the course of the different meetings it always sought to
minimize the problem of the frontier and has always
clung to the idea of so-called co-operation with Chad.
The positions of the two parties were therefore irreconcilable. That was what was done bilaterally.

139. In paragraph 4 of the recommendation, the Committee appeals to Chad and Libya to refrain from taking
any action liable to impede the achievement of a peaceful
solution, In violation of that paragraph, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya refused, in mid-January 1978, to participate
in the meeting of the expert Sub-Committee. The SubCommittee was unable to carry out its work normally
because the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya did not provide the
OAU with any documentation in support of its claims to
Tibesti, which it occupies by force of arms in flagrant
violation of the Charter of the Organization of African
Unity and the relevant OAU resolutions.

134. Now let us take a look at what was done at the
OAU level, since certain delegations have stated, either
this morning or this afternoon, that the channels for
negotiation, conciliation and mediation offered within
the framework of the OAU have not been exhausted.
What are the facts?
135. After the failure of the N’Djamena meeting, Chad
decided to bring the matter before the fourteenth session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the OAU, held at Libreville in July 1977. On the initiative
of Mr. Omar Bongo, President of the Gabonese Republic
and at that time Chairman of the OAU, and adhoc Committee of six members-Algeria,
Gabon, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Senegal and the United Republic of Cameroon-was established2 to seek ways and means of solving this problem. The Committee, meeting at Libreville
from 10 to 12 August f977, without Libya, decided to
adopt a recommendation, the gist of which is as follows.

I40. Similarly, as everyone knows, the Security Council
had this matter before it in February 1978 [5’/125.53],
and we know what happened to this complaint of Chad
at that time.
141. We have tried to provide all this information to
the Council so that we shall not be told later that Chad
refused to negotiate under the auspices of the OAU or in
any other way whatsoever, We have embarked on direct
negotiations with Libya with no result. We submitted the
problem to the fourteenth session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held at
Libreville in July 1977, and there was no result, We
brought the matter before the Security Council in 1978
without any result.

136. The recommendation recalls, in its preamble, the
relevant resolutions adopted by the OAU to facilitate the
settlement of disputes between member States, in particular resolution AHG/Res. 16 (I), adopted at the first session
of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
OAU, held at Cairo in July 1964 [ibid., annexXDJ which
solemnly declares, inter alia, that “all member States
pledge themselves to respect the borders existing on their
achievement of national independence”, and resolution
AHGiRes.27
(II), adopted at the second session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
OAU, held at Accra in October 1965, in which the States
members of the OAU solemnly undertake to act in conformity with article III of the Charter of the Organization of African Unity.3 That article provides, inter ah’u,
for the sovereign equality of all member States; noninterference in the internal affairs of States; respect for

142. That is why, in the face of the persistent tension
between Chad and Libya born of the military occupation
of Tibesti by Libya, tension which poses a grave threat 10
peace and security in Africa and in the world at large,
Chad thought it necessary to address the Council, the
organ responsible under the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security, so that it can take the necessary measures t0
lessen tension in the region and recommend an appropriate solution to this dispute, the existence of which is
today clearly established.
12

143, The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative of
the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to speak in exercise of his
right of reply.

15” * wish t(t)confhl the foilowing. First Aouzou is
part and parcel of Libyan territory, in acco;dance with
the United Nations resolution on the independence of
Libya* We will MVer give up one inch of that territory
but we are fullY prepared to develop the best relation;
with the fraternal people of Chad,
SecOndly
I
emphasize-contrary to what the representative ’ of
HabrC haS said, and 1 am sorry to say it because that
delegation does not represent any legitimacy
at all in
accordance with the relevant resolution of the oAUthat 1 did not say the Lavai-Mussolini treaty wasnull but
that it existed and will continue to exist. That was the
clarification I wished to make before the Council.

144. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation from Arabic): In View of the lateness of the hour, I
will be brief. In the course of my statement, I asked the
representative of France in the Council to answer my
question: When the French troops arrived in southern
Libya, was the AOUZOU Strip part of Libya or part of
French Africa, as it was called at that time’?
145. I had a second question that I wished to put to
the delegation of France, a permanent member of the
Security Council and one of the founding Members of
the United Nations. I agree that the frontiers inherited
from the time of colonialism at the time of the achievement of independence should be respected. When
Libya acceded to independence, happily in accordance
with a United Nations resolution, and France being a
Member was the Aouzou Strip part of Libya or not? I
have here a United Nations map annexed to Libya’s
independence documents. But the representative of
France was evasive concerning an answer to these two
questions.

151. The PRESIDENT: The representative of France
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of the right
of reply. I call on him.
152. Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretationfram
French):
I do not wish to leave unanswered the two questions
addressedto me by the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
153. I thought I had answered in my earlier statement
by referring to the legal documents and conventions
which, since the very origin of the frontiers, delimited the
frontiers between Libya and Chad: the France-British
Declaration of 21 March 1899; the France-British Convention of 8 September 1919; the France-Italian
exchange of letters of 17 and 25 December 1938; and,
finally, the France-Libyan Treaty of 10 August 1955

146. Chad has boundaries inherited from the time of
colonialism and they should be respected. But Libya’s
boundaries, which also were inherited from the time of
imperialism, should not be respected.

[S/1.5649,annexesII, V, VIII and XJ.

147. What would the representative of France say if
one day we told him that Strasborrrg was not part of
French territory and that he would have to go before
the International
Court of Justice to prove that Strasbourg was a part of France? The French representative
wants us to go before the Court to prove that today AouZOU,
tomorrow Seubha, then Tripoli, and after that
Benghazi are Libyan territories and that the Court,
according to him, should issue an advisory opinion tO
that effect,

154. The reply to the question put to me is in the affirmative, Yes, the Aouzou Strip, at the time mentioned by
my Libyan colleague, was a part of Chad. That is the
French position. The Aouzou Strip has never been any
thing but a part of Chad.
155, I should like to add one last clarification: all the
documents in my Government’s possessiOn in connection with the delimitation of this frontier Were communicated not only to the Government of Chad but also to
the Government of Libya, which is therefore fully aware
of them.

148. The representative of France said that I spoke on
behalf of Chad; that is untrue, He sought to prove that
France, by virtue of its responsibility, was acting with
prudence. So I told him what the Chadians think of
France, according to documents, conventions and agreements signed by Chadians, including Hissein Habrt. This
is Hissein HabrC’s signature on the document that I have
in my hands.

156. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Benin
has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise 0ffh.e right
of reply. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

149. As regards what the representative of the First
Army said, I do not intend to answer him. I wish only to
say the following. Most of what he said concerning what
took place at the meetings is untrue, despite the fact that
the dates are correct. We met with Chad to consider its
claim that there was a problem with Libya. We are ready
to meet again with a legitimate Government of Chad, but
we will not meet with the representative of the First
Army at all.

157.

Mr. SOGLO

(Benin)

(interpretation

from I+wh):

The representativeof Chad, my friend Mr. krm& just
referred to my country
and said that it contributes to the
destabilization carried out in Africa by Libya. He did not
see fit to support that with facts. A wise man, it is said,
says nothing
that he cannot,prOVe. MY delegation cat!”
gorically rejects this gratuitous accusation which 1s
devoid of any foundation.
13

158. As will be recalled, after the Lagos accords, Benin
was ready to send its sons to fight so that peace, harmony
and reconciliation would be restored among the sons of
the Chadian peoples and Benin’s action throughout the
Iong history of Chad never departed from the lines set
out and decided on by the OAW as soon as the question
came before it.
159. If that contributes to destabilizing Africa, if trying
to achieve harmony for the people of Chad is contrib-

Litho

in United Nations,

New York

00300

uting to the destabilization of Africa, then we are proud
of that contribution.
The meeting rose at 7.55 p.m.
NOTE

’ The Holy

Koran,

XXVI:

221.

2A/32/310, annex II, decision AHG/Dec. 108 (XIV).
‘United Nations, Treatj Series, vol. 479, No. 6947.

60205-December

199th-2,050
