Vlll.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

tions shall be suspended in respect of the amount of
$1,496,703, which otherwise would have to be surrendered pursuant to those provisions, this amount to be entered into the account referred to in the operative part of
General Assembly resolution 33/13 E and held in suspense until a further decision is taken by the Assembly.
94th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

41/176.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors

The General Assembly,
Having considered the financia! reports and audited financia! statements for the period ended 31 December
1985 ofthe United Nations, 4 the United Nations Development Programme, 5 the United Nations Children's Fund, 6
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, 7 the United Nations Institute for Training and Research, 8 the voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, 9 the Fund of the United Nations Environment
Programme, 10 the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities, 11 the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation 12 and the United Nations Industrial
Development Fund, 13 the audit opinions of the Board of
Auditors 14 and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15
Concerned about the inadequate action taken by the executive heads of sorne of the organizations audited to
remedy the serious financia! management problems repeatedly identified by the Board of Auditors,
Also concerned about the frequently inadequate responses given by sorne of the executive heads to questions
raised by the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
Taking into consideration the views expressed by delegations during the debate in the Fifth Committee on this
item, 16 in particular those views in support of measures to
improve the efficiency, management and financial control
ofthe United Nations organizations and programmes concerned,

4 Official Record, of Ihe Genaal Assembly, Forty-fir.sl Session.
Supplemenl No. 5 (A/41/5 and Corr.1), vol. 1, sects. l and VI; vol. 11,
secls. I and VI; and vol. 111, sects. 1 and VI.
5 [bid., Supplemenl No. 5A (A/41/5/ Add.1 and Corr.1 ), sects. 1 and

VI.
6 !bid., Supplemenc No. 5B (A/41/5/Add.2 and Corr.1), part one,
secls. I and V.
1 [bid., Supp/ement No. 5C (A/41/5/ Add.3 and Corr.1 ), sects. 1 and
VI.
8 /bid., Suppleme111 No. 5D (A/41/5/ Add.4), sects. 1 and VI.
9 /bid., Suppleme111 No. SE (A/41/5/ Add.5), sect. IV.
IO /bid., Supplemenc No. 5F(A/41/5/Add.6), sects. 1 and V.
11 /bid., Supplement No. 5G (A/41/5/Add.7), sects. I and VI.
12 /bid., Suppleme111 No. 5H (A/41/5/ Add.8), sects. I and IV.
13 /bid., Supplement No. 51 (A/41/5/ Add.9), sects. I and V.
14 /bid., Supplemenc No. 5 (A/41/5 and Corr.1), vol. 1, sect. IV;
vol. 11, sect. IV; and vol. 111, sect. IV; ibid., Suppleme111 No. 5.4
(A/41/5/Add.l and Corr.1), sect. IV; /bid., Suppleme111 No. 5B
(A/41/5/ Add.2 and Corr. l ), part onc, sect. 111; /bid., Supplemenc
No. 5C(A/41/5/Add.3 and Corr.l), sect. IV; ibid., Supplemen1 No. 5D
(A/41/5/Add.4), sect. IV; ibid., Supplement No. 5E (A/41/5/Add.5),
sect.111; ibid., Supplement No. 5F (A/41/5/Add.6), sect. 111; ibid.,
Supplement lVo. 5G (A/41/5/ Add 7), ,ec·t. IV; ibid., Suppleme111 No. 5H
(A/41/5/Add.8),
sect. 111;
ami
ihid.,
Supplemenc
No. 51
(A/41/5/Add.9). sect. IV.
15 A/41/632.
16 See Officiul Record, of che General A ,semhly. fimy-jirsc Session.
F,jih Commillee, 41h to 81h meeting,.

233

1. Accepts the financial reports and audited financial
statements and the audit opinions of the Board of Auditors;
2. Endorses the comments and observations of the
Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions as contained in
their respective reports;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of United Nations organizations and programmes
concerned:
(a) To take without delay remedia! action within their
competence in response to the comments and observations
of the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, and to report to
the General Assembly and the governing bodies of these
organizations and programmes on ways of improving
budgetary and accounting control;
(b) To review interna! control procedures relating to
the benefits and allowances received by United Nations
staff members and to take the necessary measures to improve those procedures with a view to preventing waste,
fraud and abuse and to report thereon, through the Board
of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to the General Assembly at
its forty-second session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To take steps to improve the accuracy of United
Nations accounting information and the timeliness with
which it becomes available to the Headquarters ofthe Organization;
(b) To undertake an investigation ofthe Headquarters
catering and gift-shop operations and to report thereon,
through the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, to the
General Assembly at its forty-second session;
(e) To take the necessary steps to improve the financia!
management in the area of the current arrangements for
the provision of travel services;
(d) To submit to competitive bidding, upon its expiration, the contract for the maintenance and operation of
electrical equipment at Headquarters;
5. Recommends that ali future reports of the Board of
Auditors include separate sections which:
(a) Summarize recommendations for corrective action
to be taken by the organizations and programmes concerned, with an indication of relative urgency;
(b) Report on specific measures taken by the Secretary-General and executive heads of these organizations
and programmes to implement previous recommendations of the Board and comment on the efficacy of such
measures and the extent to which there are recurring
problems;
6. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to comment in its report on
the progress achieved by the Secretary-General and the
executive heads of organizations and programmes concerned in implementing previous recommendations of the
Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee;
7. Requests the Board of Auditors and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to cover in their reviews the areas relating to the adequacy
and efficiency of the financia! procedures and controls, the
accounting system and related administrative and management areas, in accordance with regulation 12.S of the
Financia! Regulatinn~ of the United Nations, and to

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

234

recommend measures, as appropriate, to strengthen financia) and management control procedures;
8. Also requests the Board of Auditors:
(a) To monitor progress on those aspects referred to in
paragraph 4 (a) above, relating to the accounting systems
ofthe United Nations and to comment thereon in its next
report to the General Assembly;
(b) To submit to the General Assembly a concise
document summarizing its principal findings and drawing
conclusions for remedia! action;
9. Further requests the Board of Auditors to study the
possibility of submitting reports on a biennial basis and to
report on this matter to the General Assembly;
10. Requests the governing bodies of ali organizations
subject to audits by the Board of Auditors of the United
Nations to review thoroughly at their regular sessions the
report ofthe Board of Auditors, the report ofthe Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,
the related comments made in the Fifth Committee and
the remedia! action planned or taken by the respective executive heads in response to the comments and observations ofthe Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee, as approved by the General Assembly;
11. Invites Governments that are represented on the
governing bodies of organizations and programmes for
which audited financia! statements have been considered
by the General Assembly to ensure that their representatives on those bodies give full consideration to the reports
of the Board of Auditors and the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions and the related
comments made in the Fifth Committee.
99th plenary meeting
5 December 1986
41/177.

the Advisory Board on Disarmament Studies for 1988 and
thereafter in the light of the prevailing situation.
99th plenary meeting
5 December 1986
B
RENEWAL OF THE MANDATE OF THE
COMMITTEE ON CONFERENCES

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 3351 (XXIX) of 18 December
1974, 32/72 of9 December 1977, 35/10Aof3 November
1980 and 38/32 B of 25 November 1983,
Considering the need for strengthening the Committee
on Conferences in order to enable it to fully discharge its
functions,
1. Decides to renew the mandate of the Committee on
Conferences for a one-year period from 1 January 1987;
2. Requests the President of the General Assembly,
after consultations with the chairmen of the regional
groups, to appoint twenty-two Member States, on the basis of an equitable geographical balance, to serve on the
Committee on Conferences for a one-year term beginning
on 1 January 1987;
3. Requests the Committee on Conferences, taking
into account the views expressed during the forty-first session of the General t\ssembly, to consider, as a matter of
priority, at its organizational and substantive sessions in
1987, the possibility of changing its terms of reference and
becoming a permanent intergovernmental body and to
submit recommendations thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-second session.
99th plenary meeting
5 December 1986

Pattern of conferences
A

e

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON CONFERENCES

The General Assemb/y,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences, 17
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report nf the
Committee on Conferences;
2. Approves the draft revised calendar of conferences
and meetings ofthe lJnited Nations for 1987 as submitted
by the Committee on Conferences; 18
3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make
adjustments in thc calendar of conferences and meetings
for 1987 that may become necessary as a result of action
and decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fortyfirst session;
4. Authorizes the Advisorv Board on Disarmament
Studies, on an exceptional basis, to meet during the second
part of September 1987;
5. Invites the Committee on Conferences to review at
its substantive session in 1987 the pattern of meetings of

IMPROVED UTILIZATION OF CONFERENCE-SERVICING
RESOURCES

The General Assembly,
Welcoming the improvement in the utilization of conference-servicing resources by a number of subsidiary organs
over the past few years,
Aware ofthe continuing need to ensure the optimum utilization of conference-servicing resources for the benefit of
ali who use them,
l. Invites the Committee on Conferences to maintain
its communications with United Nations organs, especially those which still utilize inadequately the conferenceservicing resources allocated to them, with a view to securing further improvements;
2. Adopts the guidelines for the dispatch of planning
missions in respect of meetings and conferences held away
from United Nations headquarters locations, as contained
in the annex to the present resolution;
3. Takes note with gratitude ofthe offer ofthe Austrian
Government 19 to place at the disposal of the United Nations, the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,

17 /bid., Fon y-Ji ni Sc\\1011. S1111pl<'111,•111 No. 32 ( A/41 /32 and ( 'orr. l)
18

/!,id .. annex 11

Jq Sec A/AC.172/INF/6
