S/PV.8187

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8187th meeting

Thursday, 22 February 2018, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Tenya
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Clay
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central African Republic (S/2018/125)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-04835 (E)
*1804835*

S/PV.8187

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the Central
African Republic (S/2018/125)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special
Representative of the African Union to the Central
African Republic; Mr. Esa Pulkkinen, Commander of
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic; and His Excellency Mr. Omar
Hilale, Permanent Representative of Morocco, in his
capacity as Chair of the Central African Republic
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Nébié and Mr. Pulkkinen are joining us via
video-teleconference from Bouar, Central African
Republic, and Brussels, respectively.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/125, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.

22/02/2018

minutes in accordance with paragraphs 22 and 41 of the
memo circulated by the President.
I now give the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga.
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): It is an
honour and a welcome duty to speak before the Security
Council today. I look forward to taking part with the
other important Central African Republic partners here
at this meeting, in particular my colleague and brother
Ambassador Nébié, Special Representative of the
African Union to the Central African Republic, who,
as you mentioned, Mr. President, will be speaking later
via video-teleconference from Bouar, where, together
with other members of the panel of facilitators of the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, he is pursuing his noble
mission in the search for lasting peace in that country.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2018/125)
has already been submitted to the Security Council. I
shall simply make a few additional remarks.
I am here today to address the issue of the violence
and atrocities that continue to affect a large swath of the
Central African civilian population. The unacceptable
violence and human rights violations are the work
of armed groups that have not yet renounced armed
violence and are slow to engage in dialogue with the
Government. The result of that obstinacy reminds us
that in spite of our efforts, the path to peace, stability
and reconciliation in Central Africa remains long
and arduous. Returning refugees and the internally
displaced to their homes remains a challenge. This
veritable human tragedy is exacerbating an already dire
humanitarian situation, in which life for nearly half of
the Central African population is unimaginable, given
the lack of emergency humanitarian assistance.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Mr. Nébié,
Mr. Pulkkinen, Ambassador Hilale and Ambassador
Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent Representative
of Cóte d’Ivoire, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic.

I should like to pay tribute once again to
humanitarian workers in the Central African Republic,
in particular those who have lost their lives in an
attempt to save millions of others. It is because of such
acts of heroism, and in particular the daily sacrifices
and tireless efforts of the staff of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), who often
risk their lives, that we have been able to mitigate the
impact of armed conflicts and prevent so many others.

Before giving the floor to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga,
I call on all briefers to limit their statements to five

Nonetheless, their sacrifice is not in vain. Despite
great adversity, peace lies ahead in the Central African

2/13

18-04835

22/02/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Republic. Every day we regain some of the legitimacy
once lost. The Government is working assiduously
to restore the authority of the State and to strengthen
newly established democratic institutions. The inclusive
political process initiated by President Touadéra is
gradually gaining ground and now has the full support
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation,
backed by the United Nations and all of Central Africa’s
other strategic partners.
The ongoing dialogue and political process
involving the main actors and partners now underpin
multidimensional efforts under way to emerge from
the crisis, such as the Government’s attempts to better
represent contemporary society and the tangible
progress made in enhancing the authority of the State
by appointing prefects in the 16 prefectures and in the
majority of sub-prefectures. The new prefect of Ndélé,
in the north-east, has just assumed office. It is hoped that
the success of the pilot disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration project will enable it to be launched
on a wider scale, thanks financial and technical support
provided by the World Bank.
All elements of MINUSCA are involved in the
process, as it is vital to stability in Central Africa.
That shift in the right direction is also demonstrated
in the strengthening of national judicial institutions. In
addition, preparations for the start of the work of the
Special Criminal Court are well under way. Two days
ago, the Government issued a decree confirming the
appointment of judicial police officers, which would
allow the Court to start its investigations. The message
is clear: the fight against persistent impunity, which
has been the source of recurring conflict in Central
Africa, has begun. This formal judicial institution
will very soon be complemented by new transitional
justice mechanisms, which will lead to an improved
balance between justice and national reconciliation and
guarantee lasting peace.
Thanks to the multifaceted efforts under way,
security and defence structures are now undergoing
far-reaching reforms. The central role played by the
European Union Training Mission to reform the Forces
armées centrafricaines (FACA), is commendable. For its
part, MINUSCA is strengthening its support of Central
African security forces by recruiting gendarmerie and
police officers at the technical level and by supporting
the implementation of various strategic frameworks.
Every effort must now be made to sustain the gains
made and to marshal considerable resources for the next

S/PV. 8187

five years. The support of key partners, such as France,
the United States of America, China and the Russian
Federation, should be underscored. Not long ago, the
mere idea of a joint ​​MINUSCA-FACA endeavour was
unimaginable. We are now partners in field operations,
such as in Paoua and Obo, in the south-east. At the
request of the Security Council, the Central African
authorities and MINUSCA have agreed on a plan for
the use and deployment of the Central African defence
and security forces. In May, the Secretary-General will
submit to the Council a detailed plan to ensure more
effective collaboration and support.
(spoke in English)
As we contemplate ways and means to strengthen
the support that we provide to the national defence and
security forces, we remain dedicated to optimizing
our own performance. Moreover, our commitment to
performance is as strong as our resolve to abide by
the highest standards of conduct and discipline. Let
it be clear that sexual exploitation and abuse have no
place in peacekeeping. The Secretary-General’s zerotolerance policy will remain an integral part of our duty
to protect.
Efforts are under way to more effectively protect
civilian populations, while ensuring the safety and
security of our own peacekeepers. Because of the
nature of the threats we face in the Central African
Republic, unless MINUSCA has the capacity to apply
meaningful military pressure on armed groups that
remain reluctant to embrace peace, no peace process
will have the chance to succeed. That is why I am highly
appreciative of the ongoing outreach by the SecretaryGeneral and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix to
secure the 900 additional troops that the Security
Council authorized in the renewed mandate. I would
like to thank the troop-contributing countries for their
dedication and their sacrifice for the cause of peace in
the Central African Republic.
But the work is not over yet. More will be required
from us all. The fate of millions of civilians hinges on
the commitment of well-equipped, well-trained and
determined troops who use all the power bestowed upon
them by the Council to protect populations from harm.
I am grateful to our military and police forces for their
hard work and robust posture, which we observed in
Bambari early last year, and in Bocaranga and Bang in
late 2017. That is the current situation in Paoua, where
the MINUSCA force is engaged in a military operation

18-048353/13

S/PV.8187

The situation in the Central African Republic

22/02/2018

to create a safe and secure area for the people of Paoua
and the entire prefecture of Ouham-Pendé, and we are
determined to do even more.

Mr. Nébié (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank
the Security Council for the opportunity to brief it on
the current situation in the Central African Republic.

Together with the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation, the Mission continues to work towards
the sustainable reduction of the presence of and the
threat posed by armed groups through a comprehensive
and proactive approach. The additional 900 troops will
boost those efforts by enhancing our flexibility and our
capacity to react. As highlighted in the new mandate,
MINUSCA is supporting Government-led processes
to reduce conflict at the local level to complement and
support the African initiative.

It is thanks to the support of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) that I am
speaking to the Council from the city of Bouar, about
450 kilometres north-west of Bangui in the prefecture of
Nana-Mambéré. My briefing will focus on the following
points: the status of implementation of the road map
of African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
Central Africa, the agenda of the Initiative and the
impact it has had on the ground.

I must emphasize that the success of our collective
effort will require the delivery of tangible peace
dividends for the people of the Central African
Republic. Urgent efforts are needed to translate the
country’s recovery and peacebuilding plan into an
effective programme for change that can be used in both
governance and people’s livelihoods. As just briefly
outlined, and as challenging as things are, the picture
in the Central African Republic is not as hopeless as the
raw numbers and media reports make it appear. With
the continuous support of the Council and everyone’s
sacrifice and dedication — first and foremost, those of
the Central Africans themselves — there are reasons
to remain hopeful and to believe that an era of peace,
stability and prosperity will soon be within reach.
(spoke in French)
In my remarks today, I have endeavoured to give a
brief overview of the challenges in the Central African
Republic, but I have also tried to highlight the many
windows of opportunity to a more stable future. The
region and the international community have a vital
role to play in helping the Government of the Central
African Republic build on its accomplishments. It
is essential that the country remain a priority for the
Security Council and continue to receive international
support commensurate with its strategic priorities.
In so doing, we will help create the conditions for
inclusive socioeconomic recovery and long-term peace
and stability in the Central African Republic.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Nébié.
4/13

I

thank

With regard to the status of implementation, the
panel of facilitators undertook a first field visit in
November and December 2017 to meet with the senior
military and political leadership of 14 armed groups
recognized by the Government. The main objectives
of the field mission were to establish initial contact
between the armed groups and the panel of facilitators
with a view to creating an atmosphere of trust, deliver
a message from the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission to the armed groups, invite them to join
the Initiative’s road map, and hear the armed groups’
demands. At the end of the first field visit, the main
concerns voiced were political, socioeconomic,
security-related, administrative and judicial. In
addition to meeting with armed groups, the panel
also met with local players in civil and political life
to hear their concerns. In the interests of transparency
and openness, the results of these conversations were
shared with the Head of State, the President and other
the senior-ranking members of the National Assembly,
the political parties, the diplomatic corps, civilsociety organizations and the general public through a
press conference.
Secondly, with regard to the agenda of the Initiative,
from 19 February to 17 March the panel will have been
in the field for its second visit, during which it will meet
the same players as in the first field visit. The main
objectives of this round are to extract written demands
and proposed solutions from the parties, build on the
trust established between the panel and the armed
groups in the first round, prepare the armed groups
for dialogue with the Government, obtain a firmer
commitment to non-violence, and create conditions that
ensure the safety of all populations and respect for State
authority and humanitarian actors. At the end of this
second round, the groups’ demands will be submitted
18-04835

22/02/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

to the Government for study. A seminar on capacitybuilding for the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
crises will be organized for the armed groups and
local players in civil and political life. After that, the
dialogue with the Government will be organized.
Thirdly, with regard to the Initiative’s impact, signs
of hope for a peace agreement were already perceptible
at the end of the first field visit. All the armed groups
with which we met welcomed the message of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, who
called on them to join the peace and reconciliation
process and to end all forms of violence. They have read
the content of the Initiative road map and are committed
to reporting back to their respective bases. They shared
their concerns with the panel of facilitators and showed
their willingness to discuss issues of concern with
the Government.
During the first round, it was also agreed to
establish a permanent contact group between the
panel and the armed groups. Through this mechanism,
the panel questioned armed groups that had engaged
in confrontations or shown a desire to undermine
peace. This effort has contributed to lowering tensions
in certain regions, causing some leaders of the
politico-military movements to change their positions
and accept diplomats and prefects in their areas, as
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga mentioned earlier, and to
persuading others to agree to renounce confrontation
and enter into the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme. These
results are also the combined outcome of the efforts
of the Central African authorities and the integrated
action of all partners in the international community,
who have been resolutely committed to finding peace
in the Central African Republic. In this respect, I
welcome the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2387 (2017).
In conclusion, and to make a recommendation on
security, a small amount of progress has clearly been
made, but it is progress all the same, particularly when
we keep in mind the depth and duration of the crisis
in the Central African Republic. It is true that what
follows is likely to be difficult, but all those living in the
Central African Republic have witnessed the progress
made thus far and expressed optimism and hope for a
peaceful resolution of the crisis in the country.
I therefore renew my plea for the continued
support and solidarity of the Security Council and the

S/PV. 8187

international community as a whole for the Central
African Republic, specifically by encouraging President
Faustin Archange Touadéra and his Government to
selflessly pursue their many efforts that are beginning
to yield good results, by making a forceful appeal to the
armed groups to fully participate in the dialogue process
that is currently being prepared, and by assisting the
panel so that it may continue to develop its programme.
I also take this opportunity to reiterate my thanks
to Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
Head of MINUSCA, and his entire team for their full
support and assistance in the ongoing political process.
My thanks also go to the European Union and other
development partners.
The five minutes allocated to me could not be
enough to outline in full detail what is happening in the
Central African Republic. But we who are on the ground
are committed and determined, and we believe that the
Central African people deserve our assistance through
to the end of this effort and that we shall achieve peace
in the Central African Republic in 2018.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Nébié
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pulkkinen.
Mr. Pulkkinen: I am Lieutenant General Esa
Pulkkinen, and I am grateful to have the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the topic of the
Central African Republic and the biannual report
(S/2018/125) of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).
The European Union (EU) greatly welcomes the
recent extension of the mandate of MINUSCA, which
was adopted in November 2017 (resolution 2387 (2017)).
As the Operational Commander, I particularly note that
MINUSCA has been given the task of providing support
to the progressive and coordinated redeployment of the
Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA) units trained by
the European Union Training Mission in the Central
African Republic (EUTM-RCA) as an element of the
strategy to extend State authority. In addition to the
extremely valuable joint deployments already under
way, this effort is crucial to restoring State authority.
Moreover, it is central to the United Nations and EU
achieving their wider strategic objectives in the Central
African Republic.

18-048355/13

S/PV.8187

The situation in the Central African Republic

To put my role and that of my organization
in context, I am the Director of the EU’s Military
Planning and Conduct Capability. This is a Brusselsbased organization that carries out the roles and
responsibilities of an operational headquarters.
Currently under my command are three EU training
missions in Africa, one of them being the training
mission in the Central African Republic.
I should underline that the EUTM-RCA is an
unarmed training mission. It contributes to defence
sector reform within the Central African effort to that
end being coordinated by MINUSCA. It assists in the
progressive development of a democratically controlled,
professional, credible, accountable and ethnically and
regionally balanced FACA. Its mandate includes close
coordination with MINUSCA. The joint MINUSCA-EU
delegation and EUTM-RCA support plan on security
sector reform and the rule of law in the Central African
Republic, signed in July last year, aims to define the
basis of our coordination and complementarity in all
our activities.
Despite some progress, we remain seriously
concerned by the worsening security and humanitarian
situation. The crisis in the Central African Republic
will not be resolved by force, but rather through
dialogue, justice and reconciliation. In that context,
the EU fully supports President Touadéra and his
Government in their efforts to build peace in the Central
African Republic.
The Council is aware that the Central African
armed forces, trained by EUTM, have already
started to deploy to operations, with the support of
MINUSCA — albeit in small numbers and despite
considerable logistical constraints. Reports on their
performance in those joint deployments have been
favourable, both from the operational point of view and
with regard to non-governmental organizations and
public opinion. Although they are a step in the right
direction, these small-scale operations, originating in
Bangui, are not enough to reoperationalize the FACA.
All political actors and international partners agree
on the need to restore State authority throughout the
country as a key factor in resolving the crisis. Therefore,
the redeployment of the armed forces and the internal
security forces is recognized as critical to enabling the
return of public institutions and services to the entire
territory, as well as to deterring armed groups.
6/13

22/02/2018

In order to restore authority to the regions, a
9,800-strong army is planned by 2021, with around
4,500 of those troops redeployed outside Bangui. That
implies a huge effort; infrastructure development,
sustainment capability and effective logistical support
will be crucial.
In the context of a Government that has been in
power for almost two years and whose army is largely
confined to Bangui, MINUSCA is the key enabler that
will allow us to capitalize on what has been achieved
to date. The troops that EUTM has trained are now
being equipped, and we cannot lose momentum in their
deployment and operationalization.
MINUSCA remains a critical factor for
operationalizing the FACA and for ensuring basic
logistical support. Continued support to the FACA
in joint deployments on limited military operations
is important. But MINUSCA’s support, in its next
mandate, for the progressive and coordinated
deployment in garrisons or decentralized hubs of
FACA troops trained by the EUTM is absolutely critical
to the extension of the State authority. That, in turn,
supports the Central African Republic Government’s
national defence plan and allows it to demonstrate its
willingness to address security and stabilization issues
across the whole country. A decentralized army that is
able to deploy outside of Bangui is fundamental. With
United Nations support, a progressive redeployment
of those forces could serve as a concrete example of
State authority returning to the provinces, and allow
MINUSCA an opportunity to redeploy to areas where
it is needed most — helping everyone reach their goals.
If MINUSCA’s support for the FACA is withdrawn,
that progress would almost certainly stall and, with
it, MINUSCA’s own mission. On its own, FACA does
not have the capacity to deploy or sustain itself, and
the critical extension of State authority will cease. The
most likely outcome would be FACA’s return to Bangui,
and the opportunity to restore State control will be lost.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Commander Pulkinnen for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador Hilale.
Mr. Hilale: In response to your request,
Mr. President, I will summarize my briefing.
At the outset, I am grateful for the kind invitation
to brief the Security Council on opportunities
and challenges to build and sustain peace in the
18-04835

22/02/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Central African Republic, in my capacity as Chair
of the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The fragility of the situation in the Central African
Republic remains a concern, with renewed fighting
and the emergence of new humanitarian hotspots. At
the same time, the combined commitment from the
Government, the United Nations system and all other
stakeholders to long-term solutions is starting to pay
off. Despite delays, the implementation of the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the restoration of
State authority are progressing. Efforts are under way to
coordinate the deployment of internal security forces,
justice actors and providers of basic social services to
reinforce the social contract between the population
and the State. As we move forward, it will be important
to ensure the sequencing and complementarity among
reconciliation efforts, the restoration of State authority
and delivering peace dividends to the population.
The Central African Republic configuration
works to bring a long-term focus to stabilization,
reconciliation and development efforts in the country,
guided by national priorities. To that end, we provide
political accompaniment to the country, promote an
integrated and coherent approach to international and
regional peacebuilding efforts and draw attention
to glaring resource and capacity gaps in the Central
African Republic.
In 2017, the configuration focused on the Brussels
commitments to implement the National Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan, primarily Pillar 1, which
encompasses security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; the rule of law and
reconciliation. In line with our commitment to assess
the Plan’s implementation with multiple stakeholders, I
met with World Bank officials last week in Washington,
D.C. During our discussions, we addressed resource and
capacity gaps that are hampering the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Planand
focused on the World Bank’s role in its implementation.
I would like to present to the Council some
key observations.
First, Central African Republic is at a critical
juncture. The Government needs to be supported to
drive the reforms necessary for the implementation
of the National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan. In
Bangui, New York and Washington, D.C., and together
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-

S/PV. 8187

General, I have continued to urge the Government and
donors that a robust commitment from both sides is
critical for the Plan to succeed. Although $2.23 billion
was pledged at the Brussels conference, the delivery
rate of ongoing projects for which financing has already
been secured was only 16 per cent in 2017. From my
contacts with the United Nations, the World Bank and
other stakeholders, I understand that the absorption
capacity of the Central African Republic Government,
the lack of coordination across the line ministries and
the absence of the Government and the presence of
armed groups across the territory are also perceived to
hamper the effective and speedy use of resources.
Secondly, we need to encourage the positive
developments regarding the restoration of State
authority. There has been progress in the deployment
of prefects and sub-prefects in the provinces, and
coordination among national institutions has improved
at the national and provincial levels. The Government
is also engaged in redeploying the national army — the
Forces armées centrafricaines (FACA) — as well as the
national police and gendarmerie, within the broader
context of the security sector reform and the extension
of State authority. We encourage the Government
to both deploy civil servants and to try to provide
basic services. That is the only path to lasting stability.
Thirdly, long-term security depends on the
prioritization of justice and the fight against impunity.
In that regard, we welcome the extradition today from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Bangui of
the individual known as “Romaric”. He is suspected
to be responsible for the massacre of Moroccan and
Cambodian Blue Helmets in Bangassou last May.
The national Special Criminal Court is an innovative
structure that will allow impunity to be addressed.
However, the Special Criminal Court faces multiple
challenges, including resource deficits for the next
five years.
While a strategy on witness and victim protection
both for the Special Criminal Court and the national
system more broadly has been developed, serious gaps
remain on witness and victim protection. The draft
rules of procedure and evidence, which will provide
guidance for witness protection mechanisms, should
be adopted soon. At the same time, we must balance
the focus on the Special Criminal Court by supporting
the Central African Republic’s national justice system.
Despite the recent progress of the ordinary courts in
Bangui and Bouar, the resumption of justice activities

18-048357/13

S/PV.8187

The situation in the Central African Republic

outside Bangui remains challenging. The challenges
are mainly due to insufficient security, difficulties in
paying salaries and the lack of equipment.
Fourthly, as the configuration committed to
fostering coherence among stakeholders, we strongly
support the African initiative that brings together all
peace efforts under the Libreville road map, based
on their comparative advantages. While maintaining
security outside of Bangui remains a challenge,
dialogue initiatives at the local level with armed groups
have proceeded with support from the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic towards violence reduction
and reconciliation. We look forward to seeing that
initiative contribute to the implementation and success
of the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation and
reintegration process.
The development and implementation of a realistic
and clear reconciliation strategy is a top priority for
2018. The creation of the truth, justice, reparation
and reconciliation commission announced during the
2015 Bangui Forum has been slow to be activated. It
is important that this structure be operationalized to
reassure victims waiting for justice pending the start of
trials by the Special Criminal Court.
Fifthly, and finally, economic recovery will be key
to maintaining faith in State institutions and overcoming
the humanitarian crisis. It is encouraging that President
Touadéra has prioritized development efforts in the
north, where perceptions of marginalization have fuelled
conflict. Addressing such horizontal inequalities will
be critically important to sustain peace.
I would like to conclude by thanking the Central
African authorities for their commitment to the
implementation of the activities of the configuration.
I would also like to thank the members of the
configuration, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Onanga-Anyanga and his team, as well as the
Peacebuilding Support Office for its tireless efforts in
support of the people of the Central African Republic.
The President (spoke in Arabic):
Ambassador Hilale for his briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ambassador TanohBoutchoue.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I have the honour to brief the members of
the Council in my capacity as Chair of the Security
8/13

22/02/2018

Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013), concerning the Central African Republic.
In my statement, I intend to provide an overview of the
Committee’s work since my predecessor last briefed the
Council on 15 February 2017 (see S/PV.7884), and in so
doing highlight the activities of the Committee and the
Panel of Experts.
Over the course of 2017, there were a number of
positive developments in the Central African Republic,
including the start of political consultations within
the framework of the African Union initiative and the
progress achieved in engaging representatives of armed
groups in disarmament and demobilization and security
sector reform. Despite all those advances, however,
the heightened level of violence in the south-east and
north-west last year has reminded us of the worst
developments in the country in 2013 and 2014, with the
number of internally displaced persons and refugees
reaching unprecedented levels, while civilians, Blue
Helmets and humanitarian actors have been regularly
attacked by predatory armed groups.
Since my predecessor’s last briefing, the
Committee has convened a total of eight meetings — on
23 February, 31 March, 12 May, 21 July, 6 September,
4 and 29 December 2017 and 26 January 2018.
While press releases summarizing those meetings
are available on the Committee’s webpage, I wish to
highlight several activities of the Committee that speak
to the implementation of sanction measures.
The Committee has continued to work closely
with the Central African authorities, regional and
neighbouring States, and, on 6 September and
26 January, convened its first open briefings, which
were available to all Member States. Those open
briefings have proven to be very useful and engaging,
and have provided Committee members and the invited
regional States with an opportunity to hear the views
of the broader membership of the Organization on how
to enhance the implementation of sanctions by regional
States and those neighbouring the Central African
Republic. Most important, though, they have allowed us
to see the complete picture on the ways in which we can
address cross-border arms trafficking and trafficking
in natural resources.
It is clear to me that regional cooperation among
neighbouring States in countering illicit networks,
the illegal exploitation of natural resources and crossborder trafficking in arms and ammunition is key in
18-04835

22/02/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

addressing many challenges that countries in Central
Africa face. However, without the sanctions regime and
other assistance being provided by the international
community, those steps may fall short in efficiently
eradicating the root causes of the conflict.
In that regard, I would also like to highlight the
outstanding work of the United Nations Mine Action
Service in ensuring the safe and effective management
of weapons and ammunition in the Central African
Republic, improving weapons and ammunition
storage facilities and building permanent armouries
outside Bangui. The Mine Action Service briefed the
Committee twice in 2017, on 17 May and again on
4 December, regarding its assistance to the Central
African authorities in the implementation of the 20172018 small arms road map aimed at developing a
national strategy and action plan. On 4 December, the
Committee received a briefing for the first time from
the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research,
which provided preliminary findings of its report on
weapons and ammunition management that is expected
to be published by the end of March.

S/PV. 8187

legitimate efforts to rearm the national defence and
security forces, the Committee also stresses the secure
and safe management of arms and ammunition.
During the reporting period, the Committee also
worked closely with the Central African Republic,
States of the region and other Member States to provide
guidance on implementing the arms embargo. In
that regard, the Committee and the Panel of Experts
are committed to further dialogue with the national
authorities in order to ensure that the arms embargo
can be seen to be helping the Government to rearm
the defence and security forces while fully complying
with its provisions. The ongoing deterioration in the
security situation, particularly in the south-eastern and
north-western areas of the country, along with the easy
availability of arms and ammunition, makes effective
implementation of the embargo essential.

I also wish to underline the work of the members
of the Panel of Experts, who are the eyes and ears of
the Committee on the ground. Thanks to the Panel’s
reporting — namely, its midterm and final report, as
well as its progress updates, the most recent of which
was circulated on 9 February — the Committee is well
informed in connection with the implementation of the
sanctions measures in the Central African Republic and
the region. In that respect, it is important to note that,
on 17 May 2017, the Committee added the name of one
individual, Abdoulaye Hissène, to its sanctions list. I
would also like to emphasize that in 2017, the Panel of
Experts submitted three new statements of cases for
possible sanctions designation as well as two updated
statements. To date, the Panel has submitted a total of
32 statements.

With regard to the travel ban, the Committee
and the Panel of Experts have continued to actively
engage with regional States, particularly Kenya and
Ethiopia, in following up on reported violations, while
emphasizing that appropriate exemption procedures
aimed at promoting mediation activities may be used
ahead of the proposed travel in accordance with the
sanctions measures, as detailed in resolution 2339
(2017) and the Committee Guidelines. In that regard, I
would particularly like to thank the Kenyan authorities
for having communicated reliable evidence to the Panel
of Experts indicating that a sanctioned individual,
Mr. François Bozizé, has been travelling under a
different name, which has just been added to the
sanctions list. I would therefore like to urge the Central
African Republic authorities and all States of the region
to fully implement the sanctions measures, including
by ensuring that fraudulent, counterfeit, stolen or lost
passports, as well as invalidated diplomatic passports,
are removed from circulation, as requested in paragraph
12 of resolution 2399 (2018).

On 29 December, in an example of the Committee’s
cooperation with the Central African Republic’s
national authorities, the Committee heard briefings
on the implementation of the arms embargo via video
teleconference in Bangui from the Ministers of National
Defence and Interior and Public Security and from
representatives of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the European Union Training Mission in Mali
and the Panel of Experts. While fully recognizing and
understanding the Central African Republic authorities’

Turning to the assets freeze, in its final report the
Panel of Experts highlighted the fact that Chad had
frozen the assets of the listed individual Abdoulaye
Hissène, while noting once again that the Central
African Republic authorities have still not frozen the
accounts and assets of Alfred Yékatom and Eugène
Ngaïkosset. According to the Panel of Experts,
the Central African Republic authorities have also
continued paying Yékatom and Ngaïkosset’s salaries,
in violation of the assets freeze. On behalf of the
Committee, I once again urge the authorities to fully

18-048359/13

S/PV.8187

The situation in the Central African Republic

implement the sanctions measures and immediately
freeze the assets of the individuals in question.
In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council that
this year I intend to visit the Central African Republic
and several States of the region in order to be able to
talk directly and frankly with the appropriate officials
on the ground, convey the importance of ensuring that
the sanctions measures are fully implemented and
outline the relevant exemption procedures.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. TanohBoutchoue for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the convening of this meeting.
We would like to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), and the other briefers for
their presentations.
Peru is committed to maintaining and sustaining
peace in the Central African Republic. We contribute
to MINUSCA through our deployment of a division
of engineers from our armed forces, which gives
us yet another reason to follow the situation in the
Central African Republic with special attention.
The humanitarian crisis remains urgent and the
deteriorating security situation in most of the country
has hindered consolidation of the modest progress that
has been made in the political process. With that in
mind, I would like to discuss three specific aspects that
require our attention:
The first is the urgent need to end the violence. We
are concerned about the permanent state of conflict in
most of the country, the inter-ethnic violence, the attacks
on the civilian population, MINUSCA personnel and
humanitarian workers, and about armed groups’ access
to weapons. To that must be added the clashes over the
control of various areas and the exploitation of natural
resources. Transhumance corridors have become spaces
for illegal business and crime. We commend the efforts
of MINUSCA and the European Union to help build
military and police forces capable of dealing with these
threats, and we emphasize the importance of advancing
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants.
10/13

22/02/2018

My second point is the importance of reconstructing
and consolidating the State and extending its presence
throughout the country. That in turn implies the
importance of promoting a peaceful, inclusive society
focused on sustainable peace and development. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, launched by the African
Union, which has been facilitating dialogue between
armed groups and civil society. We believe that it
should include groups of women and young people,
with a view to establishing institutions oriented towards
sustainable peace. We also consider the consideration
of the issue of incitement to violence by resolution 2399
(2018) — the most recent resolution on sanctions for the
Central African Republic — to be a positive step.
We emphasize the importance of arriving at
agreements and commitments that will enable progress
to be made in implementing the plan for expanding
the prefectures with a view to improving the country’s
stability, security and development. One of the
underlying causes of the conflict in the Central African
Republic is the difficult socioeconomic reality, which
contributes to its instability. It will be crucial to to find
ways to create jobs, particularly for young people, order
to prevent extremism and relapses into violence. The
international community should therefore support the
National Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan.
My third point is the importance of doing more
to protect the civilian population. We recognize the
efforts of the Central African Republic authorities to
strengthen the judicial system and combat impunity,
particularly their authorization of the Special Criminal
Court. However, we deplore the recurrent shameful
violations of human rights in the country. Firm action
must be taken to investigate and prosecute abuses in that
regard, including sexual violence and the widespread
participation of children in the conflict.
Peru acknowledges and supports the work that
MINUSCA is doing to protect civilians and provide
humanitarian assistance, as well as its efforts to uphold
the political process, despite the adverse environment
and complex operational situations that may arise.
We believe that the Mission’s operational capacities
should be strengthened. We note with concern that
100 per cent of the authorized force has not yet been
deployed, and stress the need to ensure the safety of the
Blue Helmets on the ground. In that regard, and finally,
we wish to express our support for the Secretary18-04835

22/02/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

General’s decision to address this problem, which is a
cross-cutting issue in many peace operations.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is grateful
for the report of the Secretary-General presented by
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) (S/2018/125),
to whom we extend our sincere congratulations for the
commendable and noble work he is doing in Central
Africa. We also wish to extend these congratulations to
the entire MINUSCA team. We also thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Bédializoun Moussa Nébié, Special
Representative of the African Union for Central Africa,
and Lieutenant General Esa Pulkkinen, Director of
Military Planning and Conduct Capability of the
European Union, for participating in today’s meeting.
We also thank and welcome Ambassador Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue of Côte d’Ivoire, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic, and Ambassador Omar Hilale of Morocco, in
his capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s
configuration for Central Africa, for their briefings.
Both provided us with a clear illustration of the current
situation in this brotherly country of ours, the Central
African Republic.
Having heard the briefings, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its concern at the current
atmosphere of violence being fomented by some armed
groups in the country, which affects not only the parties
to the conflict but also has a serious impact on the
civilian population, in particular the most vulnerable
segments — women and children — thereby further
aggravating the critical humanitarian situation,
weakening the State and facilitating the unrestrained
activity of mafias in plundering its natural resources
throughout the country. In that context, Equatorial
Guinea condemns the recent attacks perpetrated by
the previously mentioned armed groups against on
civilians and MINUSCA and expresses its deep regret
at the loss of human lives, both of MINUSCA personnel
and Central African citizens who have been victims of
the consequences of the violence.
Despite the outstanding progress and success
of the elections in March 2016, as well as the United

S/PV. 8187

Nations presence to strengthen stability, support the
Government and provide humanitarian assistance,
the Central African Republic continues to suffer
from unrest and instability, resulting in the violation
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
giving rise to hundreds of victims — men, women
and children — who have been subjected to sexual
violence, trafficking in persons, arrests, detentions and
displacement. Equatorial Guinea calls on all armed
groups to lay down their arms and appeals to the parties
to the conflict to renounce all sectarian interests so
as to allow for a dialogue leading to peacebuilding
and the stabilization of the country. Equatorial
Guinea re-emphasizes the need for strict monitoring
of the tripartite agreement signed on 23 May 2011
in Khartoum.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes the efforts of
the Government of the brotherly Central African
Republic, under the leadership of President Touadera,
in concert with the international community, aimed
at State-building after the conclusion of the political
transition. Those efforts involve disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and
also involve reform of the security and defence forces.
The ultimate goal is to achieve national reconciliation
and stability.
The Central African Republic will achieve the
desired stability if it is able to make a genuine national
reconciliation effort through frank, direct and inclusive
political dialogue. It is important for all the stakeholders
involved to act by putting their country’s supreme
interests first; only in that way can lasting peace and
stability be achieved.
Although much progress has been made in the
right direction, much remains to be done to rebuild
the country. The role of the international community
is particularly crucial in enhancing what the African
Union and regional structures, particularly the
Economic Community of Central African States, can
do in this process. MINUSCA is also instrumental in
that regard, and its results have been very positive.
Stability in Central Africa implies stability for
the entire Central African region, which is why the
region’s top leaders have been extensively involved
in the search for a solution, including sending forces
when the situation has required it. Equatorial Guinea
has been no exception: for a long time, His Excellency
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo has been involved

18-0483511/13

S/PV.8187

The situation in the Central African Republic

in assistance and mediation efforts in conjunction with
all stakeholders.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/125) presented
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the Central African Republic, Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, and we take this opportunity to reiterate our
full support for its recommendations. We also take this
opportunity to thank all of today’s briefers.
The ongoing violence promoted by the armed
groups, the asymmetrical attacks and the constant
inter-ethnic and intercommunal confrontations driven
by the competition to exert control over the territory
and its natural resources show that work still needs
to be done in the area of security and are factors that
aggravate the critical humanitarian situation on a daily
basis. According to the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral, approximately 50 per cent of the population in
that country depends on outside assistance to survive,
and 2.5 million Central Africans require urgent
humanitarian assistance, 100,000 more than in the
previous period. The number of internally displaced
persons increased by 70 per cent in 2017, reaching a
total of 1.2 million people, the highest rate in the history
of the Central African Republic. Food insecurity has
increased and currently affects one out of every two
people. Approximately 500 schools closed at the end of
2017 due to insecurity, including in some regions where
there are now no schools open. That is why we are
calling on the international community to continue its
support so as to address the population’s growing need
for the humanitarian assistance and provide financing
that is predictable and sustainable.
Furthermore, Bolivia condemns the constant
attacks perpetrated by armed groups against civilians,
MINUSCA and the peacekeeping forces. We value
and salute the members of the Mission — the military,
police and civilian personnel — who are working in a
volatile and high-risk environment. We commend the
Mission’s efforts to identify regions where additional
capacity is needed to protect the civilian population,
in particular its strategy for the prevention of violence
in connection with migration. In that regard, and in
order to increase their efficiency, we encourage them
to implement the recommendations of the internal
report regarding the special investigation concerning
the protection of civilians, so that they may effectively
carry out their mandate in accordance with resolution
12/13

22/02/2018

2387 (2017). We also reiterate that sexual exploitation
and abuse are unacceptable, and we support MINUSCA
in continuing its efforts to ensure compliance with the
zero-tolerance policy.
Despite the complicated context of the security
situation, we highlight the progress in the protection
of civilians, the strengthening of State authority,
inter-institutional cooperation, the training of the
Central African armed forces, inter alia. Such activities
genuinely strengthen the peace process, and should be
built upon and fully implemented.
Similarly, we highlight the new prefectural
administration, the approval of the national budget for
2018 and the development of a strategic framework for
security sector reform. We commend the Government
of the Central African Republic, led by President
Touadéra, on its quest for reconciliation, inclusive
dialogue and understanding among the parties. We also
welcome ongoing efforts to restore the court system
and the progress made to end impunity, including the
condemnation of armed groups, the operationalization
of the Special Criminal Court, the demilitarization of
the prison system and the development of a strategic
framework for security sector reform. We reiterate the
importance of equal participation in all these areas and
within the overall peace process.
We condemn all acts to incite violence — in particular
on ethnic or religious grounds — that undermine peace,
stability and security in the Central African Republic.
Once again, we call on all armed groups to lay down
their weapons, put aside sectarian interests of all kinds
that hinder fruitful dialogue, and reach agreements
that are in the interests of the civilian population and
the stability of the country. In addition, we call on
them to fully commit to the process of demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration.
We urge the Central African Republic to implement
its national programme on demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration. We underscore the efforts of and the
support provided by MINUSCA and the United Nations
Mine Action Service. We highlight the work of both
entities in the area of humanitarian demining.
In conclusion, we welcome the active and ongoing
support of regional and subregional organizations,
the participation of the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the panel
of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace and
18-04835

22/02/2018

The situation in the Central African Republic

Reconciliation, whose political efforts towards peace
and cooperation are of paramount importance to the
process of reconciliation, with strict respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the Central African Republic. Central Africans are
primarily responsible for achieving peace and stability
in their country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the floor
to the representative of the Central African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
Kuwait on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council in February, as this is the first time I am taking
the floor during its mandate.
I am pleased to take part in today’s Security
Council meeting in order to, first, thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) for his briefing, and, secondly, to
sincerely thank the Mission for its ongoing efforts to
restore peace to a country struggling to recover after
such a protracted crisis. I also thank all who spoke for
their important statements.
The end of the political transition and the
organization of credible and democratic elections
granted us the freedom to hope. Life began again. We
all welcomed the noteworthy progress observed in
various areas but then, as if by magic, inter-community
and ethnic violence broke out almost all over the
country. After reading the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/125), I said to myself that the country
was not far from the relapse into conflict we all feared.
We concluded that 2017 was the most critical year, with
threats that could have led to a tipping point.
We welcome the joint operation carried out by
MINUSCA and the Forces armées centrafricaines,
which reduced the number of armed groups in areas
around Paoua. We encourage such military action in all
areas where it is needed, as it could ease tensions among
the warring parties and reduce the threat posed by them
over the long term. It is clear that rivalries between
armed groups and self-defence militias exacerbate and
sustain violence.

S/PV. 8187

Opportunistic political leaders do not desire an end
to the crisis. They use all means at their disposal, such
as manipulation, to encourage armed groups and selfdefence militias, who are paid by them, to commit all
kinds of abuses against the civilian population and the
Blue Helmets and to spread hate speech, with the sole
aim of dividing Central Africans in an effort to better
control the situation.
My delegation welcomes the fact that incitement
to violence and inflammatory rhetoric were included
as designation criteria in resolution 2399 (2018) on
extending the sanctions regime against the Central
African Republic. We hope that such measures will
have the desired effect. To that end, the Central African
Government and MINUSCA must implement resolution
2399 (2018) without delay so that troublemakers know
they will be brought to justice.
Resolution 2387 (2017) of 14 November 2017 confers
other major duties on MINUSCA, such as providing
support to local peace initiatives and to consultations
conducted by the panel of facilitators of the African
initiative with the main armed groups, civil society and
other actors in the Central African crisis. The Council
must ensure that the Mission has substantial means
commensurate with the ever-increasing number of
duties entrusted to it.
In conclusion, given that we do not have enough
time to address the other aspects of the situation, I
would like to reiterate my delegation’s gratitude for
the excellent cooperation between the Government of
the Central African Republic and MINUSCA in their
attempts to manage this complex situation. We sincerely
thank the Head of the Mission, Mr. Parfait OnangaAnyanga, for his commitment and determination to help
the Government and the people of the Central African
Republic to emerge from this protracted nightmare. We
also thank all of our bilateral and international partners
for their unwavering support.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

18-0483513/13
