United Nations

A/RES/57/178

General Assembly

Distr.: General
23 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 102

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/57/549)]

57/178. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/229 of 24 December 2001 and its previous
resolutions on the elimination of discrimination against women,
Bearing in mind that one of the purposes of the United Nations, as stated in
Articles 1 and 55 of the Charter, is to promote universal respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction of any kind, including
distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should participate equally in social, economic
and political development, should contribute equally to such development and
should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993,1 in which the Conference
reaffirmed that the human rights of women and the girl child were an inalienable,
integral and indivisible part of universal human rights,
Acknowledging the need for a comprehensive and integrated approach to the
promotion and protection of the human rights of women, which includes the
integration of the human rights of women into the mainstream of United Nations
activities system-wide,
Reaffirming the commitments made in the political declaration 2 and the
outcome document 3 of the special session of the General Assembly entitled “Women
2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century”, in
particular paragraphs 68 (c) and (d) concerning the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 4 and the Optional Protocol thereto, 5

_______________
1

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
Resolution S-23/2, annex.
3
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
4
Resolution 34/180, annex.
5
Resolution 54/4, annex.
2

02 54991

A/RES/57/178

Recalling that, in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 6 heads of State
and Government resolved to implement the Convention,
Recognizing that the equal enjoyment by women of all human rights will
promote the realization of the rights of the child, bearing in mind the special needs
of girls, and acknowledging the mutual reinforcement of the implementation of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
the Convention on the Rights of the Child 7 and the Optional Protocols thereto, 8
Welcoming the progress made in the implementation of the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, but expressing concern
about the remaining challenges,
Welcoming also the growing number of States parties to the Convention, which
now stands at one hundred and seventy,
Welcoming further the entry into force on 22 December 2000 of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women,
Bearing in mind the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women that national reports should contain information on
the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action, 9 in accordance with
paragraph 323 of the Platform,
Having considered the report of the Committee on its twenty-sixth and twentyseventh sessions, 10
Expressing concern at the great number of reports that are overdue and that
continue to be overdue, in particular initial reports, which constitutes an obstacle to
the full implementation of the Convention,
1.
Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General 11 on the status of the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; 4
2.
Expresses disappointment that universal ratification of the Convention
was not achieved by 2000, and urges all States that have not yet ratified or acceded
to the Convention to do so;
3.
Emphasizes the importance of full compliance by States parties with their
obligations under the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;5
4.
Welcomes the rapidly growing number of States parties to the Optional
Protocol, which now stands at forty-nine, and urges other States parties to the
Convention to consider signing and ratifying or acceding to the Optional Protocol;
5.
Also welcomes the holding and successful outcome of the first informal
meeting of States parties, held in New York on 17 June 2002;

_______________
6

See resolution 55/2.
Resolution 44/25, annex.
8
Resolution 54/263, annexes I and II.
9
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
10
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/57/38).
11
A/57/406 and Corr.1.
7

2

A/RES/57/178

6.
Further welcomes the fact that the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women has adopted the rules governing its work under the
Optional Protocol as part of its revised rules of procedure; 12
7.
Notes that some States parties have modified their reservations, expresses
satisfaction that some reservations have been withdrawn, and urges States parties to
limit the extent of any reservations that they lodge to the Convention, to formulate
any such reservations as precisely and as narrowly as possible, to ensure that no
reservations are incompatible with the object and purpose of the Convention, to
review their reservations regularly with a view to withdrawing them and to
withdraw reservations that are contrary to the object and purpose of the Convention;
8.
Welcomes the adoption by the Committee of revised reporting
guidelines, 13 in particular on the length of reports of States parties and the
streamlining of their structure and content;
9.
Recalls the great number of overdue reports, in particular initial reports,
and urges States parties to the Convention to make every possible effort to submit
their reports on the implementation of the Convention in a timely manner in
accordance with article 18 thereof;
10. Encourages the Secretariat to extend further technical assistance to States
parties, upon their request, in the preparation of reports, in particular initial reports,
and invites Governments to contribute to these efforts;
11. Invites States parties to make use of the technical assistance provided by
the Secretariat to facilitate the preparation of reports, in particular initial reports;
12. Expresses its satisfaction that the Committee has addressed successfully
the large number of reports that awaited consideration by the Committee during the
extraordinary session held from 5 to 23 August 2002;
13. Commends the Committee on its contributions to the effective
implementation of the Convention;
14. Strongly urges States parties to the Convention to take appropriate
measures so that acceptance of the amendment to article 20, paragraph 1, of the
Convention by a two-thirds majority of States parties can be reached as soon as
possible so that the amendment may enter into force;
15. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the Committee to
improve the efficiency of its working methods and for the holding, in Lund,
Sweden, from 22 to 24 April 2002, of the seminar on the working methods of the
Committee, and encourages the Committee to continue its efforts in this regard;
16. Also expresses its appreciation for the participation of the Committee in
the first inter-committee meeting of the human rights treaty bodies on methods of
work relating to the State reporting process, held in Geneva from 26 to 28 June
2002;
17. Encourages the Committee, within its mandate, to continue to contribute
to the efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination between the treaty bodies;

_______________
12
13

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/56/38), annex I.
Ibid., Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/57/38), annex.

3

A/RES/57/178

18. Requests the Secretary-General, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 54/4 of 6 October 1999, to provide the resources, including staff and
facilities, necessary for the effective functioning of the Committee within its full
mandate, taking into account in particular the entry into force of the Optional
Protocol;
19. Urges Governments, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to disseminate
the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
20. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system, within
their mandates, as well as Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations and, in particular, women’s organizations, as appropriate, to continue
to assist States parties, upon their request, in implementing the Convention, and in
this regard encourages States parties to pay attention to the concluding comments as
well as the general recommendations of the Committee;
21. Encourages all relevant entities of the United Nations system to continue
to build women’s knowledge and understanding of and capacity to utilize human
rights instruments, in particular the Convention and the Optional Protocol thereto;
22. Welcomes the submission by the specialized agencies, at the invitation of
the Committee, of reports on the implementation of the Convention in areas falling
within the scope of their activities and the contribution of non-governmental
organizations to the work of the Committee, and encourages the specialized
agencies to continue to submit reports;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
fifty-eighth session a report on the status of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the implementation of the present
resolution.
77th plenary meeting
18 December 2002

4
