S/PV.8583

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8583rd meeting

Tuesday, 23 July 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra/ Mr. Ugarelli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Blandino de Los Santos
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Mabhongo
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Greenblatt

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-22584 (E)
*1922584*

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

is fuelling extremism and exacerbating tensions in
Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory. There is a
growing risk of more unilateral actions and the loss of
hope that peace can be achieved through negotiations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile, Croatia, Cuba,
Ecuador, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Lebanon, Malaysia, Maldives, Morocco,
Namibia, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: Mr. Cheikh
Niang, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People; and
Mr. Maged Abdelfattah Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer
for the League of Arab States to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the representative
of the Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See
to the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
Ms. DiCarlo: The Israeli-Palestinian conflict
continues to be locked in a dangerous paralysis that
2/63

23/07/2019

This outcome is not inevitable. We need to support
creating an environment conducive to advancing peace
and paving the way for negotiations on all final status
issues, including Jerusalem. In order to get there, we
need leadership, political will and the determination
to make tangible progress, despite the difficulties. We
must work together to bring Israelis and Palestinians
back to the negotiating table in order to resolve the
conflict on the basis of international law, relevant
United Nations resolutions and previous agreements.
Without the prospect of viable negotiations on the
horizon, facts on the ground continue to undermine the
possibility of achieving a two-state solution.
In June, the District Court in Jerusalem ruled
that four houses in the Alei Zahav settlement could
be retroactively regularized under Israeli law, despite
having been built on private Palestinian land. This
decision is the first implementation in practice of the
so-called market regularization principle, according to
which up to 2,000 housing units in settlements could
be legalized. Further, on 8 July the Jerusalem District
Planning Committee approved for deposit a plan for
the addition of 48 housing units in the Gilo settlement
in East Jerusalem. I reiterate that settlements remain
a substantial obstacle to peace and are a violation of
international law.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by Israeli authorities also continued. Sixty-six
structures were demolished or seized, overwhelmingly
on the grounds of lack of Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to
obtain. This practice must stop. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
this resulted in the displacement of 90 Palestinians,
including 58 children.
On 11 June, Israel’s High Court dismissed a petition
by the Palestinian residents of the Wadi Al-Hummus/Sur
Baher neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, giving them
until 18 July to demolish nine buildings, owing to their
proximity to the separation barrier. The structures were
demolished by Israeli authorities on 22 July, resulting
in the displacement of 24 Palestinians, including 14
children. As Deputy Special Coordinator McGoldrick
stated yesterday, Israel’s policy of destroying Palestinian
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

property is not compatible with its obligations under
international humanitarian law and contributes to the
risk of forcible transfer facing many Palestinians in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
On 27 June, six Palestinian-owned structures in
the Bethlehem community of Zatara Al-Kurshan were
demolished, displacing some 46 people. On 10 July,
a Palestinian family was evicted from a property in
the Silwan neighbourhood of East Jerusalem. This
was done after the Court ruled in favour of an Israeli
organization that had obtained ownership of the
majority of the property.
The past month has again seen a reduction of
violence in Gaza, while protests at the perimeter fence
have continued. One Palestinian was killed by the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) and another 736 were injured,
including 234 children and 39 women. There were
also fewer launchings of incendiary balloons and kites
by Hamas and other Palestinian militants from Gaza.
Despite this, some 130 fires were started by some 100
devices in Israel during the reporting period.
Similarly, there has been a reduction in the number
of rockets launched by militants towards Israel since
the last dangerous escalation in May. Two rockets were
fired during the reporting period, causing no injuries
or damage. The launching of rockets and mortars
towards Israeli civilian populations is prohibited by
international humanitarian law. Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad must cease this practice immediately.
Sadly, the reporting period also saw continued
violent incidents in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. On 27 June, a 21-year-old Palestinian
was shot and killed by an Israeli policeman after he
allegedly shot fireworks towards Israeli forces during
clashes in East Jerusalem. Clashes ensued in the
area for several days, during which 88 Palestinians
were injured.
On 12 July, a 9-year old Palestinian boy was shot and
severely injured during clashes with the Israeli security
forces in the West Bank village of Kafr Qaddum. I call
on Israel to promptly launch a thorough investigation
and reiterate that children’s lives and rights must
come ahead of any other consideration. They must be
protected from all forms of violence. In addition, Israeli
security forces injured 154 Palestinians, including 14
children, in clashes that erupted across the West Bank.
On 6 July, a vehicle driven by a Palestinian reportedly
rammed into a group of IDF personnel near the

S/PV. 8583

entrance of Hizma village, north of Jerusalem, injuring
five soldiers.
Settler-related violence also continued. According
to OCHA, six Palestinians were injured in six attacks
by Israelis. At the same time, two Israelis were injured
by stones thrown by Palestinians. I condemn all attacks
on Palestinian and Israeli civilians alike and call on all
sides to refrain from violence. All perpetrators must be
held accountable for their acts.
Allow me to return to the situation in Gaza.
The United Nations continues to work closely with
Egypt to mediate and de-escalate tensions. While our
joint efforts are beginning to bear fruit, I remain deeply
concerned by the humanitarian, economic and political
situation there. The shortage of medicines, equipment
and personnel continues to impede the ability of health
providers to meet the needs of patients, including those
severely injured during the weekly protests at the
perimeter fence.
Since the last round of United Nations and
Egyptian-led mediation, the Gaza fishing zone has been
expanded from 10 to 15 nautical miles. Israel has also
returned 44 confiscated fishing boats to the Gaza Strip
and eased some of the conditions for travel of Gazabased businessmen. I welcome these developments and
urge the continuation and expansion of such actions.
In line with agreed understandings, the United
Nations is accelerating the implementation of the
September 2018 and April 2019 packages of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians, which include interventions
that have already started to improve the situation in
Gaza. In this context, the United Nations efforts on
job creation through the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East have
thus far created some 9,000 job opportunities, including
around 3,000 for women.
UN-Women has also initiated a smaller programme,
targeting some 250 vulnerable women in Gaza. A
recent assessment of the programme to date revealed
that 91 per cent of the beneficiaries had not earned any
income prior to this programme. About 83 per cent
of the women said that the opportunities improved
their livelihoods; 71 per cent said their interhousehold
tension has decreased due to the availability of income;
and 55 per cent reported that the earned income

19-225843/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

allowed them to participate in decision-making at the
household level.
The current calm must be sustained in order to
gradually introduce longer-term interventions that
will support Gaza’s sustainable development. I take
this opportunity to thank the Member States that have
contributed to date and strongly urge others to support
these vital efforts, particularly in the areas of job
creation, health care, water and sanitation, and energy.
Yet, the root of Gaza’s problems remains political.
I call on all Palestinian factions to take concrete steps
to ensure the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank
under a single, democratic and legitimate national
Government. Gaza is and must remain an integral
part of a future Palestinian State as part of the twoState solution.
While discussions aimed at resolving the financial
crisis in the Palestinian Authority (PA) are ongoing, no
solution has yet been found. For the fifth consecutive
month, the Palestinian Government has refused to
receive Israel’s partial transfer of tax revenues owed
to it. Despite the PA’s announced austerity measures
and the support package committed by Qatar, the
PA remains under tremendous strain and may soon
reach the breaking point. The Palestinian economy is
increasingly showing signs of decline, with a noticeable
reduction of purchasing power contributing to an overall
reduction in economic activities. I call on both sides to
engage in a constructive manner to ensure compliance
with the Paris Protocol on Economic Relations.
In the meantime, it is critical to adopt temporary
measures to address the PA’s fiscal crisis, and I encourage
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to work together to
find such solutions. The recent decision of the League
of Arab States to support with up to $100 million per
month the Palestinian Authority should provide a
welcome respite until a viable solution is found. The
recent memoranda of understanding between the
Government of the Palestinian Authority and Jordan
in the areas of energy, health and transportation are
also welcome.
During the reporting period, we saw additional
international support for Palestine’s economic
development. I note the third high-level Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development, under the co-chairpersonship
of Japan and Palestine. I also note the Peace to
Prosperity economic workshop that took place in
4/63

23/07/2019

Bahrain on 25 and 26 June, and which was attended by
Government officials, business leaders, representatives
of international organizations and religious leaders,
among others.
Humanitarian and economic support for the
Palestinian population is crucial to creating an
environment conducive to viable negotiation. Such
measures should be followed by a comprehensive peace
agreement that addresses all final status issues.
In closing, I would like to emphasize the severity
of the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
and the urgent need for tangible steps to reverse the
negative trajectory. The circumstances will hardly ever
be ideal for advancing peace, but let us do our utmost
with conviction, hope and creativity to support the
creation of those circumstances. The United Nations
remains committed to supporting Palestinians and
Israelis in their efforts to end the conflict and to
realizing the vision of two States, living side by side in
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.^
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We thank the Peruvian
presidency for convening today’s important meeting
and for your able leadership of the Security Council in
addressing the Council’s agenda. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing
on the situation, one that regrettably worsens every day
that action to ensure justice is delayed and that a political
horizon for a peaceful solution remains obstructed.
We have come to this Chamber time after time,
appealing to, calling on and imploring the Security
Council to act to alleviate the human suffering, to
salvage the prospects for peace and to contribute to
making that peace a reality. We remain convinced that
such action, in line with international law, the Council’s
resolutions and its responsibility for international peace
and security under the United Nations Charter, is the
only way to bring an end to this grave injustice.
Respect for the law and human rights and
establishment of justice are the only way forward.
Those who would tell us otherwise are setting us
up for decades more of suffering and insecurity for
all — Palestinians, Israelis and the entire region. Let me
add in this regard: all colonialists and occupying Powers
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

throughout history have continuously and repeatedly
tried to substitute freedom with the improvement of
peoples’ living conditions and did not succeed in a
single instance. They will not succeed in the case of the
Palestinian people, as we will never be the exception to
the rule. And despite all those who come from within
or outside the Security Council to try to convince us
that what we are doing does not make sense, saying
that they have the magic formula, we know that their
formula has been tried throughout history, but it has
never succeeded. It will not succeed this time either.
After more than 52 years of Israel’s illegal
occupation of our land, its gross, violent denial of
the rights of our people and its constant efforts to
dispossess and displace, it is past high time to justly
and permanently redress the situation. This is a blatant
situation of belligerent colonial foreign occupation,
attested to by any measure of the law and by the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the International Court
of Justice, countless regional and global organizations,
academia and the international community in its near
entirety — and it must be brought to an end.
Absent accountability, including for the gravest
violations, this foreign occupation is rapidly mutating
into apartheid, bringing shame to all who have pledged
to never allow such denigration of human beings to
occur again. Moreover, as many have long observed
with regard to the question of Palestine, the failure
to uphold the law on this issue has undermined the
international rules-based system, exposing its flaws
and total dependence on political will for effect and
allowing for its cynical exploitation.
This situation can never be normalized. The legal,
political and moral obligations incumbent upon the
Security Council and the international community as
a whole are clear, as are the principles and values that
are so fundamental for peace and security in our world.
However, as we have heard from Israel’s representatives
and more recently from its staunchest supporter in the
Council, there are those who deride their principles
and values as things of the past or mere slogans and
who are blatantly dismissive of Palestinian rights. In
their calculus, the law and morals do not matter; only
raw power and delusions of superiority do. In clearing
the way for a future devoid of values and principles,
they not only expose the emptiness of their claims of
seeking a peaceful, secure and better future for all,
but do a disservice to humankind by setting dangerous
precedents with far-reaching implications.

S/PV. 8583

All of the foregoing was starkly reflected in the
scenes of destruction and injustice witnessed yesterday
in occupied Palestine in the Sur Baher neighbourhood
of the Wadi Al-Hummus area of Jerusalem, where
Israel has issued military orders for the demolition
of 10 residential buildings, comprising at least 70
apartments and affecting hundreds of families. Instead
of demolishing the illegal wall, Israel is now using the
wall as a pretext to demolish Palestinian homes.
I can show Council members a few pictures of
yesterday’s reality; they depict some of the homes
that were destroyed and demolished. In front of these
homes, we see their owners watching the demolition by
the Israeli occupying authorities, who show complete
disregard for the suffering of children who are seeing
the furniture of their homes being thrown outside while
they are watching their family homes being destroyed
and demolished. Such plans and actions, deliberate
and systematic in nature, constitute gross violations of
United Nations resolutions and the Charter prohibition
on acquisition of territory by force, grave breaches of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, disrespect for the 2004
International Court of Justice advisory opinion and war
crimes pursuant to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).
Yet, ignoring its legal obligations and the appeals
of the United Nations, States and Palestinian, Israeli
and international human rights organizations, Israel
began yesterday to demolish, as I have mentioned, the
homes in Sur Baher. In the early hours of Monday, a
large contingent of Israeli soldiers entered the homes
of the families residing there and forced them to leave
before proceeding to destroy the homes using military
bulldozers and massive amounts of dynamite. As I have
just shown Council members, the scenes have been
shocking and heartbreaking.
The families displaced and dispossessed of their
properties and life’s belongings yesterday include 17
persons, 11 of whom are children. Nine are Palestine
refugees who have been traumatized by yet another
displacement. As the destruction continues, 350 other
Palestinians fear the same loss, in addition to the
thousands more Palestinians, especially in occupied
East Jerusalem, who are under the threat of pending
demolition orders by Israel.
For these families, the anguish is immense and the
situation disastrous. Their homes have not been taken by
an act of nature such as those we sadly witness around

19-225845/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the world; rather they have been taken by a deliberate
decision by the Israeli Government and its so-called
Supreme Court of Justice, which have assumed rights
and privileges that the people of Israel are not entitled
to in order to strip another people of their legitimate
rights, land and property. This is a blatant act of ethnic
cleansing and forced transfer; it is tantamount to a war
crime and it must be fully condemned and prosecuted
as such.
Israel is not the sovereign in the area of Sur Baher/
Wadi Al-Hummus, just as it is not the sovereign in any
part of the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967,
including East Jerusalem. Israel, the occupying Power,
does not hold any of the rights it has accorded to itself
to carry out such colonization in our land. The Israeli
Government, its officials and military personnel must
be held accountable for these crimes, and reparations
and restitution for these losses must be obligatory upon
the occupying Power. The State of Palestine will spare
no effort and will continue exploring every avenue to
end impunity and ensure justice for victims, including
through the ICC.
We are informed by over five decades of Israeli
occupation policies. The pretext may vary but the
objective is always the same: an illegal land grab. They
may declare closed military areas, green areas, new
archaeological sites, a new road or a new tunnel, but
they always mean land confiscation. Religion, history
and security are placed at the service of that colonial
project to the detriment of the rights of the Palestinian
people and the interests of the Israeli people.

23/07/2019

of occupation and the basic rights of the Palestinian
people, we wonder?
When people live peacefully, even under conditions
of constant oppression, and when they work hard,
support themselves and build homes for themselves on
their own land only to see those homes destroyed under
pretexts that are as false as they are illegal, how can that
possibly contribute to a better life, a sense of dignity and
stability? How can such dispossession, as was inflicted
on hundreds of thousands of Palestinians before them,
foster any belief that peace and coexistence are possible?
It cannot. No amount of spin or propaganda ­— or stories
told inside or outside this Chamber —
­ can hide the fact
that those actions are being taken in a grave breach of
international humanitarian law that amounts to massive
collective punishment.
Yet, though dispossessed and displaced, deprived
and isolated, the Palestinian people remain. They have
been and will continue to be resilient. They will not
submit or surrender. There is no people on this Earth that
will willingly give up the right to freedom and human
dignity, and I say that in the presence of representatives
of nations that have fought valiantly to free themselves
from occupation. Those members who have lived under
colonial domination and fought against colonialism to
acquire their freedom would not consider for a second
exchanging their freedom for money or a better life.
Freedom was always the most important thing and we
are exactly like them. Freedom is the most important
thing for us.

So when Israel announced the excavation of yet
another tunnel in occupied East Jerusalem, its true
intentions were obvious. Its recent inauguration of
the so-called Pilgrims Road, with the support of the
United States Ambassador to Israel and other American
officials, was yet another illegal act attempting to assert
sovereignty where there is none and to alter the character
and status of that Holy City in flagrant contravention
of United Nations resolutions, revealing yet again the
occupation’s expansionist, extremist intentions.

The continuation of those criminal, inhumane
actions, like all the crimes before them over more than
70 years of injustice, have sown deep resentment, anger
and pain among our people, while the international
community’s silence and inaction have only deepened
our hurt, despair and sense of abandonment. The
colonization and annexation of our land by Israel, its
suffocation of Gaza, its violence, terror and incitement
against our people, its killing of our children, its
imprisonment of our people, its assaults on our holy
sites, its theft of our natural and financial resources and
its destruction of our future must be halted.

Is that the better life that some United States
administration officials claiming to seek peace speak
of? Is that the future touted by the failed, so-called
Peace to Prosperity workshop convened last month,
which neglected to even minimally acknowledge the
root causes of the conflict, the reality of a half-century

The global consensus on the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to the same freedoms
cherished worldwide, on the principles and parameters
of a just solution, remains strong, and we thank and
salute members for holding firmly to their collective
and unanimous position in spite of all the efforts of

6/63

19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

some to try to convince them otherwise on the basis of
big ideas that were not even shared with them.
Those principles and parameters and the
commitment to their realization are reaffirmed in
this Chamber every month. That consensus has been
reaffirmed by recent summits of the League of Arab
States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
and the African Union, as well as by the ministerial
meetings of the OIC and the Non-Aligned Movement,
and it remains at the core of the international position.
At every juncture, calls are made for action to achieve
the two-State solution based on the 1967 borders in
accordance with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principle of land
for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.
Equally consistent are the calls for action to bring
an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967;
to realize the independence and sovereignty of the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side with Israel on the basis of secure
and recognized borders; and to achieve a just solution
for the Palestine refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948. The consensus
remains that such a solution would be the guarantor of
just, lasting and comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian and
Arab-Israeli peace and security.
We are grateful for those principled positions
and the solidarity extended to our just cause and our
people, including to Palestine refugees through the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. However, commitment to
principles and humanitarian assistance alone cannot
remedy that abysmal situation and make peace possible.
International action, in line with legal, political and
moral duties concerning the Palestine question, must be
taken. There must be accountability. All the legitimate
tools that are politically and legally available, including
prosecution in courts and sanctions, must be pursued
without hesitation.
The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibilities and act immediately, in line with its
resolutions, to compel a halt to the occupation’s crimes,
avert further deterioration of the situation, protect
innocent civilians and salvage the chances for a just
peace. Israel must bear the consequences of its violations
and its disregard of the international community’s will.

S/PV. 8583

States must also act, individually and collectively,
to adhere to the relevant resolutions in both word and
deed, and to uphold their legal obligations, including the
obligation not to recognize or render aid or assistance to
the current illegal situation and the obligation to ensure
accountability. That must include action in respect of
the call for distinction in resolution 2334 (2016) and
all other relevant resolutions, including resolution 478
(1980) on Jerusalem.
Only such action and pressure can bring change and
salvage the chances for peace. Continuing to appease
and coddle Israel, the occupying Power, can only lead
to more of the same impunity and worse. We will do so
at our peril, but also at the peril of the Israeli people
and the region as a whole, which will continue to be
deprived of the justice, peace, security and development
that so many have long sought and struggled for. Do not
let another generation suffer that injustice.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Forty years ago in 1979, the
world witnessed two historic events. One set the stage
for a future of peace and order in our region and the
other emboldened the forces of complete and utter
chaos. On 26 March of that year, Israeli Prime Minister
Menachem Begin, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and
United States President Jimmy Carter shook hands on
the White House lawn to launch a lasting peace between
two formerly sworn enemies.
As one end of our region began to see the light of
day, the other was descending deeper into darkness.
On 11 February, just five weeks before the Treaty of
Peace between the Arab Republic of Egypt and the
State of Israel was signed, the founders of the current
Iranian regime gained control of the Government,
hijacking the future of Iran and exploiting the Iranian
people’s genuine aspirations for freedom. Just two
weeks apart from each other, two ground-breaking and
radically opposed developments occurred in the Middle
East — the first peace agreement between Israel and
an Arab State and the rise of the violent and oppressive
regime that laid the foundation for the fundamental
threats facing the Middle East today.
In 2019, there is still peace between Israel and
Egypt. There is also peace between Israel and Jordan.
Those agreements, which have lasted decades, have
served as critical forces of order in a region plagued by
terrorism, extremism and hateful ideology.

19-225847/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

But the revolution has not subsided either. If
anything, the forces of chaos have only grown,
extending far past Iranian borders. The Iranian regime
is jeopardizing the region and beyond, spreading its
ideology into Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Yemen and even the
African continent. It is financing terrorism while also
hijacking the freedom of navigation in one of the most
crucial shipping lanes in the world. It is bolstering its
proxies to commit malicious crimes around the world
and continues to pursue nuclear weapons capabilities
with the explicit goal of destroying Israel.
The United Nations cannot stay silent when those
forces of chaos are destroying the principles for which
it stands. Today, we have a duty to preserve the forces of
order by confronting the forces of chaos — terrorism,
extremism, hateful ideology and the regime of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
On 11 July 1997, Nelson Mandela delivered a
speech on reaching a new world order. He observed: “in
the new global order, no country, region or continent
can any longer operate in isolation from the rest of
the world” (“Renewal and renaissance: towards a new
world order”, lecture delivered at the Oxford Centre for
Islamic Studies, United Kingdom). Mandela’s words
encourage cooperation and partnership for a new and
prosperous world order, but they also send a warning to
those countries and forces that seek to act in isolation
from the rest of the world and against its best interests.
It has become clear that the interconnected world
order is upheld and protected when countries come
together to confront rogue actors and their malicious
partners. Those regimes seek to dominate the regions
of the world with an extreme ideology. They punish
or even kill those that they believe stand in their way.
The regimes use violence and terrorism to achieve their
goals. Such rogue regimes are those like the one in the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
In 1979, the year that witnessed historic peace, also
endured the rise of the Islamic Republic of Iran. The
Iranian revolution shocked the world. When Ayatollah
Khamenei took power, he wasted no time in turning
his extremist militant ideology into policy. When
Khamenei established the Quds Force in 1980, with the
clear objective of exporting the revolution abroad, he
stated in his announcement, “We have to topple these
unjust and treacherous Governments”.
Take it from the Iranian political and military
establishment itself. Regime leaders today celebrate
8/63

23/07/2019

their international intervention openly and boast about
their regional influence and power in Iraq, Syria,
Lebanon, Yemen and Gaza. They refer to themselves
and their main partners, proxies and puppets as the
“axis of resistance”. The axis includes Iran; its proxy,
Hizbullah in Lebanon; and its partner, Bashar Al-Assad
and his criminals in Syria. Its goal is to export the
Iranian revolution, violently targeting the West and all
who oppose its efforts to spread the revolution across
the region.
The Iranian force of chaos has caused infestation in
Lebanon — 13 years have passed since the catalyst that
launched the Second Lebanon War in July 2006, when
Hizbullah launched a well-orchestrated attack with the
goal of infiltrating Israeli sovereign territory, killing
eight Israeli soldiers and abducting two more.
One month later, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1701 (2006), which established, between
the Blue Line and the Litani river, “an area free of
any armed personnel, assets and weapons other than
those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL”
( para. 8). It also called for the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004), requiring “disarmament of all
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias” ( para. 3).
But Hizbullah, with inspiration, funding and
weapons supplied by Iran, has further entrenched
itself in the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). Although 13 years
have passed, the Security Council has yet to receive
an accurate picture of the gravity of the situation in
southern Lebanon. It is unfortunate that some have
chosen to turn a blind eye to the reality on the ground.
UNIFIL must be fully equipped to discharge its
mandate and contribute to stability in the region. It must
report to the Council all restrictions in movement to the
fullest extent, detailing where the restrictions occurred
and who was responsible and why, because with every
passing day of Hizbullah’s further entrenchment, it
becomes harder and harder to tell where Beirut ends
and Tehran begins.
Resolution 1701 (2006) calls for “no sales or supply
of arms and related materiel to Lebanon except as
authorized by its Government” ( para. 8). It appears,
however, that the call for an embargo has been
completely ignored.
The Iranian regime is transferring weapons in
various ways and Council members can see it there.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Quds Force exploits civilian airports in Damascus
and Beirut — civilian airports — and civilian land
infrastructure on the Syria-Lebanon border to smuggle
weapons, dual-use items and other capabilities. But
today I am presenting new evidence. In 2018 and 2019,
Israel found that Iran and the Quds Force have begun to
advance the exploitation of civilian maritime channels
and specifically the port of Beirut. For the same
purpose, a civilian port — the port of Beirut — is now
the port of Hizbullah.
Led by the Quds Force, dual-use items are smuggled
into Lebanon to advance Hizbullah’s rocket and missile
capabilities and conversion programme. Under the
guise of Syrian entities, such as the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre, Iran and Hizbullah have
been able to purchase dual-use equipment from civilian
companies, while concealing the true nature of those
purchases, which were hostile to Israel and its citizens.
Through that method, Iran is able to transfer the
dual-use equipment from the Port of Beirut with the
permission of the authorities and without revealing its
true identity and intentions. Every State Member of the
Organization must ask itself the following questions.
Is it absolutely sure that its companies are not the ones
selling dual-use equipment to Hizbullah? Is it sure that
its citizens know the end use of those dual-use items?
The Iranian regime’s targets for exporting
the revolution stretch far beyond the banks of the
Mediterranean. In the past month, Iran has pursued
a dangerous advancement in its hostile nuclear
programme, following President Rouhani’s declaration
to enrich uranium to “any amount we want”. The
regime has so far enriched uranium to 4.5 per cent,
going over the limit of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA). It is clear that Iran will continue
to pursue a nuclear weapon, threatening the entire
Western Hemisphere.
I therefore ask the countries that still support the
JCPOA what they are to do about the Iranian nuclear
threat. Are they going to ignore it? What is the Security
Council going to do about the Iranian nuclear threat?
We simply do not have the luxury of giving the Iranian
regime the benefit of the doubt. Now is not the time for
optimism, but the time for realism. It is the time to find
partners who share our goal of confronting that force
of chaos.
After years of war, it is significant that Israel and
our Arab neighbours have found something on which

S/PV. 8583

to agree. Maybe the Council should listen to us if we
agree about something after so many years. Our mutual
objectives have brought us together. In the face of
the threat posed by the Iranian regime, we are each
committed to restoring order in the region. It is critical
that, in the struggle against Iranian expansionist
ambitions, all parties look at the big picture. In the face
of existential threats, Israel, the Arab world and the
international community can only gain from working
together. By confronting the forces of chaos, terrorism,
extremism and hostile nuclear ambitions, we can clear
the path for regional peace.
When we gathered here three months ago, I offered
a framework of four pillars for the past and the future
(S/PV.8517). One of those pillars is regional cooperation.
Just as in 1979, when Israel and Egypt stood together
for peace, despite the turmoil shaking the other end of
our region, today we must come together once more to
confront the threat to peace. The forces threatening that
peace all lead back to the regime of the Islamic Republic
of Iran. We have learned from history that when the
international community fails to rise to the occasion
before it is too late, the price to pay is unbearable. When
it comes to the Iranian regime, now is not the time for
appeasement; now is the time for action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to those Council members that wish to
make statements.
Mr. Greenblatt (United States of America): I am
pleased to be back in the Security Council today. I
would like to update members of the Council on the
Trump Administration’s peace efforts.
I know that this institution has shown a deep
interest in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I also know
that many of those present are frustrated by the fact
that we have not yet shared the details of the vision
that we have crafted. We understand that. We hope
that when the right time does come, that frustration
will dissipate, as will the frustration that we all have
about the lack of any progress towards the resolution of
the conflict, as well as the lack of progress to improve
lives and the security challenges that plague Israel and
much of the region. We hope that such frustration will
be replaced by a mutual understanding that our vision
provides a unique opportunity to help the two parties
and their neighbours achieve what has been elusive for
too long — a comprehensive peace agreement.

19-225849/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We know that the Palestinians have seen promises
made by some and not kept, but President Trump and
his Administration desire to make the lives of everyone
involved better. That means Palestinians in Gaza,
Jerusalem and what many call the West Bank; and that
means Israelis in Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and what many
call Judea and Samaria.
I want to express my gratitude to the Kingdom of
Bahrain for graciously co-hosting the very successful
Peace to Prosperity workshop with us last month. In
Manama, more than 300 Government, private sector
and civil society leaders came together to demonstrate
an international commitment to improving the lives of
the Palestinians. Government leaders, chief executive
officers and economists at the workshop agreed that
the economic vision is detailed and ambitious, but
achievable and potentially transformative with the
right environment created by an agreed-upon peace
agreement and proper governance structures.
Our economic vision, which has now been
downloaded from the Internet over 1 million times,
contains a detailed portfolio of projects and capacitybuilding programmes that have the potential to
unleash exciting, sustainable private-sector growth
for Palestinians, Jordanians, Egyptians and Lebanese.
We have been clear and honest about the fact that
this economic vision can be achieved only if there
is a resolution to the political conflict between the
parties. This is not an economic peace. There will be
no economic prosperity without a political solution,
but no political solution will succeed without a welldeveloped economic plan. President Trump has not yet
decided when we will release the political portion of
the plan, and we hope to make that decision soon. In the
meantime, I want to ask for the help of those present
to create the conditions by which we could all have a
serious conversation.
Among the many obstacles that we face is the
constant drumbeat of tired rhetoric that is designed to
prevent progress and bypass direct negotiations. It is
time to retire that rhetoric. Peace will require honesty
and a willingness to consider new ideas, as well as
courage and hard compromises. This is a time for us to
speak to each other candidly, not in stale slogans and
talking points.
Let me get a little specific here. The conflict will
not end on the basis of an international consensus
about who was right and who was wrong and about
10/63

23/07/2019

who should give up X and who should give up Y.
International consensus might work from time to time,
when such a consensus can actually be achieved. In the
case of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, international
consensus has not been achieved. Those who continue
to call for international consensus on the conflict are
doing nothing to encourage the parties to sit down at
the negotiating table and make the hard compromises
necessary for peace. In fact, they are doing the opposite
by allowing people to hide behind words that mean
nothing. International consensus is too often nothing
more than a mask for inaction.
Let us not forget the day when the United Nations
could not even find a way to build an international
consensus behind the fact that Hamas is a terrorist
organization that relentlessly attacks Israelis by
incendiary balloons, missiles, attack tunnels and
other means, sometimes while hiding in residential
neighbourhoods filled with Palestinian families. Hamas
ghoulishly holds Israeli soldiers Hadar Goldin and
Oron Shaul as bargaining chips. Hamas has imprisoned
Israeli civilians Avraham Mengistu and Hisham
Al-Sayed. Hamas is a brutal terrorist organization that
causes nothing but misery and suffering for Palestinians
and Israelis. It is an organization that continues to vow
to destroy Israel.
That failure is profoundly shameful. If we cannot
even reach an international consensus regarding
Hamas, is an international consensus really going to
end the conflict? And how is it that we cannot find an
international consensus that the Palestinian Authority’s
rewarding of terrorism and the murder of Israelis using
public funds, some donated by countries represented in
this very Chamber, is abhorrent and must be stopped?
International consensus is not international
law. So let us stop kidding ourselves: if a so-called
international consensus had been able to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it would have done so
decades ago. It did not.
This conflict is also not going to be resolved
by reference to international law when such law is
inconclusive. We have all heard cogent arguments
claiming international law says one thing or another
about this or that aspect of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Some of those arguments are persuasive — at least to
certain audiences, but none of them are conclusive.
We will not get to the bottom of whose interpretation
of international law is correct on this conflict. There
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is no judge, jury or court in the world that the parties
involved have agreed to give jurisdiction to in order to
decide whose interpretations are correct. International
law with respect to this conflict is a tricky subject that
could be discussed and argued for years without ever
reaching a conclusion. We can therefore spend years
and years arguing what the law is and whether it is
enforceable and prolong the ongoing suffering or we
could acknowledge the futility of that approach.
The conflict will also not be resolved by constantly
referencing the hundreds of United Nations resolutions
on the issue. The constant reference to these heavily
negotiated, purposely ambiguously worded resolutions
is nothing more than a cloak to avoid substantive debate
about the realities on the ground and the complexity
of the conflict. The interpretation of one of the most
often-cited resolutions, resolution 242 (1967), has been
hotly debated over the past half-century. That debate
has not brought us closer to a lasting and comprehensive
peace. That debate has not even bridged the gap
between those who construe resolution 242 (1967) to
call for the so-called right of return and compensation
for displaced Palestinians and the fact that the world
covers its eyes to the fate of the roughly equal number
of Jews who were expelled or forced to flee their homes
in Arab countries in connection with Israel’s war of
independence. Resolution 242 (1967) and others may
have been drafted and voted upon in a genuine attempt
to bring an end to the suffering that all involved in this
conflict had endured, but we must acknowledge they
have not succeeded. A comprehensive and lasting peace
will not be created by fiat of international law or by
these heavily wordsmithed unclear resolutions.
The same holds true for the status of Jerusalem.
There is no international consensus about Jerusalem,
and no international consensus or interpretation of
international law will persuade the United States or
Israel that a city in which Jews have lived and worshipped
for nearly 3,000 years and has been the capital of the
Jewish State for 70 years is not today and forever the
capital of Israel. Jerusalem is a city of three world faiths.
The rights of all who wish to worship at the holy sites in
the city of Jerusalem must be protected. It is true that
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the
Palestinian Authority (PA) continue to assert that East
Jerusalem must be a capital for the Palestinians. But let
us remember: an aspiration is not a right. Please do not
read into that statement anything about the content of
the political portion of the plan. I am simply making a

S/PV. 8583

statement of fact. Aspirations belong at the negotiating
table, and only direct negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians can resolve the issue of Jerusalem, if it
can be resolved. It will not be resolved in this Chamber,
in this institution or in any other capital around the
world. That does not mean that the Palestinians cannot
aspire to have a capital in East Jerusalem, with creative
solutions that attempt to respect all three religions that
cherish this incredible city. But if there is to be such
a solution, only the parties themselves through direct
negotiations can work this issue out.
Many participants in this conversation continue to
relitigate the events of 1967, when Israel heroically acted
to defend itself against the threat to its very existence.
Many would rather rail against the supposed evils of
what they routinely call an illegal occupation than
engage constructively on the disputes that characterize
the conflict today. That is not a productive dialogue.
The dispute over the territory is a question that can
only be resolved in the context of direct negotiations
between the parties. And I am focused on how to
get those parties back to the table. I hope I have the
Council’s support in that.
Those who have weaponized the term “occupation”
in order to criticize Israel are doing nothing to
promote a resolution to this conflict. In fact, they are
heavily undermining the chances for peace and the
improvement of the lives of Palestinians and Israelis.
Both Israel and the Palestinians have asserted a claim
to certain land. This is an unresolved dispute, and it
will only be through direct negotiations between the
parties that we have a chance of resolving that dispute
and achieving a comprehensive peace. Let us not lose
sight of the fact that Israel has already conceded at
least 88 per cent of the territory captured by it in the
defensive war it had no choice but to fight in 1967. We
call on the leadership of the PLO and the PA to put aside
blanket rejections of a plan they have not even seen and
to show a willingness to engage in a good faith manner
in a meaningful dialogue with Israel. And we call
upon each of the Security Council members and each
country that truly wishes to help the Israelis and the
Palestinians achieve a comprehensive peace agreement
to encourage them back to the table.
The vision for peace that we plan to present will not
be ambiguous, unlike many resolutions that have passed
in this Chamber. It will provide sufficient detail so that
people can see what compromises will be necessary
to achieve a realistic, lasting comprehensive solution

19-2258411/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to this conflict, the conflict that has robbed so much
potential from Palestinians, Israelis and the region as
a whole. I ask all members to reserve judgment until
we publish, and Council members read, the 60 or so
pages that detail what peace could look like. Achieving
that vision will require difficult compromises by both
parties if they are willing to make such compromises,
but we believe both sides will gain far more than
they give.
We all want this conflict resolved. We all want to
help those who continue to bear the unendurable weight
of this conflict, whether they are Palestinians, Israelis
or their many friends and neighbours in the region.
So let us start by acknowledging that there are no
shortcuts and that fictions of international consensus,
international legitimacy, arguments about who is right
and who is wrong as a matter of international law, and
aspirations expressed as rights will not achieve peace.
A solution cannot be forced on the parties. Unilateral
steps in international and multilateral forums will do
nothing to solve this conflict. Let us be honest with
ourselves and the parties and the region that the only
way ahead is direct negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians.
And let us also not lose sight of the deep division
that exists among Palestinians themselves — between
Fatah and Hamas — a serious issue that must be
resolved to make progress. Let us start a new realistic
discussion. We need to look to the future rather than
dwell on the past. Let us build real foundations of peace
and work to truly transform lives by speaking the truth
directly to one another across the table.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs for her briefing.
Early yesterday morning, Israel, the occupying
Power, began demolishing buildings in Wadi
Al-Hummus in the village of Sur Bahir in East
Jerusalem, which contain numerous apartments,
displacing many Palestinian families. The operations
remain ongoing under the protection of Israeli soldiers.
A joint statement was issued by Mr. Jamie McGoldrick,
United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator for the
occupied Palestinian territory, Ms. Gwyn Lewis,
Director of Operations of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and Mr. James Heenan, Head of the Office of the
12/63

23/07/2019

United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in the occupied Palestinian territory, in which they
stressed the dramatic consequences of these illegal
actions, but begged the question as to what makes
Israel, the occupying Power, adopt policies that violate
international law and Security Council resolutions.
The answer is the absence of accountability and the
fact that Israel disregards the United Nations and the
international community’s response. The absence of
Israel’s accountability for its actions is the underlying
cause of the deterioration of the situation in the
occupied territories. I will therefore focus on the issue
of the absence of Israel’s accountability.
First, the absence of accountability has led the
occupying Power to continue its expansionist settlement
activities and practices, including the seizure of land by
force, the confiscation of Palestinian homes and forcible
displacements, which have reached their highest level
in recent years, in blatant violation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016).
Second, in the absence of an effective and robust
accountability mechanism, such Israeli practices are
leading to increased violence and posing a threat to
civilian lives. Raids and illegal detentions continue,
as well as the indefinite imprisonment of detainees
without formal charges.
Third, the absence of accountability is emboldening
Israel and causing it to continue its illegal practices in the
occupied territories, in particular in occupied Al-Quds
Al Sharif, where the goal is to erase its religious and
historic identity and end the Palestinian presence there
by means of Israeli activities and repeated raids on the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, guarded by the Israeli army, as well
as court-authorized practices such as the demolition
of buildings and forced evictions, as in the case of the
village of Sur Baher.
Fourth, the absence of accountability has made
it easy for Israel to enjoy impunity and continue its
violations of international law by means of the relentless
use of military measures. We therefore reject such
unprecedented, premeditated and provocative behaviour
by Israel, which aims to prolong the occupation and
undermine the prospects for a two-State solution.
Fifth, the absence of accountability and Israel’s
refusal to implement resolution 1860 (2009) have led to
a 13-year blockade on Gaza. The humanitarian situation
in Gaza is precarious. Its economy is undergoing
profound stagnation. Levels of unemployment have
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8583

reached 50 per cent and higher, while restrictions
are preventing the people of Gaza from earning their
livelihoods and undermining opportunities for them
to receive adequate health care, in particular those
wounded in the peaceful Great March of Return.

for peace, the Quartet road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative, and should be implemented in a manner that
will allow Palestinians to enjoy their legitimate political
rights and establish their independent State within their
own territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Sixth, under international humanitarian law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the Israeli authorities
have an ongoing obligation to implement measures
that best serve the people under occupation. Israel,
however, violates those obligations and is exploiting
an environment of impunity, riding roughshod over its
responsibilities as an occupying Power. It continues
to take unilateral measures, the most recent of which
were the rejection of the renewal of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and its decision to
withhold a portion of Palestinian customs revenues.
We therefore call on Israel to respect its obligations and
bilateral agreements with the Palestinian Authority.

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I will be relatively brief
because we are basically turning in circles in view of
the previous discussion that we had here (see S/PV.8557)
and because I will align myself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Croatia on behalf of
the States members of the European Union.

Seventh, with regard to the financial challenges
facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), we call
for enabling UNRWA to continue its role in providing
services to refugees in the areas of education, health
and social services. It is also important to continue to
provide the necessary financial support to UNRWA.
The State of Kuwait will remain among the Agency’s
main partners. Our voluntary contributions over the
past four years have amounted to $113 million.
In the absence of accountability for daily and
systematic Israeli violations within the occupied
Palestinian territories and in the light of Israel’s
manipulation of that situation so that it can deny the
Palestinians their legitimate rights and usurp and pillage
their land and assets, the prospects for achieving a just
and lasting peace in the region are being undermined.
It is therefore urgent to stop acting as if the rights of
the Palestinian people are not covered by international
laws and norms.
As members of the Council, we have a particular
responsibility to implement its resolutions and end
the violations of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations perpetrated by Israel, the
occupying Power.
In conclusion, we are committed to the Arab, Islamic
and international positions, according to which peace is
the strategic choice and a lasting and comprehensive
solution is underpinned by parameters such as relevant
Security Council resolutions, the principle of land

I would like to first start by expressing my support
for the United Nations. I heard and would like to refer
to what Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo said in her briefing. I
fully subscribe to what she said, and I must say that
I was also very struck by what she said about the
negative trajectory in which we find ourselves. She
talked about violence, settlements, demolitions, rockets
and provocative rhetoric, among others.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a political
one and will be resolved only by a political solution.
Germany supports a negotiated two-State solution,
based on internationally agreed parameters and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
I would like to respond in that regard to what
the representative of the United States just said. As
the Ambassador of Germany, I must say that, for us,
international law is relevant; international law is not
futile. We believe in the United Nations — that is why
we sought to become a member of the Security Council
for a two-year term. We believe in Security Council
resolutions; for us, they are binding international law.
As I said, we believe in the force of international
law and we do not believe in the force of the strongest.
For us, international law is not an à la carte menu. On
other occasions, United States representatives have
insisted on international law and on the implementation
of Security Council resolutions, such as those on North
Korea. We absolutely support that and, as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), we work very hard to implement Security
Council resolutions word by word. For us, resolution
2334 (2016) — to name the most recent Security Council
resolution — is binding law and that is the international
consensus. It is the United States that has withdrawn
from the international consensus on resolution 2334
(2016).

19-2258413/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

With regard to the situation, Germany participated
in the Bahrain workshop, because we are interested in
sensible measures that promote peace and boost the
economy. But I think that one thing is clear — prosperity
will be elusive as long as it is not firmly embedded
in a political framework. A lot has been said about
settlements, although not by the representative of the
United States in his intervention. For us, settlement
activities are illegal under international law. They
undermine the prospects for a negotiated twoState solution. The rhetoric has gone beyond talk of
settlements. We now hear rhetoric alluding to the
possible annexation of parts of the West Bank. We
are extremely concerned. Germany will not recognize
changes to the 1967 lines, including to Jerusalem;
we will recognize only changes that are the result
of negotiations.
To go back to the issue of settlements, the approval
of construction and tenders for new housing units in
the West Bank and Jerusalem, Germany is particularly
concerned about the demolition and seizures of
Palestinian-owned structures across the West Bank
and evictions of Palestinians from their homes in
parts of East Jerusalem, such as Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan
and Wadi Al-Hummus. We have seen photos of areas
where demolitions are taking place as we speak. Such
activities affect the Palestinian-owned structures
located in Areas A and B and set a precedent that
severely undermines the Oslo Accords. We therefore
call upon Israel to end the expansion of settlements, the
legalization of outposts, demolitions and seizures of
and evictions from Palestinian-owned structures.
Let me go back to international law and, more
specifically, to resolution 2334 (2016), which does
not refer only to settlement activities. The resolution
also mentions terrorism, violence against civilians,
incitement, provocative actions and inflammatory
rhetoric. Germany deeply condemns all attacks on
Israel. The firing of rockets from Gaza by Hamas or
other groups is unacceptable. Germany stands steadfast
in its commitment to Israel’s security as a Jewish and
democratic State. We will not remain silent when Israel’s
security or right to exist is questioned or compromised.
For the international community, peace is best served
by observing international law. That holds true for
resolution 2334 (2016) and others. It also holds true
with regard to the crisis in the Gulf and Iran. I reiterate
that the implementation by everyone of resolution 2334
(2016) would be a step in the right direction.
14/63

23/07/2019

Lastly, I would like to refer to what my Kuwaiti
colleague just said. As we worked on resolution 2334
(2016), we believed that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) was indispensable to meeting the basic needs
of Palestinian refugees. Germany is proud to have been
the largest bilateral donor to UNRWA last year.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her
briefing today.
In recent weeks, there have been worrying reports
of an increase in the number of evictions, confiscations
and demolitions of Palestinian property in both East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. Homes and structures
in the Palestinian neighbourhoods of East Jerusalem
are being torn down and settlement activity continues
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory. Since
2009, more than 6,100 Palestinian structures have
been demolished, displacing more than 9,400 people.
Since 2009, no action has been taken to address
those injustices.
South Africa is particularly alarmed about the
continuing excavation of land beneath the Silwan
neighbourhood of East Jerusalem, whose population is
predominantly Palestinian. Such actions by the Israeli
Government cannot be tolerated. It is the responsibility
of the Security Council, as part of its duty to maintain
international peace and security, condemn those actions
and call on Israel to cease such actions with immediate
effect. Israel’s persistent violations of international law
and resolutions cannot transpire without comment or
action from the Security Council. The Security Council
should uphold its United Nations Charter-mandated
responsibilities and act accordingly.
Nelson Mandela stood unambiguously for the twoState solution, in accordance with international law, as
captured in the resolutions of the Security Council, as
well as in the decisions of the International Court of
Justice. Tracing the history of South Africa and locating
it in an interconnected world, Nelson Mandela said,
“We know too well that our own freedom is incomplete
without the freedom of the Palestinians”. Nelson
Mandela was also a friend of children and youth. In that
context, we would like to focus the rest of our statement
on the plight of the youth in Palestine and the impact of
the occupation on the lives of the new generation.
Palestinian young people comprise 27 per cent of
the total Palestinian population. Demographic trends
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

indicate that, in the future, youth will constitute an
ever-increasing proportion of Palestinian society. As a
result of the long-standing occupation by the State of
Israel, the daily reality facing the youth of Palestine is
one of oppression, violence and deprivation.
Military checkpoints and the illegal separation wall
have resulted in limited trade between Palestine and
other countries, particularly within the region, which
has reduced Palestinian employment opportunities and
limited the movement of people and goods alike in
and out of the West Bank and Gaza, all of which have
detrimental impacts on both the social and economic
welfare and the future of the youth of Palestine.
As a result of that alarming situation and driven
by desperation, an increasing number of Palestinian
young people are reconsidering their way of political
involvement. At the same time, we note that Palestinian
youth have positioned themselves at the forefront of
the ongoing Great March of Return, where they have
staged regular non-violent protests along the Gaza
border, even while bearing the brunt of a violent and
disproportionate Israeli response that has led to the
deaths of more than 200 unarmed demonstrators. Such
non-violent activities prove that Palestinian youth want
to reclaim their legitimate aspirations in a considered
and thoughtful manner. They demonstrate their ability
to engage in peaceful activities to express their needs
and hopes.
We should harness that opportunity to become the
partners of Palestinian youth and acknowledge the role
they can play as agents of change in resolving the crisis
in their land. In that regard, we should also acknowledge
the important role that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) plays in the lives of all Palestinians and, in
particular, in the lives of young people. South Africa
therefore welcomes the recent pledges made at the June
pledging conference in support of UNRWA. We reaffirm
that such humanitarian support creates conditions
that contribute to easing the dire conditions of the
Palestinian people. Children in the region — be they
Palestinian, Israeli, Christian, Muslim or Jewish — all
have the right to live in peace and security alongside
one another.
In conclusion, as we mourn the untimely passing
yesterday of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya
Amano, we praise his commitment to the Joint

S/PV. 8583

Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). The JCPOA
is a comprehensive international agreement that adds
much value to international peace and security. It
enhances transparency. Through a series of reports by
the IAEA, it also enhances confidence in the Iranian
nuclear programme.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary
DiCarlo for her briefing on the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The Middle East is at the heart of international
politics and the region is plagued by a multitude of
crises — old and new alike. In recent days, tensions
have risen in the Persian Gulf. In our view, they are
being artificially heightened. The crisis jeopardizes
regional peace and security, as well as international
efforts to settle regional conflicts. Amid an ongoing
exchange of accusations, military presence is being
built up, including by States beyond the region, which
creates the risk of an armed confrontation. Any incident
could spark a conflict with devastating consequences.
We call on all stakeholders to undertake measures
to de-escalate the situation and resolve their problems
through political and diplomatic means. Above all,
that presupposes an end to ultimatums, sanctions and
threats. It becomes all the more necessary to build a
sustained mechanism for collective security in the
region on the basis of equitable dialogue. The relevant
Russian initiative is indeed geared towards breaking
the deadlock in those conflicts and crafting confidence
and oversight measures.
However, at the centre of the issues faced by the
region is the Middle East settlement. For our part, we
are sparing no effort to advance a settlement of the
range of complex issues of the Middle East crisis and
call on all stakeholders to do the same. We stand ready
to host a meeting of the leaders of Israel and Palestine
in that regard. We are taking steps to help restore
inter-Palestinian unity and we welcome the efforts of
our Egyptian colleagues to that end.
Proactive international action is required to
alleviate the dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip. At the same time, any assistance to the area
should be coordinated with the legitimate Palestinian
authorities under President Abbas and must align with
the task at hand of restoring Palestinian unity.

19-2258415/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Against that backdrop, we must send a longoverdue Security Council mission to the region. It
must be designed to build trust and facilitate the
resumption of negotiations between the parties
in order to prevent the collapse of efforts already
undertaken by the international community to ensure
conditions conducive to the implementation of the
sole viable settlement based on international law.
That basis was devised by the Security Council; that
is the very international consensus, the lack of which
was mentioned by the representative of the United
States. This international consensus is international
law because Security Council resolutions constitute
international law; they simply need to be complied
with. Any revision of this international consensus is
also in the hands of the Security Council. The issue lies
not in the absence of international consensus, but in the
United States utter disregard for it. I wonder whether
the representative of the United States understands how
far he will get with such mediation, such an approach
and such a foundation.
We reject the practice of monopolizing political
and diplomatic efforts. We propose to return to the
proven practice of multilateral efforts, including
the involvement of the Middle Eastern Quartet of
international mediators as a unique mechanism to
advance a Middle East settlement. No unilateral steps
can replace the key principles of a two-State solution,
land for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative, or change
the status of the occupied territories, including the
Syrian Golan.
We will continue to contribute to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). The activities of UNRWA are not
only humanitarian but also political in nature, given
their important stabilization effect on the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East.
Along with the Palestinian issue, new-generation
regional crises are still awaiting resolution. The Counterterrorism operations in Syria, with the participation of
Russian aerospace forces, has helped to make headway
in the fight against terrorism. The eradication of
terrorist hotbeds in Syria is in the interests not only
of Middle Eastern and North African States, but also
of the countries of Europe, as it reduces the level of
terrorist threats and the flow of migrants. President
Putin’s initiative to forge a broad anti-terrorism front
remains relevant.
16/63

23/07/2019

We are currently working to establish a political
settlement in Syria in conjunction with the United
Nations and within the framework of the Astana format.
We are in favour of combining regional efforts. It is now
critical to tackle issues of socioeconomic revival in the
Syrian Arab Republic without preconditions. We must
also solve problems related to refugees and abandon the
practice of forcibly detaining them in third countries.
General attention is currently focused on the
situation in Libya. We continue to believe that the only
way to help the Libyan people extricate themselves
from the crisis is by consolidating the positions of
international players. The current situation reflects
the consequences of foreign military interventions.
Although intended to oust an undesirable regime, they
lead to the total dismantling of statehood. We urge
all Libyan stakeholders to cooperate with the United
Nations and to refrain from advancing a unilateral
agenda, and call on external players to play by the rules.
The Libyan crisis has led to the emergence of
new phenomena, such as migratory waves. However,
this problem should not be solved by combating
migrant flows, but rather by creating acceptable
living conditions for them in their homelands. Such
an approach is equally relevant in relation to Yemen,
where all parties must act under the unifying initiatives
of the United Nations in order to achieve a political
settlement and revive statehood.
The recent Security Council mission to the Middle
East demonstrated that Iraq requires close international
attention and assistance in many areas of sociopolitical
life. Another important outcome of the mission was
the clear signal to us all that regional parties need to
contribute to the de-escalation of the situation in the
Persian Gulf. No one wants or needs a war there.
Russia maintains friendly and constructive
relations with all countries of the region without
exception. We will actively contribute to stabilizing the
situation in the Middle East and stand ready to act with
all interested parties to do so. We call on all to engage
in collective efforts.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
for her comprehensive briefing.
Allow me also to align myself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of Croatia on
behalf of the European Union member States.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Despite our constant calls for the resumption of
meaningful negotiations between the parties and the
restoration of the political horizon for the resolution
of the conflict, we have not witnessed any progress
at all. On the contrary, the situation on the ground is
becoming extremely worrisome. Recent developments
in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank remind us of the
looming threat of a full-scale escalation, which should
be avoided at all costs.
The priority of the international community should
be to restore a political horizon for the resumption of a
meaningful peace process. We believe that a negotiated
two-State solution and a resolution of all final status
issues, including Jerusalem, settlements, the future of
Palestinian refugees, borders and security arrangements
remain the only way to fulfil the legitimate aspirations
of both parties and achieve long-term peace.
We continue to support the essential agreed
parameters that are based on respect for international
principles and international law. The parameters
for the resolution of the conflict are well known and
internationally recognized and have been set out in
detail on numerous occasions by our delegation. We
appeal to both sides to refrain from unilateral steps that
prejudge the outcome of final-status negotiations and
expect them to demonstrate, through their actions and
policies, their commitment to peace. We condemn all
acts of violence, terrorism and incitement to violence
and hate, which are fundamentally incompatible with
advancing a peaceful two-State solution.
We still believe that it is only by returning to
meaningful bilateral negotiations, based on international
law and the relevant resolutions, which encapsulate
internationally agreed parameters, that it will be
possible to make a positive contribution to the process.
That is the only path towards a two-State solution and
the resolution of all final-status issues. Regrettably, the
situation on the ground continues to deteriorate, with the
two-State solution in effect continuing to be dismantled
piece by piece, in particular by the relentless expansion
of settlements. Currently, we are very close to the point
at which the establishment of a viable Palestinian State
would be difficult, if not impossible.
Poland’s position on the Israeli settlement policy in
the occupied Palestinian territory is clear and remains
unchanged. It is also the European Union’s wellknown stand. All settlement activity is illegal under
international law. Not only does it erode the viability

S/PV. 8583

of the two-State solution and the prospects for a lasting
peace, but it is an obstacle to peace.
In addition to actions aimed at advancing
settlements, the demolition of Palestinian property
by Israeli authorities, the forced transfer of residents
and attempts to legalize West Bank outposts continue
to severely undermine the possibility of a viable twoState solution. In this context, we are very worried about
the planned demolitions of the Palestinian villages of
Khan Al-Ahmar and Sur Bahir, and we again ask Israel
to entirely abandon these plans entirely.
We are closely following Egyptian-led discussions
on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that the
process will be successful. Accordingly, we urge
all Palestinian factions to work together to achieve
sustainable progress and allow the Palestinian Authority
to resume its full responsibilities in Gaza. A single and
legitimate Palestinian Authority is a crucial element for
the unity of a future Palestinian State and a basis for a
sustainable peace agreement.
In conclusion, let me underline the role of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in the region. We praise
the international community’s collective efforts to
allow UNRWA to fulfil its mandate of providing
essential relief, development and protection services to
Palestinian refugees and those displaced by the conflict.
In our opinion, UNRWA remains a key contributor that
provides humanitarian assistance, stability and security
to the region.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.
The current situation in the Middle East is
unstable. Uncertainties have visibly increased. As
for the hotspot issues in the region, the international
community must remain committed to a political
solution, promote dialogue and negotiation, undertake
a constructive approach to manage the situation and
take into account the legitimate rights and interests of
the parties concerned.
The issue of Palestine lies at the heart of the situation
in the Middle East. It is at the root of all issues related
to the Middle East region. Upholding the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people is the joint
responsibility of the international community.
At present, the Middle East peace process is
deadlocked, while inflammatory words and actions

19-2258417/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

are escalating. The construction of settlements and
the demolition of Palestinian structures continues, and
the humanitarian crisis in Gaza is deepening. China is
deeply worried about these trends. I therefore wish to
stress the following points.
First, resolution 2334 (2016) should be effectively
implemented. The recent clash in the village of Sur
Baher in Jerusalem has drawn heightened international
attention. The relevant parties should immediately halt
the demolition of Palestinian houses and the destruction
of Palestinian property, cease all settlement activities
in the occupied territories and take measures to
prevent violence against civilians. All legal actions and
unilateral initiatives aimed at legalizing settlements
must end immediately, and concrete steps must be taken
to eliminate their practical effects on the ground so as
to avoid weakening the prospect of a two-State solution.
Secondly, we must champion multilateralism
and uphold fairness and justice by promoting a
comprehensive, just and durable solution. The twoState solution is the only viable way to resolve the issues
between Palestine and Israel. The Arab Peace Initiative,
the principle of land for peace and the relevant Council
resolutions offer fundamental parameters for resolving
the conflict and should underpin the international
community’s efforts to promote a prompt resumption
of negotiations between the two parties with a view to
establishing, ultimately, a fully sovereign Palestinian
State, based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. Any new initiative should respect these
basic international guidelines, and all countries that
have major influence in the Middle East region should
play a constructive role in bringing about the necessary
conditions for the resumption of talks.
Thirdly, close attention must be paid to improving
the economic and humanitarian situation in Palestine.
China once again expresses its concern about the
withholding of the tax revenue collected on behalf
of Palestine and calls upon the parties concerned to
honour their obligations under the relevant international
treaties, including the Protocol on Economic Relations
between the Government of the State of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization, fully implement the
relevant Council resolutions and swiftly and completely
lift the Gaza blockade. The international community
should continue to enhance its support of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, with a view to improving
the humanitarian conditions of Palestinian refugees.
18/63

23/07/2019

China has already announced that it will increase its
annual contribution to the Agency to $1 million this
year. We will also provide support to the Palestinian
people through bilateral channels, including assistance
projects for the Palestinian refugees in the countries of
the region.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the members of the
European Union.
At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
The situation on the ground is deteriorating day
by day with the continuing colonization policy as one
of its main catalysts. This policy, together with such
measures as forced displacements, expulsions and
demolitions, is illegal under international law.
We condemn the destruction on 4 July of the
facilities of an Oxfam humanitarian project funded by
Belgium in the village of Khirbet Ad-Duqaiqah, which
included three water tanks and at least 2,500 trees.
The project supported three communities and sought
to expand land use through the rehabilitation of water
supplies and pasture-management techniques. Some 35
families were affected by the destruction, 63 per cent of
whom were young people. This is not empty rhetoric or
sloganeering, but simple facts. Belgium notes that the
destruction of property and objects necessary for the
survival of civilians is contrary to international human
rights law.
In the same vein, we condemn the recent
demolitions and evictions in the Silwan neighbourhood
of East Jerusalem, as well as the massive demolitions
of buildings yesterday in the community of Sur Baher,
mostly located in Areas A and B of the West Bank,
but on the west side of the separation wall. These
demolitions illustrate once again the pressure brought
to bear on the Palestinian presence in and around East
Jerusalem. They contribute to a significant change in
the demographic character of the city of Jerusalem,
which is detrimental to negotiations on its final status
as the capital of the two States. The continued pursuit
of this policy calls into question the prospect of a twoState solution.
Another immediate concern is the financial crisis
of the Palestinian Authority. We expect the economic
and budgetary agreements between Israel and the
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian Authority to be fully implemented, including
Israel’s obligations under the Protocol on Economic
Relations between the Government of the State of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. In the
meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority must continue
to accept tax transfers on a provisional basis, which in
no way constitutes a legal or political endorsement of
Israeli deductions.
The security situation in Gaza continues to be
a source of concern for us. We call on the parties to
continue to exercise the utmost restraint and respect the
ceasefire reached thanks to the efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations Special Coordinator.
A political, comprehensive and lasting solution
must be found to the social, economic and humanitarian
crisis in Gaza. That implies a fundamental change
that includes, in particular, the lifting of the blockade
and the opening of crossing points, while taking into
account Israel’s legitimate security concerns. A political
solution to the current crisis also requires the return of
control of this territory to the Palestinian Authority. We
call on the parties to resume constructive dialogue and
welcome the Egyptian and Russian efforts to that end.
Last month, the United States presented a series of
economic measures, entitled “Peace to Prosperity”, at
a workshop hosted by Bahrain in Manama. During the
presentation of the plan, we took note of the recognition
of the need to incorporate the proposed measures in
a political plan. Indeed, as we have already stressed,
peace can be comprehensive, just and lasting only if it
meets the legitimate aspirations of each of the parties to
make its national destiny a reality in peace and security
within a stabilized region. The vision towards which
the international community must work is in fact the
coexistence of two States with Jerusalem as their future
respective capitals, in accordance with internationally
agreed parameters — and, yes, those parameters have
been internationally agreed. This approach can be
supported by economic measures, but these economic
measures cannot replace a political solution. An end
to the occupation, free access for Palestinians to their
lands and resources, freedom of movement and access
to the whole territory and the ability to integrate into the
regional market are essential to enable the Palestinian
economy to fully develop.
In conclusion, it is high time for the parties to
resume the path of dialogue and endeavour to build
peace. We are convinced that this is in the clear interest

S/PV. 8583

of both the Israelis and the Palestinians. In this context,
Belgium reiterates the key role of the Security Council
as the guarantor for any comprehensive, just and lasting
solution, in line with its previous resolutions and
full respect for international law. As was eloquently
stated by the Permanent Representative of Germany,
we believe in international law and that it must be
respected. Belgium will continue to work to that end
in the Council and jointly with our Palestinian and
Israeli friends.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of today’s briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. We thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing, which shed
light on the challenges that must be overcome to achieve
peace and stability in the region.
The stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian crisis is a
source of serious concern for Côte d’Ivoire, owing to the
recurrent violence and the failure of the international
community’s many peace initiatives. The outbreaks of
violence have, over the years, eroded the possibility of a
compromise without which lasting peace is not possible
and have contributed to the gradual deterioration of the
security and humanitarian situation.
My country has always advocated the peaceful
settlement of disputes through dialogue and calls
again on all parties to give peace a chance, as they did
when negotiating the Oslo Accords. In this regard, the
international community must be relentless in pursuing
mediation efforts in order to achieve the unconditional
resumption of negotiations among the various parties.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to reaffirm its commitment
to the security of the State of Israel and the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
and, consequently, its support for the two-State solution
and the peaceful coexistence of two States based on
the 1967 borders. The resumption of dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians therefore appears to be much
more than a necessity: it is above all a political and
security emergency, the achievement of which would
help to prevent further outbreaks of violence.
As with the current political impasse and its
security consequences, the humanitarian situation in
the Palestinian territories remains a matter of concern.
Youth unemployment, the depletion of medicine, the
lack of water and electricity, particularly in hospitals

19-2258419/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

23/07/2019

and other public facilities, and insufficient fuel reserves
for the desalination of sea water that supplies Gaza City
are all vulnerabilities that can push segments of the
population to despair and radicalization. This situation
could deteriorate further if the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), which provides assistance to more
than 3 million Palestinians, does not regain a level
of financing that will enable it to meet the needs of
populations in distress. My country therefore welcomes
the holding of the annual donor conference, on 25 June
in New York, and endorses the Secretary-General’s call
for resource mobilization to close the approximately
$211 million deficit in UNRWA’s annual budget.

With regard to the issue facing Israelis and
Palestinians, with clear consequences for the entire
region, my delegation regrets that there has been no
significant change or progress recently. Last year
was quite incendiary, starting with the Great March
of Return, and this dynamic of insecurity continued
into the first half of this year, aggravated mainly by
the acts of insurgency in Gaza, led by Hamas, and by
concrete political measures taken by Israel early in this
year with respect to such issues as the non-renewal of
the Temporary International Presence in Hebron and
the withholding of taxes and tariffs for the Palestinian
National Authority. All of that has only exacerbated
hatred and encouraged violence between the parties.

In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reaffirms its conviction
that dialogue remains the only path to a lasting
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis. It therefore
urges the international community to do more to bring
both sides back to the negotiating table with a view to
achieving a compromise that can help to restore lasting
peace and stability in the region.

As we enter the second half of the year, we call on
the parties to refrain from taking unilateral actions that
incite violence. As we have said on other occasions,
the conflict has gone through worse times, with very
bloody and destructive scenes. But this horrific history
has not succeeded in guaranteeing the security desired
by Israelis, nor has it facilitated the establishment of
a Palestinian State recognized by Israel. Violence
is therefore not and never will be the best option for
resolving that dispute between the two parties.

Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank the
delegation of Peru for including today’s important
debate on the agenda of its presidency. I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her
detailed and informative briefing. We also welcome the
presence of the delegation of Israel, as well as the other
delegations that have inscribed their names on the list
of speakers today.
The situation in the Middle East has always been a
matter of great concern for the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea. We regret that, despite the various initiatives put
forth, the major financial support offered and the series
of peacekeeping operations deployed to the region, the
United Nations and the international community have
not been able to achieve a sustainable solution to the
political problems caused by the conflicts and wars in
various parts of the region. This decade is coming to
an end, and the future of the people of Syria, Yemen
and Libya remains uncertain. Millions of people in
these countries and other parts of the region are living
under the threat of weapons, awaiting the day when
the differences among their politicians will dissolve
and a sustainable solution that enables the positive
coexistence and the development of their respective
populations will be found.
20/63

As of 2016, according to a study conducted by the
Israel Democracy Institute and the Palestinian Center
for Policy and Survey Research, a majority of Israelis
and Palestinians would prefer two States as a means of
resolving the conflict over any other solution. Moreover,
a considerable majority of the Jewish population
believes that the Palestinian demand for the creation of
an independent State is just and that Israel can accept
the establishment of such a State.
Most Palestinians and Israelis see the West Bank
and the Gaza Strip as the ideal place for a hypothetical
Palestinian State in a two-State solution. However, there
are important areas of disagreement over the form of a
final agreement, as well as over the level of credibility
that each side sees in the other.
The results of that scientific exploration coincide
with the vision of the United Nations on the issue. My
delegation has always shown its commitment to the
decisions of this Organization. The resolutions of both
the Security Council and the General Assembly must
be the point of reference for Israelis and Palestinians,
as well as for any other international actor that wishes
to contribute to finding a just solution to the conflict.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Equatorial Guinea therefore advocates for the twoState solution to be negotiated directly between the
Israelis and the Palestinians within the framework of
the relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. A just solution
through dialogue may mean that neither of the parties
will have all their aspirations and claims met, which
is indeed one of the essential components of dialogue.
The definitive status of Jerusalem must be resolved in
such negotiations.
Equatorial Guinea believes the historical claims
of the Palestinians to be just, in accordance with the
various pronouncements of the African Union on the
matter. But we also think that Israel has every right to
live in peace and security. Both Palestine and Israel
must therefore respect each other’s right to existence
and avoid any action that could further aggravate
the situation.
I cannot conclude without expressing our concern
for the 2 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip
whose living conditions still require the return of
the Palestinian National Authority to that enclave.
The delegation of Equatorial Guinea underscores
in that regard the importance of the international
community continuing to support the efforts of Egypt
and the United Nations in support of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. The countries with influence in the
region must exercise that influence in the quest for a
just and lasting solution.
We call on the international community to continue
to fund the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the economic
situation of which still needs strengthening, so that it
can better perform its vital role.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to start,
if I may, on a different topic. I would like to join the
Secretary-General in expressing our deep sadness at
the passing of Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency. I would
like to pay tribute to Mr. Amano’s tireless work in the
pursuit of peace, and we send our deepest condolences
to Japan and his family and friends.
Turning to today’s debate, I would like to begin,
as others have done, by talking about the recent Peace
to Prosperity conference that was held in Bahrain at
the end of June. The United States efforts to support
the development of the Palestinian economy are very
welcome. It is crucial that we improve the daily life and

S/PV. 8583

prospects of Palestinians across East Jerusalem, the
West Bank and Gaza.
For the United Kingdom, we are doubling the United
Kingdom’s aid to the occupied Palestinian territories
between 2018 and 2023. We are helping to address
restrictions on movement and access and improving
water and energy supply, particularly in Gaza. We also
support efforts that complement that work.
As others have noted, it is, of course, essential that
political progress be made in order to unlock economic
opportunities, and we encourage the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority to engage in work
with the international community to foster solutions
that actively improve the situation on the ground.
What Mr. Greenblatt said on the political aspect of the
proposals was a welcome assurance.
For the record, the United Kingdom’s position
on the two-State solution remains unchanged. But
in the interim until there is political progress, I just
wanted to stress that steps need to be taken to address
the constraints imposed on the Palestinian economy
by the Israeli occupation. We want to see increasing
external trade opportunities for the Palestinians, a
reduction in internal movement and access restrictions
and sustainable investments in water and energy
infrastructure. We also want the financial sustainability
of the Palestinian Authority to be realized.
Looking towards fresh negotiations, it is obviously
essential to build a conducive environment, which
means that we need genuine and committed engagement
from both parties, including the end of actions that
undermine trust and threaten the viability of the twoState solution.
We therefore urge the Palestinian Authority
to address allegations of incitement, including in
the education curriculum, and to make reforms to
prisoner payments, ensuring that those are needs
based, transparent and affordable. We remain deeply
concerned, as also reflected in the statements of
other speakers today, about the ongoing advance of
Israeli settlements, including the more than 200 units
established in Gilo on 10 July, and about the retroactive
approvals of unauthorized settlement outposts.
Settlements are illegal and they undermine the physical
viability of a future Palestinian State. Settler violence,
the demolition of Palestinian property and evictions of
Palestinians from their homes should be opposed and
condemned wholeheartedly.

19-2258421/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The demolition since Sunday of a number of
Palestinian properties in the Sur Baher area of Jerusalem
governorate are particularly egregious, in part because
much of the area lies in Palestinian Authority-controlled
areas. We also condemn the eviction of the Siam family
in Silwan on 10 July. The Israeli authorities have a
responsibility to provide appropriate protection to
the Palestinian civilian population. We remain deeply
concerned by suggestions that any parts of the occupied
Palestinian territories should be annexed. Such a move
would be country to international law, destructive to
peace efforts and could not pass unchallenged.
Let me be clear about our views on terrorism.
We equally condemn in the strongest terms Hamas
terrorism and that of other militant groups in Gaza.
Since the start of the Great March of Return in 2018,
there have been nearly 2,000 rockets and mortar shells
fired from the Gaza Strip into Israel. That is completely
unacceptable and we call on Hamas and other militant
groups to cease such attacks immediately.
We recognize Israel’s legitimate security needs.
However, we do have concerns about the excessive use
of force by the Israel Defense Forces. Measures used
need to be appropriate and in line with international
law. Accountability needs to be sought through
swift transparent investigations and we welcome the
investigations currently being pursued by Israel, under
the Military Advocate General.
I would like to join others in expressing the United
Kingdom’s gratitude to the United Nations and Egypt
for their efforts to mediate between the parties. Echoing
what the Under-Secretary-General said, we also
encourage those involved in the reconciliation process
to allow the Palestinian Authority to fully resume its
Government functions in Gaza.
We believe that it is essential that the international
community continue work to support Palestinian
refugees. Their status needs to be agreed on as part of
wider peace negotiations, but until that time, the United
Kingdom remains firmly committed to supporting the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and refugees
across the Middle East. We also welcome the successful
outcome of the pledging conference on 25 June, for
which we were able to include an additional $25 million
of United Kingdom funding, increasing our 2019-2020
support to over $70 million.
22/63

23/07/2019

I just wanted to pick up on something the German
representative said about international law. We share
his view that the Security Council is responsible for
maintaining international peace and security and we
all agree that the Arab-Israeli conflict is a threat to
international peace and security. It is therefore right that
we have adopted resolutions on that topic. We are bound
by those resolutions and we all have a responsibility to
implement them, just as we do to implement resolutions
on other topics. Indeed, that is the very basis of the
Council’s work.
I was also asked by the Israeli representative about
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. So, although
I did not want to talk about Iran today, let me just
address that point, if I may. Together with France and
Germany, the United Kingdom is urging Iran not to take
further steps away from the agreement and to return to
compliance. The agreement itself allows for that.
On the general point, we are clear that the nuclear
agreement is still the best option and in the interests of
both Iranian and global security. It is critical that Iran
does not develop nuclear weapons and that agreement
makes the world a safer place by taking the prospect
of a nuclear-armed Iran off the table. Indeed, military
representatives in some of the countries that criticized
the agreement have confirmed its role in national and
international security. I alluded earlier to the sad passing
away of Mr. Amano; the International Atomic Energy
Agency plays a critical part in looking at compliance
with the agreement.
Let me return to the Middle East peace process, if
I may. As I said, our position remains unchanged. We
support a negotiated settlement leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with agreed
land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees.
Ms. Blandino de Los Santos (Dominican
Republic) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would
also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her
informative briefing.
The Dominican Republic acknowledges the
collective effort of the international community to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
at its annual international donor conference, held on
25 June in New York City. Representatives of States and
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

institutions unanimously praised the Agency’s role in
preserving the rights and dignity of Palestinian refugees.
We applaud UNRWA staff for the commitment to offer
support for the human development of 5.4 million
Palestinian refugees in the Near East.
On another note, in 2016 the Security Council
adopted resolution 2334 (2016), which asks all parties
to put an end to territorial claims, to respect sovereignty
and to liberate the occupied territories. Unfortunately,
since then, the situation has not changed. The reality
is that the occupation has expanded illegally without
any consequences, thus preventing peace from
drawing nearer.
We note with concern the large increase in
demolitions in the West Bank, particularly in East
Jerusalem. Those demolitions create a coercive
environment for the inhabitants, which could lead to
the forced relocation of the population that is being
affected. It is particularly disconcerting that the work of
human rights organizations has been restricted through
the reduction of civic space, especially in Gaza, where
the humanitarian situation remains critical and where
their work is therefore indispensable.
The Dominican Republic continues to defend the
existing international consensus that the only way
forward for the Palestinians and Israelis is to negotiate a
two-State solution, with negotiated borders based on the
1967 lines. We reiterate that the main objective should be
the restoration of a political horizon for the resumption
of a meaningful peace process that puts people at its
centre and is consistent with international law.
Regarding the Palestinian attacks against Israel,
the Dominican Republic maintains its position. We
strongly condemn any type of violence and call on
Hamas and the other groups to put an end to their
instigation and related operations. Finally, we urge all
parties involved to work together to open the doors
of negotiation and to avoid acts of provocation and
inflammatory rhetoric. We are convinced that the work
of international organizations is essential to alleviate
and reduce the risks of violence and to seek a solution
to the current unfortunate situation.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset I should like to join others in offering my
condolences to Japan and to the Secretary-General,
following the passing of Mr. Amano, who was an
outstanding leader of the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

S/PV. 8583

I would now like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing, which provided us with a concise
update on the Israeli-Palestinian situation.
I will focus my remarks today on the threats
to the two-State solution and the urgent need for
the international community to reaffirm the agreed
parameters of the political solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict. First, I wish to comment on the
worrying deterioration of the situation in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem.
France condemned yesterday the demolition by
the Israeli army of several buildings in the district of
Wadi Al-Homs, located in the south-east of Jerusalem.
Those demolitions in occupied territories are contrary
to international law, in particular international
humanitarian law and the relevant Council resolutions.
They are occurring for the first time in Areas A and
B, which fall under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian
Authority under the Oslo Accords, and they represent
a dangerous precedent that directly undermines the
two-State solution. France regrets that the Israeli
Government has not heeded the calls of the international
community to not proceed with the demolition and
solemnly calls on it to suspend the ongoing demolitions
as soon as possible.
In the same vein, the policy of colonization under
which these demolitions fall continues unabated in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank and brings us close to the
point of no return. Since the beginning of the year, more
than 4,500 new housing units have been approved in
the West Bank. In Jerusalem, colonization activities, in
particular the implementation of archaeological projects
and the increase in the number of demolitions, are
continuing and are cause for grave concern. That policy
is all the more disturbing because it is compounded by
troubling statements about the annexation of all or part
of the occupied territories.
France recalls that colonization is contrary to
international law, as reaffirmed in resolution 2334
(2016). It contributes to the agitation of tensions on the
ground and undermines the conditions for a just and
lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians, based
on the two-State solution with Jerusalem as capital.
France does not recognize any Israeli sovereignty over
any of the occupied territories. In accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, we also consider
unlawful the acquisition of territory by force, whether
in Jerusalem, the West Bank or the Golan Heights.

19-2258423/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would like to come back to the deteriorating
security, humanitarian and political situation in Gaza,
which continues to be a source of great concern. Clashes
at the end of last week, which left more than 100
Palestinian protesters injured, highlight the persistence
and the extent of the crisis we are facing in Gaza.
Everything must be done to provide a humanitarian and
political response and to prevent the risk of escalation.
We once again call on the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint and commend in that regard the efforts of
Egypt, Qatar and the United Nations to avoid the worstcase scenario.
In such a precarious context, mobilizing the support
of the international community for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) is more critical than ever. The
25 June donor conference has enabled the Agency to use
recent funds to ensure the continuity of its assistance
programmes, especially in Gaza this summer.
France has already announced that it will double its
contribution to UNRWA in 2019, as it did in 2018. I urge
all donors to maintain or increase their contribution to
UNRWA to enable it to continue its programmes, in
particular to ensure the start of the school year, and to
reaffirm their support for UNRWA’s three-year renewal
this fall.
In addition to the issue of humanitarian support,
lasting stability in Gaza will be achieved only through
a negotiated settlement, which involves on the one hand
the full return of the Palestinian Authority and on the
other the lifting of the blockade while ensuring credible
security guarantees for Israel.
Finally, the future of Gaza cannot be separated
from the goal of the establishment of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.
In conclusion, I once again reaffirm the validity of
the parameters agreed by the international community
for the two-State solution. As we are aware, the solution
to the conflict is fundamentally a political one, defined
by well-established parameters, while fulfilling the
legitimate aspirations of both sides — the establishment
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security and within secure and recognized
borders, with Jerusalem as the capital. France stands
ready to support all efforts, including economic
initiatives, as long as they adhere to the guidelines
that we have developed together and international law,
24/63

23/07/2019

in particular in accordance with all relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The establishment of a viable and independent
Palestinian State is the key condition for Palestine’s
economic take-off and also for building a stronger and
integrated regional economy. Economic peace cannot
replace the search for a political settlement. Any attempt
to deviate from those collectively defined parameters
would be doomed to failure.
Together with its European partners, France will
continue to defend the principle of a just and lasting
peace, based on parameters agreed by the international
community, and to support the Palestinian presence in
Jerusalem and in all the Palestinian territories in order
to preserve the two-State solution. In addition, France
will never compromise on ensuring Israel’s security.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me also offer our
condolences on the passing of Mr. Amano to the people
of Japan and his family.
I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her valuable briefing.
Our position is quite clear on this very important
issue. I will therefore focus primarily on the
latest developments.
We continue to be alarmed by the unceasing
provocations of the occupying Power, including its
destabilizing actions and violations of the situation and
status of Jerusalem and the Al-Aqsa Mosque. I wish to
reiterate three important points in that regard.
The first concerns the two-State solution and actions
that undermine it. We reaffirm that solution, based on
the 1967 lines, with Palestine and Israel living side by
side in peace and security and mutual recognition and
in conformity with relevant United Nations resolutions.
The international community must not budge an inch
from that platform and position.
Our objective must remain the realization of the two
States and the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as negotiated
outcomes for all final status issues. Any action that
contravenes that platform must be rejected. For that
reason, Indonesia strongly condemns Israel’s illegal
construction and inauguration of the underground
tunnel and path towards Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as
clearly articulated at the extraordinary meeting of the
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Organization of Islamic Cooperation held last week
in Jeddah.
That is undoubtedly a clear violation of relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 476 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
Together with the illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories, the construction of
tunnels can also be seen as a de facto annexation.
The Council must defend the status and character
of the Old City of Jerusalem and its walls. That is
the obligation of the Council itself. We also strongly
condemn yesterday’s arrogant, illegal and inhumane
pre-dawn destruction of Palestinian homes, including
occupied family homes, in the communities of Wadi
Al-Hummus and Sur Baher in the West Bank. Is it
possible to imagine one’s house being demolished in
front of one’s children’s eyes, as the Permanent Observer
of the State of Palestine showed us earlier in the glaring
photo? I cannot imagine my house being demolished.
That is a further reason why the Council must act
in defence of its resolutions and the Palestinian people.
We must stop turning in circles or else we run the risk
of spiralling into the pit of oblivion.
My second point concerns the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Given
the continued use by the occupying Power of the
negative policies of restriction of movement, arbitrary
detentions, the use of force and the multiple-year
blockade of Gaza, it is no surprise that the humanitarian
conditions have continued to deteriorate. Israel also
continues to withhold tax revenues of the Palestinian
Authority. Let me stress again that we cannot question
the Authority’s refusal to accept any transfer that is less
than the full amount owed to it and we must demand
that Israel not take what is not Israel’s.
With regard to the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, we once again appeal to the international
community to continue to ensure reliable and sustainable
funding for the Agency’s life-saving services. An
agency that has carried out many years of public service
for humankind and demonstrated impartiality and the
best of intentions should be supported by us all.
Thirdly, I wish to comment on the need to
strengthen Palestinian economic capacity. It is of the
greatest importance that we work towards the optimal

S/PV. 8583

economic capacity of Palestinians, but we caution that
economic assistance cannot be used as a substitute for
a final political settlement since that could be exploited
by the occupying Power to gain time to advance its
agenda, including its settlements, thereby making a
solution more and more difficult to achieve.
Indonesia continues to work through various
mechanisms to try to strengthen the economic capacity
of Palestine. Earlier this month in Jericho, Indonesia and
other East Asian countries met at the fourth Conference
on Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development in order to strengthen efforts
to support Palestine through economic and trade
cooperation and joint investments. We encourage other
members of the international community to consider
similar undertakings in the interest of humankind.
As I promised, my statement will not be long since
many of our points have already been alluded to many
times in our previous statements. I would, however,
like to address one important issue.
This morning we heard a statement that made
the point that the status of Jerusalem will be not be
resolved in this Chamber or any capital, but through
direct negotiation between the two parties, as well as an
appeal to create a conducive environment.
But how does one create a conducive environment
when illegal settlements continue, when buildings
are being demolished before children’s eyes, when a
nine-year-old Palestinian boy can be shot by Israeli
authorities and when arbitrary detentions and many
other human rights violations persist? How can one
achieve peace when one does not believe in international
law and international humanitarian law? And if we do
not believe in international law and Security Council
resolutions, then let us all together throw the beautiful
Charter of the United Nations into the East River.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Peru.
I would also like to extend our condolences to the
people and the Government of Japan following the death
of Mr. Amano, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
Our country is deeply concerned about the
developments surrounding the question of Palestine.
We deplore the persistent hostile environment, the
indiscriminate violence of Hamas, the disproportionate
Israeli response and the confrontational rhetoric on both

19-2258425/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sides. It all creates an unsustainable and destabilizing
situation for the Middle East and the international
community. We must deplore the fact that unilateral
decisions and actions have led to an even greater
escalation of tensions and violence, including the
recurrent and growing practices of settlement-building,
demolitions and evictions in occupied Palestinian
territories. Those actions contravene the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016) and make the prospects for the
two-State solution increasingly uncertain.
We are duly alarmed by the political and social
impact of the ongoing demolition of Palestinian homes
in Sur Baher. We echo the Organization’s calls for
the Israeli authorities to stop those acts and instead
implement planning policies that meet the housing and
development needs of the Palestinian population in the
occupied territories.
We also underscore the urgent need to pursue
efforts to address the serious humanitarian crisis in
Gaza, which has been exacerbated by funding cuts
to assistance programmes and the unilateral decision
of the Government of Israel to withhold a significant
amount of Palestinian tax revenue. In such dramatic
circumstances, we encourage the international
community to increase its financial contributions and
the United Nations to continue to align humanitarian
assistance with development plans that offer hope
and opportunities to the youngest in order to divert
them from radicalization and extremism. We hope
that the global investment fund outlined in Bahrain
and a strengthened United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East will
also contribute to that end.
We believe that the urgent relief of human suffering
must be complemented by a renewed commitment by
the parties to the peace process and the resumption
of negotiations leading to a two-State solution based
on the pre-1967 borders. That will require Palestinian
and Israeli political, religious and social leaders
and authorities to conduct themselves responsibly
and with prudence and restraint and to promote the
re-establishment of high-level dialogue that will allow
their respective peoples and the entire Middle East to
move towards lasting peace.
To that end, we underscore the special responsibility
that lies with the Council and countries with real
influence over the parties, which can and must do more
to ensure that the parties resume bilateral negotiations,
26/63

23/07/2019

strictly respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights and support the
efforts of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process to promote the easing of tensions.
I would also like to briefly address developments
in the Strait of Hormuz, an area that is crucial to the
global economy and to global security. Peru notes with
deep concern the military actions that occurred in
recent weeks, which pose a major threat to the stability
of the region and to international peace. We urge all
actors involved to exercise restraint in those dangerous
circumstances, avoid any unilateral act that could
trigger a conflict in that troubled part of the world and
return to diplomatic channels as the only possible way
out of the current impasse. We encourage the SecretaryGeneral’s good offices to reduce current tensions and
build the confidence needed, in line with the powers
granted to him by the Charter of the United Nations.
I shall now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The representative of Equatorial Guinea has
requested the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): At the start of my statement, I welcomed
one of the parties and neglected to greet the delegation
of Palestine. I would like to rectify that now by
welcoming the delegation of Palestine. I apologize for
the omission.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like to
inform everyone that today’s open debate will continue
during the lunch hour as there are many names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I thank you, Mr. President,
for holding today’s debate and congratulate you on a
successful presidency of the Council this month.
Before I deliver my prepared statement, I would like
to address the accusations that the Israeli Ambassador
directed against Lebanon. Taking into account
Israel’s history of invading Lebanon, the Lebanese
see those accusations as direct threats to their peace
and civilian infrastructure. If the Israeli Ambassador
is using those statements to divert attention from the
miserable situation that Israel’s occupation has created
for the Palestinians, that is nothing new. But if he is
using them to prepare the ground and the international
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community for an attack on Lebanon’s civilian port and
airport and its infrastructure, as Israel did in 2006, the
Council should not remain silent but should uphold its
responsibility to prevent Israel from launching another
war on Lebanon. The last thing Lebanon and the region
need now is another war.
I shall now deliver my statement. We are meeting
at a time of heightened tensions in the Middle East.
There is a sense of despair and hopelessness due
to protracted conflicts and decades of occupation.
Nowhere is that hopelessness more vivid than on the
question of Palestine. We are witnessing not only a lack
of progress towards peace, but also the roll-back of
the principles and foundation of real, equitable peace,
namely, United Nations resolutions and the application
of international law:
The situation on the ground for Palestinians
continues to deteriorate, especially in Jerusalem and
Gaza, where international humanitarian organizations
describe it as getting worse by the day. The continued
Israeli occupation and its illegal measures — closures,
arbitrary detentions, the demolition of homes, the
expansion of settlements and depriving Palestinians
of their basic human and political rights — have
rendered the situation unbearable. The international
community should uphold its responsibility not only
to Palestinians, but also, and more importantly, to
ensure that the Council fulfils the principles that the
Organization was founded upon and stop those actions.
The dire humanitarian situation is made worse by the
difficulties that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East faces
in terms of funding, which puts hundreds of thousands
of Palestinian livelihoods at stake in the occupied
territories and around the region.
At the political level, the much-awaited peace plan
is still promised, but its opening phase, in the form of
an economic conference, was met with disappointment
and condemnation by most of the parties, especially the
Palestinians, because of the lack of a political horizon.
Palestinians and Arabs want the right recipe for just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. They regard the
Arab Peace Initiative and the two-State solution as the
best bases for a political solution to the conflict — a
solution based on international legality, resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 2234 (2016), with a Palestinian
State living in peace and security with East Jerusalem
as its capital. That was reiterated at the most recent
meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation

S/PV. 8583

Foreign Ministers this month, which condemned Israeli
attempts at “altering Jerusalem’s legal character, status
and demographic makeup”.
In Syria, Israel continues its policy of entrenching
its occupation and annexation of the Golan Heights
with impunity. Lebanon is concerned and troubled
by that Israeli policy to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Golan Heights.
Lebanon calls on Israel to implement resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and the Geneva
Conventions in their entirety.
The Lebanese Government has made progress since
the last quarterly debate in the Council (see S/PV.8517).
Its Cabinet approved the 2019 budget — the first step
in the financial reform programme of the Government
to fulfil its obligations under the CEDRE conference
on economic development and reform. The electricity
plan was also approved by the Cabinet and Parliament.
Discussions on our capital investment programme for
the rehabilitation of infrastructure have begun as well.
The Government demonstrated its firm commitment to
the human rights agenda by appointing the members of
our national preventive mechanism against torture.
Lebanon is grateful for the continuous support
of its long-standing international partners, whether
economically or in relation to its peace and security
agenda. The Security Council held consultations
yesterday on resolution 1701 (2006), one of the pillars
of its peace and security agenda in the south, where the
Council heard from the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/574) that the situation in the area of
operations is calm. Calm is exactly what is needed in
the region. This would not have been possible without
the help of the United Nations and UNIFIL forces.
During a visit to the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force
last week, the Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri
reaffirmed both his and the Government’s commitment
to resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2433 (2018). The
Prime Minister stressed that he was fully dedicated
to further developing the capacities of the Lebanese
navy in fulfilment of Lebanon’s obligations under these
resolutions. He announced that he was fully briefed
on the plan to increase Lebanese naval capabilities
and vowed to do his utmost to have it endorsed by the
Cabinet. The strengthening of the Lebanese Armed
Forces’ capability and building a naval force will enable

19-2258427/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

them, as the Prime Minister said, to slowly assume their
responsibility in support of UNIFIL.
The United States used its good offices to reach an
agreement on starting talks on the delineation of the
maritime and land borders between Lebanon and Israel.
Although these negotiations have not yet produced the
desired outcome, which could lead to the start of these
talks, the Prime Minister has vowed to work relentlessly
to initiate these negotiations.
Unfortunately, the Lebanese commitment to
resolution 1701 (2006) and to respecting its obligations
under other relevant resolutions is met with daily Israeli
violations of Lebanese territory by land, air and sea.
This month has already witnessed tens of violations,
especially by warplanes and military boats, terrifying
the population. On the border, Israel continues to build
on Lebanese occupied territories in what are called
reservation points. These violations are a source of
tension and instability and lead to increased fragility
along the border. They must end.
The situation in the Middle East will remain
a source of conflict as long as Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions are ignored and human
and political rights are denied. The Council can and
must change that reality if the region is to live in peace.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): Allow me, at the outset,
to join others in expressing our deepest sympathies on
the passing of the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency and, in particular, to his
bereaved loved ones.
I also wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your successful presidency of the Council for the month
of July. I would like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for her
comprehensive and detailed briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Last month, in his presentation on behalf of
the Secretary-General of the tenth report on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) to the
Security Council (see S/PV.8557), Mr. Mladenov once
again underscored that no concrete steps had been
taken to implement that historic resolution. Notably,
28/63

23/07/2019

settlement activity has continued in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, with Israeli authorities
advancing, approving or tendering nearly 6,000 housing
units — the largest settlement advancement in two years.
I take this opportunity to reiterate that settlements are
illegal under international law and represent an obstacle
to peace. Furthermore, the demolition and seizure of
Palestinian-owned structures by Israeli authorities also
continue throughout the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem. We firmly condemn the demolition of
dozens of Palestinians homes in the Palestinian village
of Sur Baher yesterday.
The security situation in Gaza remains particularly
tense and, as the past has shown, the situation could flare
up at any moment. The humanitarian situation is also
extremely worrying. According to UNICEF’s quarterly
humanitarian situation report on the State of Palestine
for the period from January to March 2019, over 50 per
cent of Palestinian families in Gaza are living below the
poverty line. Namibia also remains deeply concerned
by the serious movement and access constraints being
placed on national staff from United Nations agencies
and international and non-governmental organizations
in Gaza. These individuals provide lifesaving services
to Palestinians in Gaza and their access should not
be restricted.
Despite these negative trends, there are a few
positive developments that should be highlighted.
The State of Qatar’s continued provision of financial
assistance for the humanitarian situation in Gaza has
proven essential and has had a positive impact on efforts
to de-escalate the situation in Gaza. Furthermore, the
work of the Office of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process to create more sustainable
solutions in the energy sector — an area that has been
plagued by problems for many years — should be
recognized and highlighted.
I take this opportunity to commend the successful
holding of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
pledging conference, which took place on 25 June here
in New York. I thank those countries that helped raise
$110 million, ensuring that the life-saving services of
UNRWA are not interrupted for the time being. I also
take this opportunity to reaffirm Namibia’s support
to UNRWA and its mandate in providing essential
services to Palestinian refugees across the West Bank,
Gaza, Lebanon, Jordan and Syria.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The financial crisis that the Palestinian Authority
is currently facing as a result of Israel’s decision to
withhold part of the clearance revenues of the Palestinian
Authority is severely impacting the Palestinian
economy. The continuation of this crisis threatens to
destabilize an already volatile situation. We urge parties
to implement and respect their bilateral agreements.
The Peace to Prosperity workshop held in
Bahrain on 25 June made it clear that the international
community remains steadfast in its belief that economic
development cannot be achieved without negotiations
leading to a two-State solution. The solution to this
protracted conflict remains political. No amount of
humanitarian or economic support will provide a
solution to the conflict. We urge parties not to abandon
the political process that would secure the foundation
for economic development.
Due to a similar experience, Namibia knows that,
for as long as the people are denied their inalienable
right to self-determination and independence, tension,
frustration, anger and even hatred will continue to
mount. The oppressed people who are denied their
right to self-determination and freedom will never be
silenced. A boiling point will be reached sooner rather
than later, which would certainly have far-reaching
consequences for Israelis and Palestinians alike, as well
as devastating effects on prospects for peace in that
region. The continued violation of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions by the occupying Power,
ongoing settlement expansions, unilateral actions
to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, the
annexation of the Golan and the withdrawal of funding
for UNRWA are causes for great concern as they
gravely undermine the process of reaching a mutually
acceptable, just and lasting solution. We must stand on
the side of respect and upholding of international law.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I speak in my capacity as a critical stakeholder
on this agenda item.
The ongoing Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories poses a great challenge to the credibility
and significance of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law. Despite the
unprecedented manipulations of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on the Israeli occupation
of Arab territory in Palestine, southern Lebanon and
the Golan, rhetoric continues to be used to try to turn
essential issues into items of secondary importance and

S/PV. 8583

vice versa through a flood of details of little import to
the detriment of what is essential — the need for the
Israeli occupation to be brought to an end. This is the
crux of the agenda item: ending the Israeli occupation
of Arab and Palestinian territories and empowering
Palestinians to enjoy their legitimate rights. It appears
that some choose to engage in discussions on issues that
have nothing to do with an end to the Israeli occupation
of Arab lands and the Palestinian question, talking, for
example, about Iran and going on about other matters,
knowing full well that this runs counter to consensus
within the Council and diminishes the importance of
addressing the agenda item at hand.
We have recently seen a series of provocative
unilateral measures. Those behind them are trying
to capitalize on the Security Council’s inability to
implement its own resolutions on ending the Israeli
occupation in order to turn the facts upside down
and shirk their legal obligations and the established
terms of reference. This was illustrated by the
United States President’s recognition of occupied
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and of what he
called “Israeli sovereignty” over the occupiedSyrian
Golan, completely flouting commitments made by
previous United States Administrations to comply
with all relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 497 (1981), which states that by imposing
its legislation and administration in the Syrian Golan,
Israel, as an occupying Power, is acting in a manner
that is null and void and that its acts of aggression have
no legal validity. These direct provocations targeting
our country have continued unabated, including
through armed terrorist groups, leading most recently
to the deaths of four civilians, including a baby, and the
wounding of 21 others, mostly women and children.
Israeli practices also include the seizure of goods
and lands of Golan residents for the purposes of
expanding settlements or building wind-power stations.
These actions are often a mere pretext, given that our
compatriots in the Golan, having omitted their lands
from the proper registries, have seen their goods
and property seized or confiscated. This scandalous
behaviour by the Israeli occupying Power also continues
in Jerusalem and the West Bank. Yet that is not all: the
occupying Power held a Cabinet meeting in the Golan,
where it announced the creation of a new settlement
called Trump Heights as a gift from the Prime Minister
of the occupying Power to the United States President for
having violated the resolutions of the Security Council

19-2258429/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and international law by unilaterally recognizing Israeli
sovereignty over the Syrian Golan.
Regretfully, this matter was not addressed by
Ms. DiCarlo, who has repeated the long-standing error
of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov. When she, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, fails
to address the matter of the occupied Syrian Golan
under this agenda item, it constitutes a grave breach by
the Secretariat and a new iteration of Mr. Mladenov’s
failure to address the issue of the occupied Syrian
Golan in his briefings before the Security Council. We
wish to voice this grievance to the Secretary-General
so that the matter will be duly addressed.
Our Government reaffirms that the Golan is an
integral part of the Syrian Arab Republic. Our claim to
it is an inviolable right that cannot be negotiated. The
Syrian Golan and the Syrian presence in the area is,
under international law, at the heart of our priorities.
We call on the Security Council and the United Nations
to take robust action without delay in order to ensure
that the principles of international law are applied so
as to bring an end to the Israeli policies of aggression
and its scandalous violations of international law,
the provisions of the Charter and Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981).
We reiterate our demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, release prisoner Sidqi Al-Maqt and all other
Syrians it has imprisoned. Mr. Al-Maqt is a Syrian citizen
of the Golan who has spent 27 years in Israeli jails, as
many years as Nelson Mandela spent in apartheid-era
jails. His crime was documenting, through audiovisual
media, the cooperation of Israeli authorities with armed
terrorist groups. He was convicted to 14 years in prison.
Those present in the Chamber today should note
that the statements delivered by the representative of the
Israeli occupation before the Council are an unparalleled
rejection of Council resolutions and international law. I
would recall that President Mahmoud Abbas stated that
the Organization has adopted more than 800 resolutions
on the issue of Palestine. The statement delivered by
Israel speaks of everything except what is essential,
namely this agenda item, which is why this meeting
on ending Israeli occupation of Arab territories and
denying Israel’s access to the occupied lands, including
pre-1967 Jerusalem, all of the Syrian Golan and what
remains of Lebanese territory has been held regularly
since 2002. Contrary to what the representative of Israel
30/63

23/07/2019

would have us believe, it is the main reason behind
the prevailing tensions in the region. By speaking one
day of Lebanon, another day of Libya, another of the
Sudan and another of Yemen, the Israeli representative
denies at every meeting of the Council in which Israel
participates the essence of the agenda item, namely, the
occupation of Arab lands and the Palestinian question,
and the recognition of the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people. That is the essence of this agenda
item — not Iran, the Sudan, Yemen or Libya.
In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains
its unwavering support for the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination, their desire to establish an
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, and
their right of return, as set out in General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948. Furthermore, we support
the accession of Palestine as a full-fledged Member
of the Organization through the implementation of a
principle that cannot be blocked or lobbied against by
the occupying Power.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s open debate. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her
valuable briefing. I am also grateful to all delegations
for expressing their thoughtful condolences on the
passing of Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. Their words are
truly appreciated.
Japan remains committed to supporting a two-State
solution. We continue to believe that the most realistic
solution to this long-standing conflict is a two-State
solution, based on the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed
swaps, which will bring about the peaceful coexistence
between a viable Palestinian State and the State of Israel,
with secure and internationally recognized borders.
We remain deeply concerned about the continued
violence both in Gaza and in the West Bank, including
indiscriminate rocket launches from Gaza into Israel.
We strongly condemn violence and acts of terrorism
against innocent citizens, and we call on the parties
to take immediate steps to prevent all acts of violence,
provocations and incitement. In addition, the final status
of Jerusalem is part of a range of issues that should
be resolved through negotiations based on relevant
Security Council resolutions and known parameters.
Continued settlement activities and the demolition
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of Palestinian-owned structures, including the most
recent case in Sur Baher, undermine the viability of
a two-State solution. Japan once again urges Israel to
cease those activities.
Japan is also worried about the continued issue
of the Palestinian Authority’s withheld tax revenues.
That has exacerbated the Palestinians’ deteriorating
financial situation, which we fear could negatively
affect stability and security. We call on the parties to
find a mutually agreeable solution to this issue as soon
as possible.
While the future prospects of the political process
are dim at present, Japan believes that every country
can contribute to creating an environment conducive
to peace efforts. In that regard, I wish to highlight
the Conference on Cooperation among East Asian
Countries for Palestinian Development (CEAPAD).
Japan, together with regional partners, initiated the
Conference in 2013 to assist Palestine in its economic
development by utilizing the resources and experiences
of East Asian countries. The latest meeting, which we
co-hosted in Ramallah earlier this month, emphasized
the importance of involving the private sector in the
development of Palestine.
At a business-matching event held on the sidelines
of the meeting, a memorandum of understanding on
cooperation was signed between the Chambers of
Commerce of Palestine and Indonesia, in the presence
of the Special Envoy of the Government of Japan for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Kono, and the Prime
Minister of the Palestinian Authority, Mr. Shtayeh,
as witnesses. Conference participants also reaffirmed
their unchanged stance to support a two-State solution
and expressed their determination to continue to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, responding
to the call of the Agency’s Commissioner-General,
Mr. Krähenbühl, who was present at the meeting.
Behind Japan’s efforts through CEAPAD is our
belief that in order to achieve a two-State solution, we
need to assist Palestinians in achieving sustainable
economic development. Nevertheless, development
projects alone cannot achieve peace. Lasting peace
and security can be reached only through negotiations
between the parties. We must continue to encourage the
parties to make difficult but necessary decisions. Japan
will remain engaged with both sides and will continue
to promote confidence-building measures.

S/PV. 8583

Let me conclude by briefly addressing the situation
in the Strait of Hormuz. Securing the safety of
navigation in the area is extremely important for the
peace and prosperity of the international community,
including Japan. We sincerely hope for an easing
of tensions and a stabilizing of the situation in the
region, and we will continue our diplomatic efforts to
that end, in coordination with relevant countries and
international organizations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this important debate.
Brazil wishes to reiterate its support for a twoState solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace
and security. Brazil encourages the parties to seek a
constructive political environment conducive to a
return to meaningful negotiations. The situation in
Gaza continues to highlight the need for a fair, just and
mutually agreeable political solution to the conflict. In
that spirit, Brazil encourages all of the parties involved
to engage in new and creative diplomatic efforts with an
open mind in order to achieve a just and comprehensive
settlement. Peace will be achieved only with difficult
decisions and concessions being made by all sides.
Regarding the situation in Syria, Brazil remains
concerned about the escalation of violence in the northwest of the country, while welcoming the memorandum
on the stabilization of the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. We reiterate the importance of all
parties fully complying with the ceasefire in the region
and strongly condemn air strikes impacting civilians,
including those on medical facilities and medical
workers, who must be protected at all times.
Brazil underscores its support for the work of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, and hopes that we will soon see
further progress on the Geneva track, including
through the prompt convening of the constitutional
committee. That will be a crucial step towards
achieving an urgently needed political solution based
on the parameters set forth in relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially resolution 2254 (2015),
and the Sochi declaration. We remain convinced that
only a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led United Nationsfacilitated political process will deliver lasting peace

19-2258431/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

23/07/2019

and allow for the relief of the humanitarian suffering of
the Syrian population.

its excellent job in steering the work of the Security
Council this month.

Brazil welcomes recent reports of a general
reduction in violence and in the number of victims of
the conflict in Yemen since the Stockholm Agreement
on a ceasefire in the port city of Al-Hudaydah entered
into force. We are nonetheless concerned about the
recent increase in tensions in the country. As we heard
at the latest Council briefing on the matter (S/PV.8578),
the humanitarian, political and security situations in
Yemen remain extremely fragile. We therefore call on
the parties to refrain from any actions that might lead to
a further increase in hostilities and to take the necessary
steps towards the full implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement. We also urge the parties to continue
to work with the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, in seeking
a comprehensive political solution to the conflict.
Brazil reiterates its commitment to the monitoring of
the ceasefire by the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hodeidah Agreement, to which we have agreed to
deploy Brazilian military and police officers.

The Palestinian-Israeli peace process is undergoing
its most difficult period since the Oslo Accords in
1993. Not only have there been serious difficulties in
resuming a peace process that would allow for progress
to be made towards the two-State solution based on the
1967 borders and in resolving all final-status issues
identified in those agreements, but at the same time
there has been an escalation of violence and a rapid
deterioration of the humanitarian situation.

Finally, Brazil condemns the attack on the detention
centre near Tripoli on 2 July and urges all sides to exercise
maximum restraint, avoid an escalation of violence and
engage with the United Nations, the African Union
and relevant stakeholders in order to achieve a full and
comprehensive cessation of hostilities throughout the
country. We remain convinced that establishing peace
and national unity in Libya and countering terrorism
and transnational crime in the region ultimately require
an inclusive, Libyan-led and Libyan-owned political
process, in accordance with the Libyan Political
Agreement and the United Nations action plan for
Libya. We therefore call on all parties to work with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, towards achieving a
comprehensive political solution to the security crisis
and the dire humanitarian situation in Libya. We
maintain our hope that the Libyan national conference
will be held at the earliest possible opportunity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Peru for having
invited us to participate in this debate and extend
our congratulations to the Peruvian presidency on
32/63

Argentina wishes to express its support for the work
of the Special Coordinator of the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, and acknowledge the
important contribution of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in preventing a further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. In that
context, the truce on the Gaza border is a positive first
step towards de-escalating tensions. The recurring
episodes of violence renew the urgent need to carry out
a genuine peace process leading to a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the
1967 borders and agreements reached by the parties
during the negotiation process, in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, the Quartet road map and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Argentina reaffirms its support for the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination
and to establish an independent and viable State that
is recognized by all nations, as well as the right of
the State of Israel to live in peace with its neighbours
within secure and internationally recognized borders.
Argentina reiterates its concern about the growth of
illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and urges Israel to cease its expansionist
activities, in line with the Council’s resolution 2334
(2016).
Argentina also condemns the indiscriminate
launching of missiles from Gaza against civilians in
Israel, as well as the violent actions of Hamas. It is
necessary for Palestinian leaders to address Israeli
security concerns in earnest. In that context, we
recognize Israel’s right to exercise legitimate selfdefence, emphasizing the importance for Israeli actions
to be compatible with international humanitarian law
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and taking into account, in particular, the principles of
distinction and proportionality.
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, including resolution 478 (1980), and
rejects any unilateral attempt to modify that special
status. Argentina therefore considers Jerusalem to be
one of the issues whose final status must be defined by
the parties through bilateral negotiations.
Turning to the situation in the Syrian Golan,
Argentina maintains a principled position with regard
to the illegality of the acquisition of territory by force
and respect for the territorial integrity of States. We
firmly believe in the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, which is why we feel that it is important
to seek a negotiated solution to the Syrian-Israeli
conflict with a view to ending the occupation of the
Golan Heights as soon as possible, in accordance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle
of land for peace.
In respect of the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, Argentina supports a political solution
achieved through dialogue and diplomacy, in line
with international law and respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria.
Argentina attaches special importance to the Geneva
talks held under the auspices of the United Nations.
We appreciate the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and
strongly support his efforts to achieve a peaceful
solution to the conflict in line with the provisions of
resolution 2254 (2015). In the same vein, we recognize
the contribution of the Astana agreements and other
ceasefire agreements to de-escalating violence and
alleviating the humanitarian situation on the ground
with a view to creating the conditions conducive to
moving towards a definitive, inclusive and long-term
settlement of the crisis. We call on the guarantors of
those agreements to redouble their efforts in order to
ensure their full and uninterrupted implementation.
With regard to the situation in Yemen, Argentina
reiterates its support for the constructive involvement
of the Organization through the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement, with
the goal of supporting its implementation in the city
of Al-Hudaydah and in the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Issa, as established in the Stockholm
Agreement. We believe that the full and comprehensive

S/PV. 8583

implementation of the commitments assumed by the
relevant parties is essential in order to make progress
towards a peaceful and definitive settlement of the
internal conflict in Yemen, which will make it possible
to reverse the very grave humanitarian crisis facing the
civilian population.
Finally, the Government of Argentina reiterates
its concern over and condemnation of the attacks in
the territory of Saudi Arabia and against oil tankers
operating under various flags near the Emirati port of
Fujairah and in the Gulf of Oman, which took place in
May and June. Argentina believes that such actions put
civilians at serious risk and negatively affect maritime
safety and the freedom of navigation and international
trade. We call on the international community to join
forces and work together to prevent any situation that
may threaten the stability of the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Odida (Uganda): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the States members of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), in
Uganda’s capacity as Vice-Chair of the OIC Council
of Foreign Ministers. Before I do that, I wish, in my
national capacity, to extend my delegation’s regards and
congratulations to you, Mr. President, on the manner in
which you are conducting the work of the Council in
this month of July. I also wish to extend our heartfelt
condolences to the Government of Japan for the passing
away of Mr. Yukiya Amano, the late Director General
of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
At the outset, the OIC believes it imperative to
highlight the illegal actions that took place yesterday,
22 July, when Israel, the occupying Power, forcibly
displaced Palestinians from their homes in occupied
East Jerusalem. Seventeen Palestinians, including
11 children, were displaced, while more than 350
others also face the threat of displacement. The Israeli
occupying forces began the demolition process of at
least 10 residential buildings, citing a lack of permits
and security concerns regarding the proximity of
those buildings to the illegal apartheid wall. In that
regard, we must reaffirm our position, as well as the
international consensus, and refer back to international
law in insisting that the wall is illegal, the settlements
are illegal and any action to advance either of those
is illegal.

19-2258433/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The continuing destructive, colonial practice
of demolishing Palestinian property and forced
displacement of Palestinians must be put to an end. The
flouting of international law cannot be disregarded.
Israel is acting in full contempt of the Council and
making a mockery of our rules-based order. The
Security Council has a direct responsibility to put
an end to this culture of impunity and hold Israel
accountable for its crimes. Day by day, the two-State
solution is being eroded by those policies, and with that,
the hopes, dreams and fundamental rights of millions
of Palestinians living under a gruesome and belligerent
occupation are being denied.
Since the Security Council’s previous open
debate on the question of Palestine (S/PV.8517),
developments have made for an even grimmer outlook
as Israel persists with its illegal policies and measures,
heightening tensions and the volatility of the situation
in Palestine. That has included, in particular, illegal,
provocative and destabilizing acts concerning the holy
sites in occupied East Jerusalem, including excavations
that are directly threatening the sanctity, stability
and status of Christian and Islamic holy sites such as
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, which houses the holy Al-Aqsa
Mosque. In that regard, we draw the Council’s attention
to the OIC Executive Committee’s extraordinary
open-ended meeting at the level of Foreign Ministers,
which convened on 17 July to consider the escalating
frequency and brutality of colonialist Israeli violations.
The OIC Ministers stressed their grave concern over
all unlawful Israeli attempts to alter the historical,
political and legal status and demographic composition
of occupied East Jerusalem. Such illegal actions have
been ongoing for more than half a century, in violation
of international law and the Council’s resolutions, and
must be halted.
The OIC Ministers also expressed particular concern
about recent events surrounding the inauguration of the
excavation of the so-called Pilgrims Road underneath
the Silwan neighbourhood towards Al-Aqsa Mosque.
Deplorably, that inauguration was attended by
representatives of the United States Administration,
in total disregard of international law and norms
and in blatant disrespect of Muslim sentiments. The
OIC cautions that such acts contribute to further
consecrating, entrenching and perpetuating the illegal
Israeli colonial occupation of Palestinian territory and
the acquisition of territory by force, further fuelling
34/63

23/07/2019

tensions and violence, fomenting religious conflict and
constituting a threat to international peace and security.
We call on this organ to uphold its responsibilities
under the Charter of the United Nations with regard
to the Palestine question and the decades-long quest
to ensure a just, peaceful solution to the conflict
and security in the region. Under international law
and relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016), there are clear obligations to
ensure Israel’s full compliance, including in relation to
the question of Jerusalem — the occupied capital of the
State of Palestine — which has been enduring endless
Israeli attempts of isolation, Judaization, colonization
and subjugation. It is unfortunate that the Security
Council has so far failed to put an end to all measures,
decisions or statements by any party aimed at forcibly
and unlawfully altering the legal, historical, cultural
and political status of the occupied city of Jerusalem,
including attempts to relocate some diplomatic
missions thereto, which constitute blatant violations of
international law and relevant United Nations provisions
and undermine the rule of international law, deepen the
current political impasse, erode the two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders and foreclose all prospects
for peace and stability.
The dire situation in Palestine is becoming even
more dangerous owing to the decision by the Israeli
authorities to forcibly withhold Palestinian tax
revenues. Such an illegal decision is an act of piracy and
collective punishment against the Palestinian people
and constitutes a violation of international law and of
Israel’s commitments under signed agreements, thereby
exacerbating the financial, economic and humanitarian
crisis being encountered by the Palestinian people,
which is especially dire in the Gaza Strip — which
remains under an illegal Israeli blockade — and has
caused such poverty and devastation. The OIC once
again underscores that the lack of effective international
deterrent measures has only emboldened Israel to
pursue racist, destructive and illegal acts and practices
with total impunity. Only accountability, in line with
international legal obligations, can create the pressure
necessary to end the Israeli occupation and ensure the
legitimate and inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people — the cornerstone of peace and security in the
Middle East.
While the economic empowerment of the Palestinian
people is imperative, addressing the dire economic
situation in Palestine should not overshadow the core of
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Palestinian issue and the root cause of the plight of
the Palestinian people, which is essentially the Israeli
colonial occupation and its far-reaching consequences.
The underlying issues of this historic injustice must be
directly and fully addressed. In that regard, we affirm
that in order for justice to be established and for a
genuine, lasting peace to materialize, an internationally
sponsored political process based on United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative must be
launched, with a view to ending the Israeli occupation
and enabling the Palestinian people to fulfil their
legitimate and national rights to live in freedom and
dignity in their independent Palestinian State, on the
territory occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and to find a just and lasting solution for the
Palestinian refugees, in line with resolution 194 (III).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Zulqarnain (Pakistan): My delegation
welcomes this debate on the situation in the Middle East.
Despite the Council’s regular deliberations on this
agenda item, turmoil and disorder have continued to
rise in the Middle East, exposing the inadequacy of our
efforts to end the illegal occupation, the annexation of
territories and the violation of basic human rights in
the region. While existing conflicts grow and intensify,
new conflicts have emerged, threatening to plunge the
region into a fresh vortex of violence and instability.
Tellingly, we have gone backwards in more ways than
one, and nowhere is that grim assessment more apparent
than in Palestine. With every new illegal settlement that
goes unchecked, the occupying Power is emboldened
to continue eroding by design the viability of the twoState solution, blatantly disregarding the international
consensus on the issue.
On the humanitarian front, a modern-day tragedy
is playing out daily in the Gaza strip, where millions of
innocent people have been subjected to an excruciating
blockade in contravention of all prevalent international
laws and human rights. Thousands of civilians,
particularly women, children and the most vulnerable,
are constantly under threat, exacerbating the perpetual
cycle of violence and increasing the risk of a broader
escalation of the conflict. While the Secretary-General
has repeatedly said that there is no plan B for Palestine,
realities on the ground are being deliberately engineered
to tip the scales in favour of the occupying Power. My
delegation reiterates that a viable, independent and

S/PV. 8583

contiguous State of Palestine, established on the basis
of internationally agreed parameters, the pre-1967
borders and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
remains the only sustainable guarantee of enduring
peace in the region.
At a time when a political settlement of the
Palestinian issue remains elusive, the financial
challenges faced by the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) have heightened concerns for the long-term
sustainability of many of its critical activities, including
in the provision of education, health and social services
to over 5 million Palestinian refugees. It is heartening
that the international community has stepped up its
efforts to address the financial shortfall faced by
the Agency. In the wake of unprecedented financial
challenges, those enhanced contributions have not only
allowed the Agency to keep its operations going, but
have also served as an endorsement of UNRWA’s critical
role as a beacon of hope for Palestinian refugees across
the region. In line with our long-standing commitment
to our Palestinian brothers and sisters and to express our
solidarity, my country, Pakistan, has already made an
additional contribution to UNRWA for the current year.
The Middle East stands at a dangerous juncture in
its history. The repudiation of multilateralism and the
abandonment of political processes are systematically
eroding the established norms of international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
worsening an already fragile regional environment. As
the international community intensifies its efforts to
de-escalate tensions in Yemen and advance a political
process in Syria, our focus should also remain on
alleviating the humanitarian situation in the broader
region. Pakistan reaffirms its commitment to support
negotiated political settlements that are based on
agreed frameworks and achieved through inclusive
political engagement.
A just and lasting peace in the Middle East,
especially for the occupied people in Palestine, is
not only critical for regional stability but also a
fundamental prerequisite for global peace and security.
The international community cannot rid itself of its
responsibility to ensure justice and fairness and it
cannot abandon the people of Palestine in their quest
for self-determination. For far too long, they have
looked to the United Nations with expectant eyes. We
must not fail them.

19-2258435/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Tayel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, whose tireless
efforts are facilitating the Middle East peace process,
containing the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Gaza and fostering Palestinian reconciliation efforts.
The Palestinian cause has existed since the
creation of the Security Council. We have followed
all developments concerning the issue, and we have
witnessed a decline in the international community’s
ambition to reach a just solution to end the occupation
of Palestinian and Arab territories and restore the
Palestinian people’s inalienable rights, including their
right to live in dignity in an independent State, as other
peoples of the world do.
Let me reaffirm here that the means of achieving a
just and lasting solution to this question is well known
to all. Over the past 70 years, we have held debates,
adopted resolutions and concluded agreements that
have all led to one clear-cut result in responding to the
aspirations of these peoples and addressing the issue
of Jerusalem, namely, the two-State solution based on
the 1967 borders. Contrary to what some may believe,
such resolutions and agreements have rarely been
implemented, due to a lack of genuine political will.
Transition periods have led to crises and palliative
temporary measures that have clouded the political
process. I repeat, that is not due to shortcomings in
international law; rather, it is due to a lax attitude in the
implementation of agreements and resolutions.
As we have always said, we are not trying to impose
solutions on the parties. That is not our intention and
would be illogical. Neither are we rehashing theoretical
positions. However, we believe that the issue must be
settled with immediate action. Over the past decade,
we have witnessed the ongoing deterioration of the
situation on the ground. That reality will not change
unless international law is applied.
We have spoken of the Arab Peace Initiative,
which continues to be ignored by the authors of various
resolutions, despite the fact that it clearly answers many
questions and provides realistic solutions, in accordance
with international law and Council resolutions, while
also responding to the realities of the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples and their aspirations.
36/63

23/07/2019

I therefore call on the international community
to avoid political speculation, which is prone to bias,
and to take the Arab Peace Initiative seriously, as it
demonstrates flexibility. I am convinced that, if the
parties demonstrate genuine political will, the Initiative
will accommodate the aspirations of the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples and, indeed, all the peoples of the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also wish to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her valuable briefing.
The Middle East continues to suffer from crises
that negatively affect the political, economic and social
situations of the countries and peoples of the region.
The situation requires tireless efforts to find solutions to
the root causes of conflict in the Middle East, the most
prominent of which is the ongoing Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian territories. That occupation is a
source of conflict and violence that will continue to
grow if the Palestinians do not enjoy their legitimate
right to freedom and statehood, with East Jerusalem as
their capital.
Jordan is continuing its efforts to protect Jerusalem
and its Islamic and Christian holy sites by continuing
its custodianship. His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein is devoting all of the Kingdom’s available
resources to preserving the Christian, Islamic and
Arab identity of holy sites and their historical and legal
status quo. We recall here that Jerusalem is the basis
for peace. Compromising Jerusalem and its holy sites
therefore constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. We condemn the opening by the occupying
Israeli authorities of the so-called Pilgrims Road in the
village of Silwan, which leads to the holy sanctuary of
Al-Aqsa Mosque.
We caution against those irresponsible and illegal
measures that are increasing tension. We express our
categorical rejection of all Israeli attempts to change
the identity of the Old City of Jerusalem, in particular
the Al-Aqsa Mosque and its adjacent sites. Such Israeli
practices constitute a flagrant violation of international
law and international humanitarian law and are in
continued violation of UNESCO’s resolutions calling
for the cessation of all illegal Israeli excavations in the
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Old City of Jerusalem which are in clear contradiction
of international norms.
The issue of Palestinian refugees is one of
the final-status issues to be dealt with within the
framework of a comprehensive solution, in accordance
with the Arab Peace Initiative and resolutions of
international legitimacy, the most prominent of which
is General Assembly resolution 194 (III), and in a
manner that guarantees refugees the right to return and
receive reparations.
Until such action is taken, it is essential that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) continue to
provide basic services to more than 5 million Palestinian
refugees in order to guarantee them a decent standard
of living. In that context, I would like to extend my
sincere thanks to all of the countries that participated
in UNRWA’s pledging conference, held last month, for
their continued political and financial support for the
Agency. That support sends the message to millions of
Palestinian refugees that the international community
will continue to fight for them until a just and fair
solution is reached.
The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) reflected
the international community’s condemnation of all
Israeli settlement activities. We condemn yesterday’s
demolition by Israeli authorities of dozens of
Palestinian residential units in the Sur Baher area of
East Jerusalem. We express our categorical rejection
of settlement policies in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, which include
the construction of settlements and the expansion of
existing settlements, the policy of land confiscation
and demolition, the expulsion of residents and the
construction of surrounding roads, as well as other
policies and measures aimed at forcibly displacing
residents. That represents a flagrant violation of
international law and Security Council resolutions. We
call on the Israeli authorities to immediately cease those
practices, which deepen despair, increase tension and
have a fundamental impact on the two-State solution.
The Syrian crisis has now entered its ninth year.
We reiterate our firm and clear position, which has
remained unchanged since the beginning of the crisis,
namely, that only a political solution can end the
suffering in Syria. We also reiterate our full support
for the efforts of the United Nations, particularly
those of Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, who has called

S/PV. 8583

for a solution based on resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), which
would preserve the territorial integrity of Syria and
its sovereignty, while achieving stability and national
reconciliation and creating the conditions necessary for
development, reconstruction and the return of displaced
persons and refugees.
In conclusion, we reiterate our firm position that
the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can
be achieved only by ending the Israeli occupation
through the establishment of an independent and viable
Palestinian State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, based on international
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant
United Nations resolutions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Peru for including this issue on the agenda
and for the opportunity to participate in today’s open
debate and to reaffirm the importance that we attach
to this matter. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing this morning.
Before proceeding, I wish to express the
condolences of the Chilean Government to both the
Japanese Government and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) for the death of IAEA Director
General Yukiya Amano. I had the opportunity to
work alongside him for five years, when we were both
Ambassadors in Austria for international organizations,
and for two years on the IAEA Board of Governors;
I in fact succeeded him as Chair of the Board. I saw
first-hand Director Amano’s fervour and passion for the
issues of disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation.
His absence will be noticed and missed and we
appreciate the contribution that he made with regard to
those issues.
Returning to the issue of the Palestinian question,
Chile wishes to reiterate its conviction that the solution
to the situation in the Middle East, in particular the
Palestinian question, lies in two free, autonomous,
sovereign and independent States that are able to live in
peace within safe and recognized borders, in accordance
with United Nations decisions and resolutions and
international law, which must serve as the basis for a
direct agreement between the parties.

19-2258437/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President of Chile, Sebastián Piñera Echeñique,
recently conducted his second official visit to both Israel
and Palestine just one month ago, on 24-28 June. The
first such visit was in 2011, following Chile’s recognition
of Palestine as a State. He was as always accompanied
by a representative delegation from both the Palestinian
and Israeli communities, including parliamentary,
business and civil society representatives. During his
trip, President Piñera Echeñique reaffirmed that Chile
sees its contribution to reaching a peaceful solution as a
foreign-policy priority, while continuing to express his
support for a just and lasting solution in the Middle East.
Our commitment to peace goes back many years
to the early twentieth century, when what is now the
largest Palestinian community outside the Middle East
began arriving in Chile and integrating themselves
into all levels of society. Not only has the Palestinian
community found its home in Chile and become a part of
our society, but an extensive Jewish community has also
been well established for many years. We share strong
historical and brotherly ties with Israel and Palestine.
For that reason, the President signed agreements during
his most recent visit that are important for both States
because they reflect the synergy that exists between
Israel and Chile and between Palestine and Chile.
As a country that believes in respect for international
law and the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, we wish to reiterate what was pointed out a
few weeks ago by President Piñera Echeñique in that
holy land:
“We are confident that Israel and Palestine
share exactly the same aspirations as all other
nations of the world — the best for their societies
and for the people living on their territories;
prosperity and security; and the desire to achieve
a sustainable peace to end the decades of pain that
have scarred entire generations.”
Violence only generates violence, but sustainable
peace fosters development, well-being and the promotion
of resilient and cohesive societies that are capable of
addressing and overcoming their own challenges.
We trust that both nations believe in the two-State
solution. We believe that it is the responsibility of the
international community to support them in achieving
that aspiration which has already been delayed for far
too long.
38/63

23/07/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Mr. Niang: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
people, I would like to commend the professionalism
with which the delegation of Peru has conducted the
work of the Security Council this month.
While welcoming the holding of this open debate,
which provides a renewed opportunity to consider the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, I reiterate the deep concern of the Committee
about the recent developments on the ground that
continue to undermine hope for a peaceful settlement
to the question of Palestine. In that same spirit, the
Committee strongly deplores and condemns yesterday
morning’s demolition of houses by Israel in the
Palestinian community of Sur Baher and calls for an
end to those violations of international law.
Indeed, as we gather in the Council, the cycle of
violence, dispossession, expansion of settlements,
evictions and demolitions, together with the
deteriorating human rights, humanitarian and economic
situation, all in the context of Israel’s occupation of
the Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continues unabated. We are at a critical juncture owing
to a series of deliberate, unilateral and unlawful actions
aimed at negating many of the final-status issues,
including settlements, the status of Jerusalem and the
return of refugees. The threat of de facto annexation of
the Palestinian territory is more worrisome than ever.
In response to the Peace to Prosperity workshop
held on 25 June in Manama, Bahrain, the international
community has made it clear that, without a political
initiative that addresses that historic injustice with the
fulfilment of their inalienable rights, including the
rights to self-determination and independence, as well
as the realization of the two-State solution, an economic
initiative for the Palestinian people cannot succeed.
While humanitarian and economic support for
the Palestinian people is very important and is indeed
an urgent matter, the solution to the conflict remains
political. The only viable and just solution to the conflict
remains that based on the long-standing parameters of
two States living side by side in peace and security,
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Palestine and negotiated
outcomes for all final-status issues, as per international
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

law, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles and the Arab Peace Initiative.
By and large, the international community is
still upholding those parameters, as witnessed in the
declarations and outcomes adopted at recent summits
of the African Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the
ministerial meeting of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. During recent visits of Committee delegations
to Brussels and Berlin, Government and European
Union interlocutors also reaffirmed their ongoing and
strong commitment to the two-State solution.
Such support must translate into concrete actions,
including the formal recognition of the State of
Palestine and support for its full membership of the
United Nations. In addition, the Committee continues
to emphasize the importance of a collective approach to
revive and promote the long-stalled peace process and
calls for the strengthening of the Middle East Quartet
and immediate efforts to that end.
The international community must also support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order for it to continue its
crucial operations. Despite the additional $60 million
raised at the 25 June Pledging Conference, the Agency’s
2019 budget shortfall remains at $151 million. That
is why the Committee calls on all donors to continue
to ensure reliable and sustainable funding for the
Agency’s core programmes and life-saving services and
to continue to strongly support its General Assembly
mandate, which is due to be renewed at the Assembly’s
seventy-fourth session.
Allow me to reiterate that settlements are illegal
under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. The Committee appreciates that some
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) are now provided in writing
and it expects future reports to incorporate text on
compliance with the resolution, including its operative
paragraph 5 requiring Member States to distinguish
in their dealings between Israel and the Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. That is imperative
to ensure accountability as a central contribution to the
search for justice and peace.
The Committee is also encouraged by the steps taken
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to publish in the coming months a database
on companies operating in Israeli settlements in the

S/PV. 8583

occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. That
will be an important tool to ensure the accountability
of private sector companies engaged in illegal business
activities in the occupied territory and will represent
a significant step towards the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016).
The situation in Jerusalem also remains of
utmost concern, as discussed at the latest conference
convened by the Committee on 27 and 28 June in
Geneva, which focused on preserving the cultural and
religious character of Jerusalem. The Committee again
calls on all Member States to comply, inter alia, with
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980) and to refrain
from establishing diplomatic missions in Jerusalem.
The sanctity and historic status quo of the holy sites
of Jerusalem must furthermore be respected and
their preservation is the international community’s
shared responsibility.
The security situation on the ground, particularly
in Gaza, has remained tense in recent weeks. Weekly
demonstrations have continued at the fence, where the
lives of Palestinians, including children, have been
taken, while rockets continue to be fired into Israel.
The Committee reiterates its condemnation of all acts
of violence and terror against civilians and stresses the
need to ensure the protection of civilians, in accordance
with international humanitarian law and Council
resolutions. The Committee also reiterates its call for
the lifting of the illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip.
Regrettably, there has also been no resolution
to the Palestinian Government’s serious financial
crisis, which has been caused by Israel’s withholding
of Palestinian tax revenues. The Committee calls for
an end to those punitive measures and for respect
for international law and all signed agreements. It is
crucial that the financial crisis, as well as Palestinian
reconciliation, with the support of Egypt and others, be
positively resolved in order to facilitate the creation of
an environment conducive to the pursuit of peace.
In conclusion, the Committee again calls on all
Member States to remain committed to the two-State
solution as the only way to end the 52-year-old Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territory and to achieve the
peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive peace that has
been called for by the Council and the General Assembly
for so long. For the very future of our collective action,
we need to do more to close the gap between words
and deeds. We cannot stand idle as the Palestinian

19-2258439/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

people continue to suffer a terrible historical injustice .
We must become the actors that achieve the two-State
solution and make a just peace a reality.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
The absence of any improvement in the situation
on the ground over the past three months has further
impeded prospects for peace. Significant obstacles
include the lack of trust between Israelis and
Palestinians; Israel’s continued occupation of the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem; the ongoing
illegal expansion of settlements; the constant threat of
violence against civilians; the incitement of hatred and
violence; the lack of progress towards intra-Palestinian
reconciliation; and the severe financial crisis faced
by the Palestinian Authority. Those developments are
occurring against a wider political backdrop, including
at the regional level, that threatens the viability of the
two-State solution.
The position of the European Union (EU) remains
unchanged, based on international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions and centred on our firm
commitment to a just and comprehensive resolution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through a negotiated
two-State solution. Our goal is to fulfil the legitimate
aspirations of both parties, including Israeli and
Palestinian security needs and Palestinian aspirations
for statehood and sovereignty.
The parameters for the resolution to the conflict
are well known and recognized internationally and
the EU’s position in that regard has been set out in
detail on numerous occasions, such as in the Council
of the European Union’s conclusions of July 2014.
They include the need to reach an agreement on the
borders of the two States, based on the June 1967
lines, with equivalent land swaps. They also request
security arrangements that, for Palestinians, respect
their sovereignty and show that the occupation is
over and, for Israelis, protect their security, prevent
the resurgence of terrorism and deal effectively with
security threats, including new threats in the region.
40/63

23/07/2019

They call for a just, fair, agreed and realistic solution
to the refugee question, and they underline the need
to fulfil the aspirations of both parties with regard to
Jerusalem, for which a way must be found to resolve its
status as the future capital of both States.
We emphasize that direct negotiations are an
important way forward to resolve all permanent-status
issues. The EU will recognize changes to the pre-1967
borders, including with regard to Jerusalem, only when
agreed by the parties. Ultimately, we want to see the
State of Israel and a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable State of Palestine living side by
side in peace and security. That position is based on
respect for international law. It is in the interests of the
parties themselves, not least because it guarantees a
democratic future for Palestinians and Israelis alike. It
is also in the interests of the broader region and in the
European Union’s own interests.
Last month, the United States published a set of
economic proposals, entitled “Peace to Prosperity”, and
subsequently presented them at a workshop convened
in Manama, together with the Kingdom of Bahrain. We
take note of the acknowledgement by the United States
that the vision outlined in Manama would be embedded
in a political plan. We are ready to work with the United
States and the other Quartet partners, as well as our
partners in the region, with the objective of ensuring
that the implementation of economic projects will
improve the situation on the ground and contribute to
the two-State solution. The EU and its member States
have long been reliable economic and development
partners to the Palestinian Authority and other partners
in the region.
The EU, together with Norway, will continue to use
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians as a relevant
framework, not least because it is one of the rare
international forums with the participation of both
the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority.
However, the main obstacle to development in the
occupied Palestinian territory is the lack of a political
solution to the conflict. We are convinced that genuine
and sustainable economic development must accompany
but cannot substitute for a political solution that, among
other things, brings an end to the occupation and takes
into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
and the Israeli peoples alike.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

One area of serious ongoing concern is that of
continuous Israeli settlement construction, including
recent announcements of a number of new projects
around Jerusalem’s Old City. Our position on settlement
policy is clear and remains unchanged. All Israeli
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, are illegal under international law and
figure among the significant obstacles to peace and
development that erode the viability of the two-State
solution and prospects for lasting peace, as reaffirmed
by resolution 2334 (2016). We also underline that any
form of unilateral annexation, in particular de jure
annexation of already existing settlements, would
represent a further breach of international law and
further undermines the political solution based on the
agreed international parameters.
The demolition and seizure of Palestinian-owned
structures have significantly increased in recent
months, notably in East Jerusalem. Evictions there have
also taken place again, such as in Sheikh Jarrah and,
most recently, in Silwan. Israeli authorities proceeded
yesterday with the demolition of 10 Palestinian buildings,
containing some 70 apartments, in Wadi Al-Hummus in
occupied East Jerusalem. The majority of the buildings
are located in Area A and Area B of the West Bank,
where, according to the Oslo Accords, all civil issues
are under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority.
The spokesperson for European Union Foreign Affairs
and Security Policy called the Israeli authorities to
immediately halt those ongoing demolitions, which
are illegal under international law. Such developments
mark a clear change in the current characteristics and
demographic make-up of Jerusalem. Furthermore,
we also remain very attentive to the developments in
the Bedouin village of Khan Al-Ahmar. We remain
strongly opposed to such demolitions; confiscations,
including of EU-funded projects; and forced transfers
and evictions, as well as other actions taken in the
context of Israel’s settlement policy.
A further immediate concern relates to the financial
crisis facing the Palestinian Authority. We expect the
economic and fiscal agreements between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority to be implemented in full.
Meanwhile, we call on the Palestinian Authority to
accept the tax transfers on a provisional basis, bearing in
mind the fact that the delivery of health care, education
and security to millions of ordinary Palestinians,
which is indispensable for the full enjoyment of their
human rights, remains in the interest of all sides. In

S/PV. 8583

our view, accepting the transfers on a provisional basis
would not constitute a legal or political endorsement
of the Israeli decision. Continuous revenues would
also ensure that the ongoing work to build the capacity
of a future Palestinian State is not interrupted — an
objective which the EU regards as important for the
two-State solution.
The EU continues to oppose all forms of terror and
firmly rejects and condemns any incitement to violence
and hatred, which are fundamentally incompatible with
advancing a peaceful two-State solution. We expect
both the Palestinian and the Israeli authorities to take
steps against violence. We are extremely concerned by
the increased settler violence, and we call upon Israel to
take actions in that regard.
The situation in Gaza remains dire and continues
to fuel extremism and radicalization and to foster
instability. Notwithstanding the ceasefire arrangements,
the EU is deeply alarmed by the sharp escalation of
violence and the loss of human lives in recent months,
resulting in a high number of Palestinians, including
children being killed and injured. We strongly condemn
the repeated firing of rockets by Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad from Gaza into civilian areas in Israel,
and call upon the Palestinian factions in Gaza to refrain
from any acts of violence.
The EU continues to be concerned by Israel’s
use of force against demonstrators, and expects
the Israeli authorities to respect the principles of
necessity and proportionality, while acknowledging
Israel’s legitimate right to safeguard the security of
the Israeli people. We repeat our call on all parties
to take urgent steps leading to a fundamental change
in the humanitarian, political, security and economic
situation in Gaza, including through an end to the
closure policy and a sustained opening of the crossing
points, which are important for Gazans’ daily lives.
We welcome the fact that, according to recent reports,
Israel has eased entry restrictions on certain materials.
We welcome such efforts and encourage further steps
in that regard and commend the efforts of Egypt, Qatar
and the United Nations Special Coordinator to improve
the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
The lack of intra-Palestinian reconciliation is
one of the significant obstacles to peace and to the
realization of the two-State solution. We therefore
continue to urge Palestinian factions to engage in
good faith in the reconciliation process. We welcome

19-2258441/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the renewed efforts of some factions, as facilitated by
Egypt only few weeks ago. We again value Egypt’s role
in this process. A single, legitimate and democratic
Palestinian Authority, with full control over the whole
Palestinian territory, including Gaza, is critical to
fulfilling the national aspiration of the Palestinian
people and to achieving a viable Palestinian State. We
encourage the prompt setting of a date for the planned
Palestinian elections in the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip.
Until a fair, just, agreed and realistic solution to
the Palestinian refugee issue, in accordance with
international law, is found, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency in the Near East (UNRWA), is best
placed to provide them with the necessary protection and
essential services. The services provided by the Agency
contribute to the viability of the two-State solution and
to the stability and security of the region. It is vitally
important that the Agency receive the financial support
that it needs in order to fulfil its mandate.
We commend the Agency’s efforts to overcome
the ongoing financial crisis. We welcome the success
of the pledging conference of 25 June that took
place under the auspices of the United Nations. The
provision of services and food delivery, in particular
to the vulnerable population in the Gaza Strip, are now
guaranteed over the summer months. We encourage
others to also demonstrate their support to the Agency’s
work to ensure the continuity of its mission and its
mandate again this year.
Allow me to briefly turn to the situation in Syria.
It is the worst crisis of our times — a conflict that has
displaced half of the Syrian population, threatened the
stability of the entire Middle East and provided fertile
grounds for the rise of the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant/Da’esh.
The European Union has voiced strong concern
over the violence in north-west Syria. Military strikes
by Syrian regime forces, supported by Russia, have
destroyed internally displaced persons camps, schools
and health facilities, which should be the safest spaces.
Hundreds of civilians have lost their lives, and more
than 330,000 have been displaced, many of them for the
second or third time.
The continued presence and activities of United
Nations-listed terrorist groups in the area contribute to
the suffering of civilians and remain of grave concern.
Yet, fighting terrorist groups cannot justify violations
42/63

23/07/2019

of international humanitarian law. The EU reminds all
parties, in particular the regime and its allies, of their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. We continue to call
upon Russia and Turkey to restore the ceasefire in Idlib
that they agreed on under the Sochi memorandum. The
EU stresses again the need to establish an effective and
lasting nationwide ceasefire in Syria.
There is no way ahead towards sustainable peace
but by resuming intra-Syrian negotiations in Geneva
and achieving a Syrian-led solution that will lead to
a political solution, in line with unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015). Only an inclusive political
solution can form the basis for national reconciliation
and pave the way towards free and fair elections.
The European Union will therefore maintain its
strong support for the United Nations-led process in
Geneva and continue to support the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria to revive the
political process and assist in the establishment of a
balanced and inclusive constitutional committee to
pave the way for free and fair elections, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), and to support Syrian
civil society, including women and their equitable and
meaningful engagement in the political process.
We will remain at the forefront of international
efforts to promote accountability and justice and to
combat impunity as part of any future process of
national reconciliation in Syria. We will continue to
support the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and
Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and
the assiduous work of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.
The EU strongly condemns the practice of arbitrary
detention, the enforced disappearances of civilians
and torture in detention, primarily used by the Syrian
regime as a form of retaliation and retribution, as well
as by terrorist groups.
The EU has strengthened its sanctions against the
Syrian regime this year by adding business individuals
and entities who benefit from supporting the Al-Assad
regime, as well as others responsible for chemical
attacks. The EU will continue to consider further
restrictive measures against Syria as long as the
repression continues. We will also continue our support
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and funding for the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and fully back its efforts to
identify the perpetrators of chemical attacks in Syria
in order to hold them accountable for their crimes. We
reiterate our call to have the situation in Syria referred
to the appropriate justice mechanisms, including the
International Criminal Court.
Finally, the EU continues to support the efforts of
the Global Coalition to Counter Da’esh. To contribute
to the enduring defeat of Da’esh, the EU will continue
to respond with stabilization efforts, while promoting
inclusive, independent and representative local
governance in north-east Syria.
We support the right of Syrian refugees and
internally displaced persons to a safe, voluntary,
dignified and sustainable return. We support the
assessment of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that those conditions are
not in place yet. For the third consecutive year, the
European Union and the United Nations co-chaired the
Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria
and the Region, from 12 to 14 March. Pledges made at
the conference have reached a total of €8.3 billion for
2019 and beyond. Two-thirds of the funds were pledged
by the EU and its member States.
The Conference was also an occasion to reiterate
our firm position on reconstruction. EU support for
reconstruction will be possible in Syria only once
a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political
transition, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), is firmly
under way. In that respect, I would like to inform the
Council that the European Union intends to host a highlevel event on Syria during the high-level week of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Father Charters (Holy See): The Holy See wishes
to thank the presidency of Peru for convening today’s
open debate to discuss the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.
Last month, in his briefing to the Security Council,
Mr. Mladenov noted a dangerous escalation of violence
in Gaza, as well as continued violence in the West Bank
(see S/PV.8557). The lack of unity on both sides, as well
as internal divisions, are abetting an environment of

S/PV. 8583

distrust. Fuelled by dangerous rhetoric and extremist
ideology, that lack of trust can sadly and rapidly
devolve into violent acts that put the lives of innocent
Palestinians and Israelis alike at risk and negatively
impact the tense wider region. Such a situation cannot
permit this open debate to remain merely a rehearsal
of well-known facts and commentary on troubling
setbacks and impediments to reaching the much-sought
two-State solution within internationally recognized
borders. It must lead to action.
Through generous donations, mainly by means
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the international
community continues to ensure that education, health
care and other basic services can be provided for
Palestine refugees, lest the situation on the ground
become untenable. There is already high unemployment
and limited prospects for the younger generations,
alongside an ever-increasing demand for food and water.
Yet, while humanitarian and economic support
remain vital for creating the environment for
negotiations, they cannot replace negotiations. Political
will and constructive dialogue are required to establish
the conditions for lasting peace and a comprehensive
and sustainable solution. An important contribution that
Member States can make at this time is to encourage
parties to return to the negotiating table and offer
them the space and resources to commit to dialogue as
protagonists of their own peaceful future, side by side.
In our consideration of the Middle East, we cannot
overlook the still unstable areas in Syria, where the risk
of a worse humanitarian crisis remains high. We cannot
be deaf to the cries of those lacking food, medical
care and schooling, or to those of orphans, widows
and the wounded. Yesterday, in his letter to President
Bashar Al-Assad, Pope Francis expressed his profound
preoccupation over the humanitarian situation in Syria
and, in particular, the dramatic conditions faced by
the civilian population in Idlib. He renewed his call
for their protection and for respect for international
humanitarian law.
The worsening humanitarian situation in Yemen
is also a cause for grave concern, in particular when
those most in need are deprived of food and medical
attention. The Council’s unanimous adoption on
15 July of resolution 2481 (2019) to renew the mandate
of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement was a needed step to strengthen the

19-2258443/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

implementation of the ceasefire and to facilitate access
to provisions and essential supplies. There is a need
for coherence, however. How can we make eloquent
appeals for peace in the Middle East and even commit to
humanitarian action while at the same time continuing
to permit the sale of arms in the region?
Iraq, after the unspeakable crimes that the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant inflicted upon its
population, especially members of religious and ethnic
minorities, offers some hope as it moves forward along
the way of reconciliation and reconstruction through
the peaceful and shared pursuit of the common good
on the part of all elements of society. In addition, it is
essential that the international community continue to
encourage and seek out every possible opportunity for
negotiations and peaceful solutions to current crises in
the Gulf region.
This is a critical moment in which all countries of the
region must not squander peaceful advances by falling
back into hostilities sparked by the simmering conflicts
of regional Powers. Rather it is essential to promote even
more dialogue for a culture of tolerance, of acceptance
of others and of living together peacefully; in this way,
they can contribute significantly to reducing many
economic, social, political and environmental problems
that weigh so heavily on a large part of humankind.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council is meeting today to conduct its periodic review
of the progress made towards achieving peace in the
Middle East, and to ensure that Israel, the occupying
Power, is respecting its commitments according to
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the decisions of the Security
Council pertaining to the peaceful resolution of the
Palestinian question.
Notwithstanding the report’s details about
continuing Israeli violations of the resolution’s
provisions, a close follow-up of developments since
the last periodic review (see S/PV.8517) demonstrate a
growing tendency on the part of Israel to try and cover
up its violations. It does so by seeking to depict this
political and regional conflict, which was triggered by
the illegal Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory, as
a religious conflict. Israel exploits the Security Council
as a forum for its hate speech and misinformation,
contradicting the actual reporting on what is
44/63

23/07/2019

happening, particularly with regard to the sacred sites
of East Jerusalem.
Israel and the United States of America have failed
in their bold attempt to change the historic status of
Jerusalem. It was an underhanded attempt to try and
garner international recognition of Israeli claims to the
holy city. These attempts by Israel and the United States
run counter to concerted international opposition, at
the forefront of which are the General Assembly and
the Security Council. Israel, however, is undaunted
and continues to speak in incendiary and provocative
terms, including here in the Security Council. Israel
tries to stoke religious tensions and to debate this as
a religious conflict. That demonstrates a flagrant lack
of respect for the international community and an
attempt to continue its violations of the rights of the
Palestinian people.
Israel seeks to entrench its illegal occupation
of Palestinian territory. All of that should spur the
Security Council to be more objective and to take steps
to guarantee respect for the religious texts of the three
great monotheistic religions. The Council should also
take steps to prevent Israel from interpreting these
religious texts in a perverse manner in an effort to
justify its political stance as an occupying Power. Steps
should be taken to prevent Israel from failing to live up
to its obligations under international law.
Israel occupied East Jerusalem in 1967 and is now
trying to claim that Jerusalem, as an undivided city, is
its capital. It is trying to impose Israeli sovereignty on
a de facto basis, moving forward with the claim that
this was the case under the British mandate before
1948. That is a refusal to recognize Security Council
resolutions, which make the status of the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem and
Gaza Strip, very clear.
The League of Arab States reaffirms that Israel
has no sovereignty claim over East Jerusalem or over
any part of the city. That remains a core issue that
must be resolved as part of the final resolution, which
needs to be the fruit of direct negotiations between the
two parties — Israelis and Palestinians. There should
be no interference in these direct negotiations and
no thumbing the nose at international law. Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016)
must be upheld. Also to be upheld are the General
Assembly’s own decisions and resolutions, particularly
those adopted at its resumed emergency and regular
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sessions, notably resolution 73/22, of 30 November
2018, on Jerusalem.
The League of Arab States calls on the Security
Council to reiterate its full support for the status of
Jerusalem, in line with existing resolutions, in order
to define it as a holy city for the faithful of the three
main monotheistic religions: Judaism, Islam and
Christianity. The Security Council also needs to call
for full respect for the holy sites in the city, including
those that are under the historic guardianship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, thanks to the support
of the Al-Quds Committee, which is affiliated with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Israeli attempts to confer a religious nature upon
the Arab-Israeli conflict are underhanded. They go
hand in hand with acts of provocation and incitement,
including attacks and assaults by the occupying forces
and Israeli settlers on Palestinian civilians, holy sites
and places of worship in occupied East Jerusalem, as
well as Israel’s attempt to alter the historic status of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif and other holy sites. In response, the
League of Arab States calls on the Security Council to
ensure that Israel, the occupying Power, puts an end
to its warmongering activities, in particular the forced
expulsion of the Palestinian people; the demolition of
their houses and the confiscation of their land, property
and belongings; settlement activities and the annexation
of Palestinian land, all of which are illegal practices
that flout Security Council resolutions.
They also flout the 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice concerning the legality of
the construction of the separation wall in the occupied
Palestinian territories and the Israeli demolition of
dozens of Palestinian homes in Sur Baher and Wadi
Al-Hummus, to the south of Jerusalem, following the
expulsion of its residents under the pretext that their
houses were too close to the separation wall. All of
that is intended to forge a connection between the
Israeli settlements and Al-Quds, which is in violation
of the agreed terms of reference. It is critical that the
perpetrators of those violations be held accountable for
their actions.
We must once again discuss the issue of report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2018/462), which addresses the
plight of the Palestinian people under occupation and
was discussed at the resumption of the tenth emergency
special session of the General Assembly, on 13 June 2018

S/PV. 8583

(see A/ES-10/PV.38). It is especially meaningful as,
this year, we are celebrating the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions, which provide a clear
legal framework for the protection of the Palestinian
people under occupation, while enabling them to enjoy
their inalienable rights, including the establishment of
an independent Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital and within the June 4, 1967 borders, through
transparent negotiations focused on the five questions
concerning the final status of Jerusalem and refugees.
The League of Arab States believes that this — and
not the prioritizing of the economic sphere as a means
to satisfy Palestinian aspirations to the detriment
of finding a political solution, while ignoring their
fundamental rights and freedoms — is in contravention
of international law, and the Security Council remains
responsible for the violations committed by Israel
at the holy sites, including excavation activities,
such as the digging of a tunnel under Silwan in East
Jerusalem — foreshadowing a tragic fate for the
Al-Aqsa Mosque. It is necessary to end Israeli practices
aimed at illegitimately and forcibly altering the historic
and demographic character of Jerusalem.
We support the decisions adopted by the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. Against that backdrop, the
League of Arab States once again supports the political
declaration issued by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries in July. We reject any recognition of
Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan,
in accordance with resolution 497 (1981). We believe
that it is necessary to respect the relevant terms of
reference and not allow anyone to change the reality
on the ground either through the use of military force
or through illegitimate political support. It is necessary
to preserve Syrian sovereignty over those territories
and the territorial unity of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Syrian territories remain Arab land in accordance with
the decisions of the League of Arab States, despite the
suspension of Syria’s membership in the League of
Arab States.
We call on the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral to implement the decisions adopted at the three
Arab summits convened in Mecca on 30 May 2019, as
well as the Arab Summit held in Tunisia, concerning
Iranian interference in the internal affairs of Arab States
in the Arabian Gulf and the Iranian threat to peace and
security in the Arab world. Iran supports extremist
organizations so as to destabilize the region by fanning

19-2258445/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the flames of violence and sectarian, racial and ethnic
conflicts. We are convinced that the Security Council
can realize those goals by immediately taking action.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I also like thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her excellent
briefing this morning.
First of all, I express my thanks to the United
Nations for its efforts to bring about peace in the
Middle East and support the Palestinian people. We
express our full support for those efforts. Achieving the
peace that we wish for with all our hearts requires us
to commit fully to the principles of international law,
in particular the relevant United Nations resolutions,
and rely on the agreed terms of reference, including the
Arab Peace Initiative.
It is now clear that the path towards resolving the
Palestinian question lies in the two-State solution,
predicated upon the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State within the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its
capital. That also requires ending the Israeli occupation
of occupied Palestinian territories and immediately
halting all settlement activities. Refugees must be able
to return. The Palestinian people must recover all of
their inalienable rights.

23/07/2019

which is suffering under an extremely burdensome and
long-standing blockade.
In that regard, I should like to draw the Council’s
attention to the State of Qatar’s pledge, made in May,
to provide $480 million in humanitarian assistance to
our Palestinian brothers in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Of that, $300 million will be disbursed
as a donation and loans supporting the education
and health-care budgets of the Palestinian Authority,
and the remaining $180 million are earmarked for
emergency humanitarian assistance and the provision
of electricity.
Moreover, we are supporting those projects being
carried out under the auspices of the United Nations. The
State of Qatar has also committed this year once again
to providing additional support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, as we realize the tremendous importance
of the services provided by the Agency to millions of
Palestinian refugees. Qatar reaffirms its support for
national reconciliation among our Palestinian brothers.

The State of Qatar condemns the intensification
of settlement activities in East Jerusalem, in particular
the announcement in May of the construction of 805
new housing units. In that regard, we call for the
full implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the most recent of which is resolution 2334
(2016), on settlements in the occupied territories.

While the catastrophic humanitarian repercussions
of the Syrian crisis continue, the State of Qatar, for its
part, continues to provide the necessary humanitarian
assistance to the brotherly Syrian people and cooperate
with the United Nations and international partners to
end the crisis. The only way to end the humanitarian
suffering is to end the violence and serious violations
of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, it
is essential to work seriously to achieve a political
solution that responds to the aspirations of the Syrian
people in all their aspects, with respect for the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex) and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2254 (2015). It is all
in the context of preserving Syria’s unity, sovereignty
and independence, while guaranteeing accountability
for the most serious crimes.

Qatar reiterates its principled and coherent position
that the Golan Heights is occupied Arab territory.
Therefore, Israel’s imposition of its jurisdiction and
administration is null and void and has no legal effect.
As part of its commitment, Qatar has played a positive
role in ensuring the necessary conditions for achieving
peace and is pursuing efforts with the stakeholders, in
coordination with the United Nations, to alleviate the
very trying humanitarian situation that the Palestinian
people are undergoing, in particular in the Gaza Strip,

The situation in Libya is at a critical phase, with
escalating tensions in the west of the country following
the assault on its capital Tripoli. That risks undermining
the political process under way under United Nations
auspices. Recently, we have seen serious violations of
international humanitarian law, including the aerial
bombing of a migrant reception centre in Tripoli and
the targeting of a hospital in the south of the city. That
requires firm condemnation on the part of the Council
and draconian measures to end the escalation.

46/63

19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The State of Qatar expresses its full support for
the Government of National Accord that is recognized
by the international community. Qatar welcomes the
initiative of Mr. Fayez Al-Sarraj, Chairman of the
Presidential Council, in his efforts to resolve the crisis
by holding an intra-Libyan meeting in coordination
with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
so as to achieve a comprehensive political agreement
guaranteeing Libya’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity and responding to the aspirations of its people
for security and stability. We hope that the international
community will support that initiative and express our
full support for the efforts of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Ghassan Salamé.
For two years now, our region has been the scene
of an escalating crisis, with serious repercussions
on regional stability, which could become a threat to
peace, security, human rights and cooperation in the
region. I am speaking here of the crisis concerning the
imposition of an unfair blockade and illegal unilateral
measures on the State of Qatar and the accompanying
campaign promoting hatred and disinformation — a
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and the principle of friendly relations among States,
which calls on States not to aggravate conflicts, but
rather to resolve them through dialogue and peaceful
means. The position of the State of Qatar is very clear.
We call for the settlement of the crisis through dialogue,
thereby guaranteeing our sovereignty and ending
illegal measures. We have reiterated that commitment
through the good offices of His Highness Sheikh Sabah
Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Emir of Kuwait. In that
regard, we thank all States that supported it.
Our approach is the right one, as was demonstrated
in our handling of the crisis using international law and
international dispute settlement mechanisms. Our legal
position is also valid, as proved by the judgment of July
2018 at the International Court of Justice for measures to
be taken against the United Arab Emirates for violating
the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination, as well as the decision
of the Court in June to refuse the request of the United
Arab Emirates for the implementation of temporary
measures against Qatar.
The aim of those attempts to undermine the State
of Qatar is now well known. Attempts to impinge upon
our State have had the sole result of demonstrating its
importance and place on the international stage. Its
place has been recognized, as it is based on positions

S/PV. 8583

and policies rooted in the principles of international law,
the United Nations Charter and based on an important
contribution to cooperation that seeks to preserve
international security, bring about development and
protect human rights. However, the ongoing crisis sets
a dangerous precedent in international relations and
is a threat to international peace and security. The
international community must therefore take a firm
position on the issue and put an immediate end to the
illegal blockade.
In conclusion, the continuation and growing number
of crises in the Middle East should not undermine our
hope in our ability to address them. The Council has
played a key role in combating threats to international
peace and security. The people suffering from the crises
in our region aspire to the role that the international
community and the United Nations can play to address
them effectively.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Hasrin (Malaysia): First and foremost, I wish
to commend you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate, which allows Member States to participate
and express their views on the worrying situation in
the Middle East, in particular on the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory.
Malaysia wishes to align itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Uganda, on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
and the statement to be delivered by the representative
of the Bolivian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As we gather at today’s quarterly open debate,
Malaysia shares the concern, as reflected in the tenth
report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016),
that no steps have been taken by the occupying Power,
in particular on the illegal settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
As we have pointed out on countless occasions,
the ongoing expansion of Israeli settlements is a grave
violation of resolution 2334 (2016), as well as of other
United Nations resolutions. It constitutes a flagrant
contravention of international law and international
humanitarian law. Not only are such actions a threat
to international peace and security, but they are
nothing short of acts of defiance against the voice
of the international community. The international

19-2258447/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community must continue to call for the immediate
reversal of negative trends on the ground that imperil
the two-State solution. Israel must cease immediately
and completely all illegal settlement activities in the
occupied territories, as well as the continued illegal
demolition of Palestinian homes.
The ongoing escalation of violence in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
remains precarious. We condemn the continuous use
of force by Israel against Palestinians. Those acts of
provocation and incitement against the Palestinian
people and holy sites in occupied East Jerusalem,
including Al-Haram Al-Sharif, threaten the sanctity
and stability of holy sites. The international community
has a duty to collectively ensure that Israel’s continued
violations are put to an end.
Malaysia commends the initiative taken by the OIC
to convene the Open-Ended Extraordinary Meeting
of the Executive Committee at the Level of Foreign
Ministers on the Israeli Violations in the Occupied City
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, on 17 July.
Israel’s recent opening of the so-called Pilgrims
Road tunnel, which was cut from under the village
of Silwan to reach the Al-Aqsa Mosque, has sparked
widespread indignation and anger across the OIC
membership. The construction of the tunnel has not
only resulted in the weakening of the structure of the
mosque, but has also left 80 Palestinian homes in Silwan
damaged, while dozens more are at risk of collapsing,
forcing Palestinian families from their homes. Surely
the international community cannot be expected to
stand on the margins and continue to witness further
destruction unfold?
The financial situation of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), compounded by the decision of the
United States to cease its funding, remains deeply
alarming. The discontinuation of funding to UNRWA
would unravel 25 years of work and perseverance, not
only by the United Nations and its agencies but by all
other parties that have dedicated their lives to the name
of peace and humanitarian assistance.
Malaysia remains deeply concerned by the
unilateral actions taken by the United States that
further jeopardize the international consensus on the
two-State solution. Malaysia believes that a legitimate
political process is the only way forward in order to put
an end to the illegal occupation of Palestine and address
48/63

23/07/2019

all final-status issues in accordance with relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
and previous agreements. The stalled Middle East
peace process serves only to exacerbate the current
situation in Palestine, therefore credible conditions
must be created in order to revive the peace process,
based on the existing terms of reference to the twoState solution.
Malaysia remains convinced that the ongoing
occupation is the stumbling block to progress and
development in the occupied Palestinian territories. We
continue to believe that it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to strive towards a two-State solution
whereby the Palestinians and the Israelis can live side
by side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders and
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine. It is
our sincere hope that the views expressed here will be
considered seriously by Council members for the sake
of maintaining peace and security in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you for convening this meeting to
discuss the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for her informative briefing
on the subject.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
and by the representative of the United Arab Emirates,
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
It is with great regret and concern that we are
following the deteriorating situation in Palestine, due to
the occupying Power’s policies against the Palestinian
people, namely, the Judaization of the territory of
Jerusalem and the continued building of settlements,
demolition of houses and repression of unarmed
civilians. These policies are complicating the situation
even further, exacerbating tensions and reinforcing all
the obstacles to the onset of a peace process that has
been moribund for years. We are therefore witnessing
the demise of the two-State solution.
The ongoing settlement activities, in flagrant
violation of Security Council resolutions, particularly
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

resolution 2334 (2016), undermine peace efforts and
nullify all attempts to revitalize the political process.
Worse still, they represent a continued provocation of
the Palestinian people and the international community.
Moreover, the deterioration of the living conditions of
the Palestinians and the lack of basic requirements for
a dignified life prevent the lost climate of confidence
from being re-established. It is also detrimental to
the State-building process and to the creation of the
framework and conditions necessary to revive peace
talks for a two-State solution along the borders of
4 June 1976.
Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif remains at the heart
of this conflict. It is the centre of the Middle East and
the essence of a political solution for Palestinians and
Israelis alike. Indeed, Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif
occupies a special place in the hearts of all followers
of the three monotheistic religions. It is the first Qibla
and the third of the holy shrines, which gives the city
a special legal status that cannot be undermined, as
guaranteed by Security Council resolutions.
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, President of the
Al-Quds Committee, has attached great importance
to the city by consistently emphasizing the need to
preserve its historical, legal and political status. He has
called on the United Nations and permanent members
of the Council to shoulder their responsibilities in
order to prevent its status from being undermined and
efforts to resolve the conflict from being delayed. His
Majesty has also, on more than one occasion and by
various means, be it at bilateral meetings or in various
international forums, called for an end to Israeli
settlement activities and the Judaization of Jerusalem.
He has urged the occupying Power to discard all plans
to change the legal status of the city and its spiritual
sites of worship by drawing attention to the serious
repercussions of adopting its project to Judaize
Jerusalem. He has also called for Israel to avoid any
measures that would undermine the political status, as
the question of Jerusalem lies at the heart of final-status
issues under resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980).
Based on this belief with regard to the special status
of Jerusalem for members of the three monotheistic
religions, the Emir of the Believers, His Majesty
Mohammed VI, President of the Al-Quds Committee,
along with the Pope, issued a joint appeal in Rabat, on
30 March, calling for respect for the sanctity, spiritual
dimension and exceptional position of Jerusalem as a
city of peace. This appeal was enshrined in a unique

S/PV. 8583

document calling for the preservation of the unique
nature and identity of the city.
In addition, the communiqué that followed the
historic visit of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein to the Kingdom of Morocco, at the invitation
of his brother, His Majesty Mohammed VI, reaffirmed
their full support for the Palestinian people in the
recovery of all their legitimate rights and for the creation
of an independent Palestinian State along the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital and on
the basis of relevant international resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the two-State solution.
This was reaffirmed at the first round of political
consultations between the Kingdoms of Morocco
and Jordan, held last week in Amman. Mr. Nasser
Bourita, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Morocco, demonstrated that our two
countries share the same position of advancing a twoState solution under international law and preserving
Jerusalem and its Islamic heritage. In that context, His
Majesty sent Moroccan architects and craftspeople to
preserve the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in collaboration with the
Jordanian Waqf.
In conclusion, our position remains consistent. It
is based on the Arab Peace Initiative and all terms of
reference for the creation of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital within the
4 June 1967 borders, coexisting in peace, harmony and
security with Israel.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Uruguay consistently monitors the various
situations that make up the Council’s agenda with
regard to the Middle East, all of them complex
and multidimensional.
We would like to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her informative briefing. We
would also like to recognize, as we routinely do, the
work of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, who has the
full support of Uruguay.
The few, if not non-existent, positive measures
taken by the two parties have been insufficient to
reverse the negative trends on the ground, which is why
the viability of the two-State solution is at serious risk.

19-2258449/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We once again recognize the potential contribution of
multilateral, regional and unilateral initiatives, whether
in force, being proposed or not yet devised, but we are
still a long way from reaching a solution to the conflict.
More importantly, it is necessary to resume direct
negotiations in order to clarify the outstanding issues.
We know that this will not be easy, but remaining in the
state of paralysis and stagnation that we are currently
witnessing and which has gone on for too long, will be
even worse. The two-State solution continues to be the
only viable option; there is no plan B that can replace it.
Uruguay has strong ties of friendship with both
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We once
again reaffirm the right of Israel and Palestine to live
in peace within secure and recognized borders in an
environment of renewed cooperation and free from any
threat or act that undermines the peace. To achieve this
goal, the current negative trends on the ground must
be reversed. Otherwise it will be extremely difficult, if
not impossible, for Palestine to territorially consolidate
its State.
The intensified development, approval and
construction of settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, as well as the legal measures underpinning
them, is extremely worrying. The evictions of Palestinian
families and the continued demolition and confiscation
of their properties, as occurred yesterday in Sur Baher
or in Wadi Yasul in April, exacerbate the situation and
increase the risk of plans for future annexation.
We condemn acts of violence and terrorism against
Israeli civilians, including the firing of rockets and
explosive devices from the Gaza Strip. We equally
condemn the increased settler violence against
Palestinian civilians, as well as the excessive use of force
in Israel’s response. The incitement and glorification of
all violent acts deserves our total condemnation.
For all the foregoing reasons, we would once again
like to call on both parties to adopt measures and take
steps to gradually de-escalate and alleviate tensions,
which is the only way to reach a mid- and long-term
definitive solution to the conflict and a just and lasting
peace amid the long-standing dispute between Israel
and Palestine.During the most recent open debates on
this issue, Uruguay has proposed a set of 10 measures
to that end, and we reiterate them today.
Seventy years ago, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 181 (II). Thanks to the impetus of that
international legal act taken by the Organization,
50/63

23/07/2019

Israel and Palestine have continued to consolidate their
identity, rights and obligations as States and recognized
legal entities. As was the case 70 years ago, when it
was eager to find a solution and favoured this one,
the international community today remains ready
and expectant.
It is not helpful when leaders take action contrary
to the path forward that the international community
has set out for them in good faith and promotes. We
disagree with those who rebuff international consensus
or reject provisions adopted in the Security Council,
the General Assembly or the judgments and opinions
of the International Court of Justice. International
law plays a critical role in the resolution of this and
all conflicts. It is the civilized way we have devised
to support and promote peace and development. We
should not forget that.
It is high time to begin to overcome hatred and
its incitement, disillusionment, despondency and
frustration. Any gain in territory or exercise of
misconceived sovereignty is worthless if it is achieved
at the cost of peace and prolongs the struggle of the
peoples that inhabit the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation welcomes the convening of this
debate under Peru’s presidency and wishes to reiterate
that the question of Palestine is of vital importance to
the international community and the Security Council,
which bears the primary responsibility conferred on
it to ensure prompt and effective action by the United
Nations, as stipulated in the Charter of the United
Nations, namely, to maintain international peace
and security.
We welcome the briefing by Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo.
A month ago, the Council met (see S/PV.8557) to
hear the tenth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), covering
the period from 25 March to 10 June 2019, which was
introduced by the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov’s briefing was very clear. He offered
evidence that the expansion of settlements over the
past two years continued, particularly in occupied East
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8583

Jerusalem, and that demolitions — including punitive
demolitions — and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures by the Israeli authorities were also ongoing.

international initiatives that have been taken for the
purpose of having negotiations and peace talks resume
between Israel and Palestine.

In that regard, Ecuador’s position on the settlement
policy has not changed. All settlement activity,
evictions, demolitions, and home seizures are illegal
under international law. The financial crisis of the
Palestinian Authority, resulting from Israel’s decision
to withhold part of its tax revenues, remains unresolved.
We are concerned that the humanitarian situation,
human rights violations and breaches of international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory
continue to worsen and deteriorate. Deaths, attacks,
arrests, violence and clashes are not stopping.
Provocative actions, statements that incite violence and
inflammatory rhetoric continue, as the report points
out. Our country condemns all acts of violence and
terrorism from wherever they come.

We are also concerned about the deep-seated
humanitarian and political crisis in Gaza. In this
regard, our delegation recognizes the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and reiterates its
full support for its mandate. We call upon all donors to
maintain their financial commitments so as to alleviate
the financial deficit.

The 2004 advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice in The Hague stated that the
construction of the barrier in the occupied territory was
contrary to international law, which is why the recent
demolition of several buildings in East Jerusalem
erected near the security barrier is deeply worrying. It
is imperative that the Council take action to ensure full
respect of the fundamental principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, as it has
been repeatedly called on to do. Its inaction gives rise
to events that run counter to the repeated calls of the
Middle East Quartet for immediate positive steps to be
taken to reverse the negative trends on the ground that
are endangering the two-State solution, around which
there is a near international consensus.

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Allow me to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
successful steering of the work of the Security Council
in the month of July. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her comprehensive briefing
this morning.

Our delegation reiterates its call for the international
community to make concrete progress in supporting
the advancement of a peaceful, definitive and just
political solution, based on the existence of two States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security, with borders negotiated on the basis of the
1967 borders, which is the consensus reaffirmed in
resolution 2334 (2016).
It is imperative that the prospect of a two-State
solution be preserved, as it is only way to achieve peace
and stability in the Middle East, restore the rights of the
Palestinian people and realize the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine, which would enjoy full
membership in the United Nations. Our delegation also
appreciates and reiterates its support for the various

In conclusion, I would like to recall Nelson
Mandela’s first maxim: “no problem is so deep that
it cannot be overcome...through discussion and
negotiation rather than force and violence”.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Uganda on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
We are holding this meeting at a time when the
cause of Palestine has been experiencing unprecedented
existential challenges, particularly owing to the absence
of any serious political and legal actions by the Security
Council to end Israel’s illegal, decades-long foreign
occupation of the occupied Palestinian territory. In
particular, Israel’s recent attempt to disfigure historical
realities by opening the so-called Jewish Pilgrims Road
extending from the Silwan pool to the Al-Buraq Wall
constitutes blatant contempt and systematic violations
of international law and numerous United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Illegal
demolition by Israel of approximately 70 apartments
of Palestinians as recently as yesterday in Sur Baher
displacing some several hundred Palestinians is yet
another flagrant violation.
My delegation condemns those unfortunate
developments. The limitless aggression, indiscriminate
killing of innocent Palestinians, including children,
intensification of Israeli settlement policies, ongoing
assault on Islamic and Christian holy places, particularly

19-2258451/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Al-Aqsa, changing the demography of East Jerusalem,
and all other provocative and outrageous actions by
Israel, the occupying Power, in defiance of Security
Council resolutions make peace in the Middle East
as elusive as ever. In this regard, we recall the openended extraordinary meeting of the OIC Executive
Committee held at the Foreign Minister level in Jeddah
last week and fully endorse its final communiqué
reiterating, inter alia, its condemnation of any attempt
to undermine the legal and historical status of the city
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
Israel’s illegal blockade, escalation of military
aggression and raids are making the already volatile
situation more perilous, thereby exacerbating the
humanitarian catastrophe of the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories. Increasing numbers of
Palestinian civilians are being made homeless or forced
to live under disastrous circumstances.

23/07/2019

as a full member of the United Nations. We also urge
the Security Council to do its utmost to implement in a
timely manner relevant Council resolutions to end the
Israeli occupation, which is the bedrock of achieving
lasting peace in the Middle East. The implementation
of the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
efforts of the Quartet are also crucial.
Vulnerability and deepening poverty are increasing
the number of Palestinian refugees, which calls to mind
the year 1971 when millions of our people had to take
refuge in neighbouring India. Knowing full well the
pain of distressed humankind, we have opened our
doors to host 1.2 million Rohingyas fleeing atrocity
crimes in Myanmar. Recognizing the dire need to
ensure enhanced, predictable and sustainable funding
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, we will continue
our modest contribution to the Agency.

Another grave concern is the socioeconomic
downturn of the people of Palestine. The realization
of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is facing
serious challenges in the Palestinian context. The Israeli
occupation has been contributing directly to prolonged
poverty, unemployment and humanitarian crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory. The achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals would fail miserably if
we left our Palestinian brothers and sisters behind, to
suffer in their political, social, economic and cultural
hardships. We urge the international community’s
prompt intervention to compel the Israeli authorities to
lift the blockade, facilitate the freedom of movement
of Palestinian civilians and ensure their access to
basic supplies.

Compelled by our constitutional and moral
obligations and the avowed principle of Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh will continue to
unwaveringly support the cause of Palestinian struggle
until the State of Palestine is established on the basis
of a two-State solution and pre-1967 borders with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

Israel’s continuous acts of aggression have given
rise to an egregious culture of impunity, which is
undermining the viability of the State of Palestine and
jeopardizing the prospects for realizing the two-State
solution. In this situation, we believe that the Security
Council cannot remain passive. With the Security
Council at the forefront, the international community
must fulfil its responsibility to ensure accountability
for all Israeli violations, uphold the rule of international
law and provide protection for the Palestinian people in
the occupied territory.

Today, despite continuous international calls, the
expansion of illegal settlements continues throughout
occupied Palestinian territory. The dramatic escalation
of settlement activities that are designed to create
new realities on the ground continue to be a cause for
concern, as it is an attempt to undermine the two-State
vision and the possibility of coexistence.

We reaffirm our support for the accession of the
State of Palestine to international organizations and
treaties and reiterate our call on the Security Council
to recommend and positively consider its admission
52/63

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): There was a moment in
history when we were hopeful for peace in Israel and
Palestine. That is hardly the case anymore, frankly, and
the hopes for a lasting solution are dim. But this gloomy
picture could have been avoided; it was not inevitable.

Parallel to settlement expansion and excavation
work, there is also an effort to destroy the demographic
character and history of the old city of Al-Quds/
Jerusalem. The ongoing destructive excavation tunnel
work to open the so-called Pilgrims Road is the latest
example of such efforts. In Al-Quds, Palestinians are
also facing eviction orders and daily incursions into
their neighbourhoods. Their residency statuses are
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

terminated in violation of international norms. Only
yesterday, Palestinian residential buildings, including
inhabited homes, were destructed in Sur Baher. I draw
the Council’s attention to the fact that these demolitions
are occurring for the first time in areas under the
authority of the Palestinian Authority under the Oslo
Accords. This is a breach of international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions.
The situation in Al-Haram Al-Sharif is also a
cause for concern. For the first time in years, hundreds
of settlers entered Al-Haram Al-Sharif during the
Ramadan. We saw attacks against Muslims worshipping
at Al-Aqsa Mosque. Instead, with its blessed place in
all of our hearts, Al-Quds should be a city of peace and
harmony, not a place of violence and provocation.
All the foregoing illegal steps must stop
immediately. Peace requires Israel to show political will
and refrain from provocative and detrimental actions.
The international community, in particular the Security
Council, cannot turn a blind eye to the blatant disregard
for international law. The Council needs to take action,
the basis of which should be the only viable solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: the two-State solution
based on 1967 borders, with Palestine and Israel living
side by side.
The rights of the Palestinian people, including
to self-determination, are not up for negotiation. For
decades, the basis for peace negotiations have been the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, as was explicitly reaffirmed in resolution
2334 (2016). These modalities cannot be changed.
Economic projects and plans cannot replace the need
for dignity, justice and freedom, and no project can
succeed without a just peace.
Unfortunately, the plight of Palestinian refugees is
compounded by the financial crisis of United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). Until a just and lasting solution
to the Israeli-Palestine conflict is achieved, the work
of UNRWA remains vital. It is our collective and
moral duty to support the Agency. As the Chair of the
UNRWA Advisory Commission and the Working Group
on the Financing of UNRWA, Turkey will continue to
contribute to Agency’s work. We call upon all actors to
do the same. It is high time that States Members of the
United Nations stand up for justice and protection of the
established parameters for a lasting peace in Palestine.

S/PV. 8583

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me to begin by congratulating you on
your capable leadership of the Security Council’s work
this month, Mr. President. I would also like to express
our deep appreciation to your predecessor, our sister
State Kuwait, for its successful presidency last month.
I am honoured to deliver this statement as chair of
the Group of Arab States this month. On behalf of the
members of the Arab Group, I would also like to express
my appreciation to the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for her valuable briefing.
The Arab Summit held in Tunis in March and the
emergency Arab Summit held in Mecca last month both
underscored the primacy of the Palestinian cause. It is
therefore a priority for Arab countries. The Summits
also reaffirmed the Arab identity of Jerusalem as the
capital of Palestine and further highlighted that the
Arab countries are committed to peace as a strategic
choice. We have underpinned the importance of a
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East,
which is a strategic Arab choice, embodied by the Arab
Peace Initiative, which was adopted by all Arab States
in Beirut in 2002 and was endorsed by the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation.
The Initiative continues to represent the most
comprehensive plan to address all the elements of a
final settlement, at the forefront of which is the issue
of refugees. It accords Israel acceptance, peace and
security. We are committed to the Initiative and all its
provisions, including the need to withdraw from Arab
occupied territories, especially the occupied Syrian
Golan. We call on the international community to join
us in working towards the just settlement of that cause.
The Israeli hostile practices persist. We strongly
condemn Israeli authorities’ demolition of dozens of
homes in Sur Baher, in East Jerusalem, an area that is
home to hundreds of Palestinian citizens. The Saudi
Council of Ministers has condemned such acts, and
we call on the international community, particularly
the Council, to uphold its responsibilities to protect
the Palestinian people and put an end to the Israeli
occupation and its systematic violations of Christian and
Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem, at the forefront of which
is the blessed holy sanctuary of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.

19-2258453/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We condemn the Israeli attempts to change the
historical status of Jerusalem, and we caution against
the illegal settlement activities on Palestinian territory.
We also call for the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) and underscore the significance of the historic
Hashemite custodianship over the Christian and Islamic
holy sites in East Jerusalem, particularly Al-Aqsa, and
the leading role of Jordan in protecting those sites, as
well as the Arab identity of Christian and Muslim sites
in Jerusalem.
We stress the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Libya and reiterate our rejection of all military solutions
and all external interference. We call for an expeditious,
comprehensive political settlement through inclusive
dialogue, based on the road map, under the auspices of
the United Nations, with a view to restoring security
and stability in Libya and ending the suffering of the
Libyan people. We reiterate our support for all efforts
to eliminate terrorist groups and uproot the threat faced
by Libya, its neighbours and the region at large.
We stress the need to achieve a political solution to
end the Syrian crisis in a way that fulfils the aspirations
of the Syrian people, promotes the integrity and
sovereignty of Syria and ends all external interference
and active terrorist organizations in Syria, based on the
Geneva outcomes, the statements of the International
Syria Support Group and relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2254 (2015).
There is no way to stop the bloodshed except through
a peaceful settlement that could achieve a real transition
to a new political reality, agreed by all components of
the Syrian people, through the Geneva road map, which
is the only path towards a peaceful solution. We are
committed, together with the international community,
to alleviating the humanitarian situation in Syria. We
reiterate our support for the Special Envoy for Syria,
Mr. Geir Pedersen, and his efforts to find a solution
to the Syrian crisis and to establish a constitutional
committee as soon as possible.
The ongoing negative conduct of Iran in the region
will lead only to further threats to international peace
and security. Iran’s clear support for the Houthi coup
militias and its supply of arms threaten regional
security, commercial shipping lines and civilians in the
region. The threat to close the Strait of Hormuz and
the continued attacks on and detention of commercial
ships require the Council to fulfil its obligations to
54/63

23/07/2019

stand firmly against such practices in order to maintain
international peace and security.
We are seeking to restore peace and security in the
region, and the only real means to do so is for all nations
to respect the principles of good-neighbourliness and
refrain from the use of force or the threat of the use
of force and non-interference in the internal affairs of
other States. Iran’s activities in the region contravene
those principles, undermine the requirements to build
trust and threaten stability and security. We reaffirm our
readiness to establish friendly and cooperative relations
with Iran, based on the principles of non-interference in
internal affairs and respect for sovereignty.
The continued activity of the Houthi coup militias,
which are supported by Iran, and their continued control
over critical State institutions in the capital of Sana’a,
for the fifth consecutive year have created a hotspot for
terrorist organizations in the region, enabled the spread
of epidemics and led to the deterioration of humanitarian
crises. The militias are using humanitarian assistance
as a weapon to maintain their control and achieve their
political aspirations. The conduct of those militias and
the attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reveal the
nature of their ideology and destructive principles. We
call on the Council to enhance the implementation of
resolutions 2140 (2014), 2216 (2015) and 2451 (2018).
We also emphasize that the solution for the Yemeni
crisis is only through political dialogue, in line with the
Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and the outcomes
of Yemen’s National Dialogue Conference.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.
Mr. Halvorsen (Norway): Only a negotiated
two-State solution can create durable peace between
Israelis and Palestinians. Economic development and
institution-building are essential building blocks for a
future Palestinian State, but they cannot replace the need
for a political resolution to the conflict. Norway shares
the concern to ensure urgent improvements in the living
conditions of the Palestinian people. It is crucial for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to maintain its
capacity to deliver basic services, in particular health
care and medication, to Palestine refugees. That is also
an important factor for regional stability. Norway will
therefore continue to support UNRWA both politically
and economically.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

A key challenge remains — how to implement
projects that can lead to stability, growth and economic
development in preparation for a negotiated two-State
solution? The obstacles are many and of a political
nature, such as the continued occupation, restrictions
to access and movement, and internal Palestinian
divisions. We call on all those involved to take steps
to reverse the current negative trends on the ground,
including settlement activity and acts of violence.
Norway strongly regrets the Israeli Government’s
ongoing demolitions of Palestinian buildings in Wadi
Al-Homs, part of Sur Baher in occupied East Jerusalem.
Norway is deeply concerned about the current
financial situation of the Palestinian Authority.
The international donor group for Palestine, the Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of the
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC),
remains the international framework for addressing
economic issues between the two parties and the donors.
Norway will chair the next meeting of the AHLC, to be
held in New York on 26 September. The key priority
will be to develop a common strategy to implement
concrete measures that will strengthen the Palestinian
economy and improve the dire situation in Gaza.
With regard to Syria, we express our support for
the early establishment of a constitutional committee.
We call for trust-building measures that will contribute
to an atmosphere conducive to such a committee’s
work, including prison releases that initially prioritize
women and children. Norway also encourages renewed
de-escalation in north-west Syria and the launch of a
genuine political process.
The increased tension in the Gulf region is of great
concern. It is critical that all actors refrain from actions
and statements that may further escalate the situation.
Iran’s seizure of ships in the Gulf is unacceptable and
is contributing to a further escalation of tension. As a
leading shipping nation, Norway views the freedom of
navigation and the free flow of commerce as crucial to
secure international trade and cooperation.
Norway remains committed to preserving the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran.
The agreement plays a crucial role in international
non-proliferation and regional stability. We regret
all steps that may jeopardize the agreement. Recent
enrichment activities by Iran are inconsistent with
its commitments and are moving it away from the
agreement. We urge Iran to reverse course and return to

S/PV. 8583

full compliance. Norway strongly supports the ongoing
measures by France, Germany, the United Kingdom
and the European Union to preserve the JCPOA.
Norway expresses great concern about the situation
in Yemen, which remains the world’s worst humanitarian
crisis. We urge all parties to abide by the Stockholm
Agreement in its entirety and to commit to a political
process under the guidance of Mr. Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. We call on
the Security Council to apply pressure on all parties to
live up to their commitments enshrined in international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
The de-escalation in Al-Hudaydah is a positive step. It
should be utilized to make further progress.
Norway has a long-standing commitment to
contribute to peace and security in the Middle East. If
elected as a member of the Council for the term of 20212022, we will bring that commitment with us. We will
remain an active and consistent partner in supporting
international efforts that ultimately lead to peaceful
solutions in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I should like to endorse the statement that
will be made by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
Since the last quarterly open debate (see S/PV.8517),
far from taking steps to immediately and completely
end the illegal Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territory, greater impetus has been given to the
expansion of settlements, which is troubling. Punitive
demolitions, seizures of Palestinian structures by the
Israeli authorities, the forced displacement of hundreds
of Palestinian civilians and the increase in violence have
resulted in the continuing deterioration of the situation
on the ground. We condemn in the strongest terms the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory, all illegal
and colonizing policies, practices and measures, as well
as the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of force
against Palestinian civilians in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, in
flagrant violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and international humanitarian law.
In the light of those events, we once again call
on the Security Council to fulfil the responsibility

19-2258455/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

granted by the United Nations Charter to maintain
international peace and security. The Council must
demand the immediate end of the occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the aggressive policies and
colonizing practices. It must also demand compliance
with its resolutions on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016).
The complicit silence of the Council is unacceptable.
The Council has not even condemned the escalation of
violence or the tragic events that have been taking place
in the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018, owing once
again to the repeated obstruction of the delegation of
the United States.
We express deep concern about Israel’s decision not
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, in compliance with the relevant
Council resolutions, the Oslo II Accords and
international law, as well as the freezing of the revenue
of the Palestinian Authority.
We reaffirm our unstinting support for a
comprehensive, fair and lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict that allows the Palestinian people
to exercise the right to self-determination and to have
an independent and sovereign State based on the pre1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as the right of return of refugees.
We express to the Palestinian Government and
people our unwavering solidarity and support for
Palestine’s entry as a full member of the United Nations.
We reject the unilateral action of the United States
Government to recognize the city of Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel; the withdrawal of financial support
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East; and all unilateral
measures and attempts to undermine the two-State
solution, which is the only viable and realistic solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
We also reject the so-called pact of the century,
drawn up by the current United States Government,
which ignores both the creation of a Palestinian State
and the two-State solution, which has had the historical
backing of the United Nations, the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, the League of Arab States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and other
international actors.
56/63

23/07/2019

We reiterate our strongest condemnation of the
decision of the United States Government to recognize
the occupied Golan as the territory of Israel, which
constitutes a serious and flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 497 (1981). That latest manoeuvre
from Washington, which violates the legitimate interests
of the Syrian people and the Arab and Islamic nations,
will have a serious impact on stability and security in
the Middle East and will further increase tensions in
this volatile region. We will continue to support the
demand of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to recover the Golan Heights and we demand once again
the total and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from
the Syrian Golan and all occupied Arab territories.
We reject the fabrication of pretexts and concepts
attempting to legitimize in the Council the unilateral
use of force and aggression against sovereign States. We
demand respect for multilateralism, an end to double
standards, interference in the internal affairs of others,
foreign aggression and support for terrorist groups to
promote instability and conflicts in the Middle East.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.
Mrs. Hussain (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank Peru for organizing today’s open debate. I would
also like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her timely briefing.
The situation in the Middle East remains grim for
the millions of people suffering in the aftermath of
conflicts, terrorist attacks and other acts of violence.
Despite numerous debates and calls for action, the
situation in the region remains tense, with a high
probability of escalation leading to renewed conflict
and unrest.
The lack of action by the international community
is epitomized by the seven-decade-old question of
Palestine — now one of the longest-standing issues
on the agenda of the Council. The peace initiatives
offered by various interlocutors have so far failed to
gain traction to instigate genuine dialogue between the
conflicting parties, which is all the more reason why we
must continue to strive for an international consensus
to resolve the issue.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The plight of the Palestinian people and their right to
self-determination will always remain an international
priority for the Maldives. Let me remind all Member
States that the Council has declared null and void,
through resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), Israel’s
illegal occupation of Palestine, the annexation of
Jerusalem, the shifting of Israel’s capital to Jerusalem
and the decision by any country to recognize Jerusalem
as Israel’s capital.
Our position on the Israeli settlement policy and
related activities in the occupied Palestinian territory
remains clear and unchanged. We reaffirm resolution
2334 (2016). All settlement activity is illegal under
international law and erodes the viability of the
two-State solution and the prospects for achieving
lasting peace.
Allow me to reaffirm our unwavering support
for any resolution involving international consensus
on a two-State solution, with the establishment of an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We urge the Security Council and the international
community to redouble their efforts to end the conflict
so that the people of Palestine can enjoy meaningful
and lasting peace and live in dignity.

S/PV. 8583

is hopeful because of the remarks made by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen to the Council
last week (see S/PV.8578), expressing optimism that we
may be nearing the end of that war. Despite positive
steps forward, we recognize that the situation in Yemen
remains fragile, and we need to find a comprehensive
political solution, including the full implementation of
the Al-Hudaydah agreement and its mandate.
My Government will remain committed to working
with the Council and supporting the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to find a lasting solution to the many
conflicts in the Middle East. It is our collective voice
and ability to act that will provide a safer world for all
of us and future generations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate and align
myself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries and the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Uganda on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The aftermath of the conflict in Syria has presented
Member States with new sets of challenges, as refugees
and foreign terrorist fighters continue to be held in
detention facilities. That is especially true for family
members, women and children left behind by foreign
terrorist fighters, with no international consensus or
framework to effectively deal with the situation. My
delegation calls on the Council and the United Nations
to facilitate and provide assistance to Member States
whereby they can repatriate, rehabilitate and reintegrate
those individuals back into society after a thorough
threat assessment. The Maldives looks forward to
dialogue with its partners in exchanging information
and views on what could be done and what measures
are most effective in the rehabilitation process.

The main development since the previous open
debate on this issue (see S/PV.8517) has been the
attempts to implement the so-called deal of the century
by convening a workshop on Palestine in Bahrain. That
initiative is based on ill intent, wrong assumptions
and unrealistic approaches, and is therefore definitely
doomed to fail. It is based on ill intent simply because
it has been proposed by the United States, a country
that is well known for its biased policies rendering
unconditional support for Israel, as well as unjust
practices towards the Palestinians. The latest examples
include moving the United States Embassy to Jerusalem
and recognizing Israel’s sovereignty over the occupied
Syrian Golan, both of which are in flagrant violation of
the pre-emptory norms of international law.

We must be united in our efforts to avoid
the impending humanitarian crisis in Syria and
must undertake efforts to ensure that hundreds of
malnourished children and women do no perish in
those refugee camps.

Basically during the past seven decades, the
Security Council has been unable to force the occupying
Power to end the occupation because of the unreserved
support of the United States for Israel. Such systematic
United States support, even when Israel is committing
the most heinous and barbaric crimes, has emboldened
the Zionist regime to continue, with total impunity, to
commit all international crimes systematically.

Today, the humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains
one of the largest, with over 20 million people requiring
aid and tens of millions at risk of famine. The Maldives

19-2258457/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Relying on such support, Israel has also continued
its expansionist policies and illegitimate practices
in oppressing the Palestinians, in gross violation of
their basic rights. One example of such brutality is the
decade-long illegal blockade by Israel on Gaza, turning
it into the largest open-air prison in the world. That
inhumane blockade must come to an end. Moreover,
the so-called deal of the century is based on wrong
assumptions simply because it is aimed at buying all
causes and aspirations, honour and dignity, property
and territory, and the inalienable rights of an entire
nation. It is certainly an illusion and will therefore
definitely fail completely.
The cause of Palestine is based on the struggle of
a nation for freedom, liberty, independence, complete
control over all its ancestral lands, preserving its
religious and cultural identity and sites, and saving its
honour and dignity. Diminishing and reducing such
noble and holy causes to economic improvement is the
most wrong-headed assumption ever for resolving the
question of Palestine. Additionally, the so-called deal of
the century is based on an unrealistic approach, simply
because all Palestinian groups, without exception, have
strongly rejected it.
Furthermore, Al-Quds Al-Sharif, in addition to the
Palestinians, is dear to all Muslims, and no Muslim in
the world is ready to accept such a disgraceful plan.
Al-Quds Al-Sharif is and will remain the capital
of Palestine.
History tells us that no nation has compromised
on its sacred causes, and the nation of Palestine is
no exception. The mere struggle and resistance of
Palestinians over the course of the past seven decades
clearly indicate how resolute, determined and persistent
they are in realizing their noble objectives of liberty
and independence. They have suffered economically
for seven decades to liberate their lands. What they
need is freedom and liberation. Once the occupation
ends, they know very well how to improve the economy
of their independent State.
At the same time, the international community
should maintain its strong support to the Palestinians
in their struggle to liberate their homeland. Under the
pretext of economic improvement, the main aim and
true nature of the so-called deal of the century are to
consolidate the occupation. The world must resist that
unjust move. The Council must also end the vicious
cycle of being bullied by one of its permanent members,
58/63

23/07/2019

which unlawfully and brazenly continues rendering
this organ inactive and ineffective, regarding Israel.
That hypocritical policy should come to an end and the
Council must be able to play its Charter-based role in
support of Palestinians.
Ultimately, like any other crisis, the question
of Palestine cannot be solved without addressing its
root causes. There is no magic solution. The unlawful
occupation of Palestine is the main source of the crisis
and it can end only by ending the occupation.
Finally, the Israeli representative, in total disregard
for the agenda of today’s meeting, which is respected
by all and focused on the Palestinian question,
unsuccessfully tried to distract our attention from the
crimes and unlawful policies of its regime. He should
have explained why they continue the occupation of
Palestine, investing in death and destruction, invading
other countries, imposing an inhumane blockade on
Gaza, killing innocent children, demolishing homes,
schools and hospitals, promoting racism, developing
all types of weapons of mass destruction, including
hundreds of nuclear weapons, refusing to join treaties
banning weapons of mass destruction, in particular
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, and rejecting the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. It must stop its
fabrications, lawlessness, brutality and crimes and be
held accountable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
has the honour to speak on behalf of the 120 States
members of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Just three days ago, the Movement’s Ministerial
Committee on Palestine met in Caracas to review the
most recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. Regrettably, the
situation remains critical and is clearly unsustainable.
At that meeting, we unanimously adopted a political
declaration in which we renewed our permanent
solidarity with the Palestinian people, their inalienable
rights and their just cause.
The States members of the Movement reiterate
that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with the Israeli
occupation at its centre, remains a serious threat to
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

international peace and security and requires urgent
attention and action, in accordance with international
law, the relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
the Charter of the United Nations itself and available
multilateral diplomacy instruments.
The Security Council has a clear responsibility
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security. This organ must uphold its obligations under
the Charter and act accordingly to implement its own
resolutions, which are not only the basis for a peaceful,
just and lasting solution to the conflict, but also legally
binding on all States Members of the United Nations.
That is why we are deeply concerned by the fact that the
Security Council has been unable, for too long now, to
fulfil its mandate on such an important issue, owing to
the use of the veto by one of its permanent members. We
call on the Security Council to overcome its paralysis
with regard to the Palestinian question and to fulfil its
responsibilities under the Charter.
The Movement continues to believe that resolution
2334 (2016) is the only viable path to peace as it
establishes the essential requirements and parameters
for achieving a just settlement on the basis of the
two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders and
respecting the terms of reference historically endorsed
by the international community, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, including the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map,
with a view to ensuring that the Palestinian people
can realize their inalienable rights, including the right
to self-determination and independence in their State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
therefore call for full respect for resolution 2334 (2016)
and the effective implementation of its provisions
and the obligations outlined therein by the occupying
Power, including also in terms of the obligations of
States with respect to distinction — an issue that is
paramount for determining the responsibilities borne
by entities tasked with administering justice.
With regard to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains
of great concern to the Movement, in particular the
grave humanitarian situation, which, regrettably,
continues to deteriorate day by day. The Movement
therefore reiterates its call for the complete lifting of
the Israeli blockade, which continues to subject more
than 2 million Palestinian girls, boys, women and
men in Gaza to indescribable humanitarian, social
and economic suffering. The crisis must be addressed

S/PV. 8583

in a comprehensive manner, in accordance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, all relevant United Nations
resolutions, within the context of the overall situation
resulting from the ongoing illegitimate and belligerent
Israeli foreign occupation of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and all calls for an end to
the occupation.
In that regard, we reiterate the need to support the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in ensuring its continued
and uninterrupted provision of vital humanitarian and
development assistance to the more than 5.4 million
Palestinian refugees in the Gaza Strip, the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria,
as reaffirmed by the international community at the
Agency’s recent donors conference.
We also express our concern about the deterioration
of the socioeconomic conditions faced by Palestinians
under occupation. Those conditions have been
exacerbated by the financial crisis of the Palestinian
Government due to Israel’s illegal withholding of
Palestinian tax revenue. We call for an end to that
unfair and punitive practice, while demanding respect
for the agreements signed.
Given that Israel has clearly renounced its
obligations as an occupying Power to provide
protection to the Palestinian civilian population under
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the States members
of the Movement are obliged to reiterate their call on
the international community to ensure the protection
of the Palestinian people. That is an urgent matter as
it pertains to alleviating the critical insecurity of the
occupied Palestinian territory and preventing the loss
of more innocent lives.
The Movement reiterates its concern about the
fact that Israel is not being held accountable to justice
for all the violations it has committed, many of which
could even be considered war crimes. The lack of
justice only fuels impunity, leads to new crimes and
further destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby
diminishing the prospects for peace, as noted in the
report of the internationalndependent international
commission of inquiry on the protests in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory (A/HRC/40/74), established by
the Human Rights Council. That is why we continue
to call for international action — by the Security
Council in particular — to guarantee the immediate

19-2258459/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

cessation of violations being systematically committed
by the occupying Power against the Palestinian civilian
population under occupation. Israel must fulfil its
obligations and responsibilities under international law.
With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan, the Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions that have been or may be taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, such as the illegal decision of
December 14 1981, seeking to modify the legal status,
physical nature and demographic composition of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structure,
as well as all of Israel’s measures to apply its own
jurisdiction and administration in this area, are null
and void, lack validity and of no legal effect. Therefore,
we once again demand that Israel comply with
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw completely from
the occupied Syrian Golan along the borders of 4 June
1967, in compliance with resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We also reiterate our condemnation of the
arbitrary and unilateral declaration by the United States
on recognizing the Golan Heights as part of Israel, and
renew our call on the Security Council to also condemn
this act of provocation.
Regarding Lebanon, the Movement’s member
States reaffirm the need for Israel to withdraw from all
Lebanese territories — including the areas of the Shaba’a
farmlands, the Kfar Shuba hills and the Lebanese part
of the village of Al-Ghajar — behind the Blue Line. We
urge Israel to cease its persistent and serious violations
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon,
in accordance with the relevant international resolutions
and resolution 1701 (2006) in particular.
Finally, we reiterate our calls on the international
community to act collectively and responsibly to
defend international law and to step up all necessary
efforts in support of the Palestinian cause, with the
ultimate objective of ending this historic and grievous
injustice. We reaffirm our commitment to promoting
a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to
the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including
the suffering of Palestinian refugees. We also reaffirm
our support for the heroic Palestinian people in their
struggle to achieve justice and realize their inalienable
rights and legitimate national aspirations, including the
right to self-determination, freedom and independence
in their State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
60/63

23/07/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting, which comes at
a time when the challenges and tensions in the region
are increasing.
We are grateful that Member States have this
opportunity to participate in this discussion on the
Middle East at a time when we are witnessing extremely
important developments. We would also like to express
our deepest appreciation to your delegation, Sir, for its
presidency of the Council this month, and congratulate
the delegation of the brotherly State of Kuwait on its
successful Council presidency in June. Finally, we
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her
excellent briefing.
The importance of the role of the international
community in implementing these resolutions on peace
and stability in the Middle East, as well as in preparing
the necessary conditions to provide greater chances
for a successful political settlement is more evident
today than ever before. This role includes providing
protection to the aggrieved, refraining from interfering
in the internal affairs of States and ensuring that
States are able to preserve their sovereignty, security,
independence and regional integrity.
We strongly condemn the actions of the Israeli
authorities in Sur Baher, in occupied Jerusalem. In that
regard, we reaffirm that a comprehensive, just and final
peace in the region will be achieved only by resolving the
Palestinian question, enabling the brotherly Palestinian
people to recover their legitimate rights, like other
peoples of the world, by building their independent State
within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. We call for the preservation of the status
and historical secular character of this city based on
the Arab Peace Initiative, the two-State solution and all
relevant international resolutions,
The Kingdom of Bahrain hosted a conference
entitled “Peace to Prosperity” in June, in partnership
with the United States of America, which was attended by
many Heads of State, as well as civil society and private
sector representatives from the region. The conference
aligned with Bahrain’s efforts and commitment to
realizing the aspirations of the brotherly Palestinian
people in terms of development and prosperity and
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in support of initiatives to strengthen the Palestinian
economy. Indeed, the next steps in the process will
require a convergence of all international efforts to
ensure a bright economic future that is committed to
peace and to supporting development for all peoples of
the region. The conference achieved these objectives
by encouraging investment in the brotherly Palestinian
State to strengthen the economy and ensure prosperity
and development for its people. In that regard, we
welcome the great efforts made by the United States of
America towards achieving a just and comprehensive
peace in the region.
In conclusion, achieving international peace and
security requires us to join ranks and work towards
the development of innovative mechanisms to face new
challenges. The Kingdom of Bahrain, for its part, will
continue to work within the regional community to
resolve disputes peacefully in order to achieve security
and stability in the region and throughout the world.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mr. AlMutawa (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting. We would
also like to express our thanks to Ms. DiCarlo, UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, for her briefing this morning.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Uganda on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The issues of the Middle East are, without a
doubt, of utmost importance to the Council. We have
heard briefings by United Nations officials about the
gravity of the situation in the region and the need to
take decisive measures as new crises and challenges
have emerged. This situation requires the international
community to take action to reduce tensions, ensure
the maintenance of regional security and stability and
reach political solutions to the long-standing crises in
the region, particularly the Palestinian issue.
The United Arab Emirates calls on the international
community to assume its responsibilities to end the
suffering of the brotherly Palestinian people and to
establish an independent Palestinian State along the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in
accordance with the relevant international resolutions
and the Arab Peace Initiative. We emphasize the need

S/PV. 8583

for Israel to cease its illegal practices of Judaization,
creating new facts on the ground, expanding settlements
and demolishing Palestinian property, the latest
incidence of which was the demolition of 70 houses
in East Jerusalem yesterday. We emphasize the need
for the international community to take all measures
necessary to end these grave violations, given their
grave implications for the security and stability of the
region as a whole.
In our quest for a just and comprehensive solution,
we must not lose sight of the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories or
of the importance of continuing and intensifying
humanitarian assistance.
Based on my country’s long-standing support for
the Palestinian people, in 2017 and 2018 the United
Arab Emirates provided more than $364 million to
our Palestinian brothers and to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East.
We renew our commitment to supporting regional
and international efforts to advance the Middle East
peace process. The United Arab Emirates also renews
its commitment, within the coalition, to supporting
the legitimate efforts to reach a political solution in
Yemen, based on the relevant Council resolutions,
including resolution 2216 (2015) and 2451 (2018). In
that connection, we reiterate our support for the efforts
of the United Nations Special Envoy for Yemen to
implement the Stockholm Agreement and relaunch
the political process. We emphasize that there is no
military solution to the conflict and a political solution
is the only way forward.
The United Arab Emirates condemns in the
strongest terms the attacks by Houthi militias on the
territory of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia through the
use of ballistic missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles,
as well as the ongoing threat posed to navigation in
the Red Sea. The situation calls for the Council to take
more decisive measures to end these violations and
prevent the flow of Iranian weapons to Yemen, which
is a flagrant violation of resolutions 2216 (2015) and
2231 (2015).
The Houthi attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia undermine the prospects for progress in the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah at a time when the United
Arab Emirates and the Arab coalition are providing

19-2258461/63

S/PV.8583

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

an opportunity for peace by redeploying forces in
Yemen and promoting political efforts aimed at a
comprehensive solution.
On the humanitarian front, my country strongly
condemns the practices of the Houthi militias, which
have exacerbated the humanitarian crisis through the
looting of humanitarian aid and the denial of access to
its intended beneficiaries. The United Arab Emirates
will continue to work with the United Nations and key
partners to improve the humanitarian situation and meet
the needs of the brotherly Yemeni people. The United
Arab Emirates has provided a total of $5.5 billion in
assistance to Yemen since 2015.
My country is following with great concern the
latest development in Syria and Libya. We stress that
a political solution is the only way to end these crises.
We call on all parties concerned to sit at the negotiating
table and find a solution to the protracted crises within
the framework of the relevant Council resolutions.
In that context, we express our concern about the
exploitation by terrorist groups of the security vacuum
in Libya and the growing migrant tragedy in the
Mediterranean, which makes it more difficult to reach
a peaceful solution to the crisis. We call for concerted
efforts to end the crisis and restore stability in Libya.
As the international community, we share a
collective responsibility to avoid conflict and tension
in the region and to prevent any party from attempting
to undermine the security and safety of maritime
navigation and global energy supplies. Sabotaging and
threatening commercial ships and the lives of their
crew is a serious development that threatens not only
maritime trade, but broader regional stability. The
United Arab Emirates emphasizes the importance of
ensuring freedom of navigation and the integrity of
energy supply lines and of safeguarding the security of
sea lanes and straits, particularly the Straits of Hormuz
and Bab Al-Mandab. My country also stresses the need
for patience, wisdom and good judgment, and calls
on all parties to prioritize diplomacy and to restore
stability in the regional.
In conclusion, we affirm that the gravity of the
situation in the Middle East requires the international
community to pay serious and credible attention and
the Council to assume its responsibilities to end all
destabilizing acts and practices, including violence
by extremist and terrorist groups with the support and
funding of certain States, and to hold accountable the
62/63

23/07/2019

parties responsible for the outbreak and continuation of
conflicts in the region.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of Israel has asked to make a further
statement. I now give him the floor.
Mr. Bourgel (Israel): After hearing Lebanon’s
statement, allow me to make some clarifications
regarding the situation in our region.
This 11 August will mark 13 years since the adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006), calling for the establishment,
between the Blue Line and the Litani river, of an area
free of any armed personnel, assets and weapons other
than those of the Government of Lebanon and of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). It
is clear that this call has yet to be answered.
For the past 13 years, Hizbullah’s presence in
UNIFIL’s area of operations has only amplified,
converting all villages into command-and-control
centres, weapons warehouses and intelligence bases.
Hizbullah has only entrenched itself further into
southern Lebanon, strengthening and widening its
grip. All of those activities are taking place in parallel
to the exponential growth of Hizbullah’s rocket and
missile capabilities.
Eight months ago, we came to the Chamber
following Israel’s initiation of Operation Northern
Shield (see S/PV.8432). The discovery and demolition
of six terror tunnels, in violation of both Israeli
sovereignty and resolution 1701 (2006), should have,
at least, raised questions regarding the claim that
UNIFIL’s area of operations remains relatively calm.
Let us be very clear — UNIFIL’s area of operations is
anything but calm.
Eight months have elapsed and UNIFIL has yet to
be granted access to the tunnel’s entry points on the
Lebanese side. The claim of private property cannot
continue to deny UNIFIL the ability to discharge
its mandate. The Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Lebanese authorities have the responsibility to extend
sovereignty over their land and are failing to do so. As
a result, they are only serving Hizbullah’s game. This
situation should be unacceptable to anyone whose goal
is to prevent a new war. Today more than ever, the
question of where the Lebanese Government ends and
where Hizbullah begins remains pressing and needs to
be answered.
19-22584

23/07/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The restriction of movement of UNIFIL forces in
its area of operations is cause for alarm. UNIFIL should
report all restrictions in its movement to the fullest
extent, detailing where the restrictions took place, who
was responsible and why. The Security Council should
demand detailed maps with coordinates pointing
to the locations of those incidents. No one should
accept any assault on UNIFIL troops or any seizure
of their material. The Security Council must ensure
that the Lebanese authorities investigate such attacks
thoroughly and swiftly. Turning a blind eye is simply
not an option.

S/PV. 8583

The
Secretariat’s
report
regarding
the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) should reflect
accurately the dangerous situation developing on the
ground. In that sense, the creation of a map that would
show where UNIFIL is successfully operating at this
time and where it is not would be very helpful. Weapons
are pouring into and out of Lebanon and the Lebanese
authorities show no sign of making any effort to fix this
urgent problem. The international community and the
Security Council must ensure that the arms embargo
set forth in resolution 1701 (2006) is fully implemented
and duly reported.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

19-2258463/63
