S/PV.8782

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8782nd meeting

Thursday, 27 May 2021, 10.25 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun/Mr. Geng Shuang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Ms. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-13344 (E)
*2113344*

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Nations, were instrumental in bringing this latest round
of violence to an end.

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Israel to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to participate
in the meeting, in accordance with the provisional rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and Personal Representative of
the Secretary-General; Mr. Philippe Lazzarini,
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East; and Mr. Rashid Khalidi, Professor of Arab Studies
at Columbia University.
Mr. Wennesland, Mr. Lazzarini and Mr. Khalidi
are joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.
Mr. Wennesland: As I brief the Security Council
today, a cessation of hostilities is holding between
Palestinian militants in Gaza and Israel following 11
days of the most intense hostilities we have witnessed
in years. I welcome this agreement as it brings a halt to
the violent escalation and allows us to address the most
urgent humanitarian needs of the people in Gaza.
At the outset, I wish to thank the Security Council
for the support expressed to United Nations efforts
to de-escalate the situation, address urgent needs and
respond to the aftermath. I also wish to commend the
crucial role of Egypt and the United States, and the work
of Qatar, which all, in close contact with the United
2/29

27/05/2021

The United Nations is coordinating the delivery of
urgent humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza,
and I highlight the $95-million humanitarian flash
appeal launched today. At the same time, we remain
focused on the important political steps that are needed
to solidify the cessation of hostilities that began on
21 May.
Those recent events have made clear once again the
costs of perpetual conflict and lost hope. The challenges
in Gaza — like the conflict as a whole — require
political solutions. As we look ahead, our approach
cannot be business as usual, and we cannot afford to
repeat the mistakes of the past.
Given their magnitude, I will focus today’s
briefing on the recent escalation and its consequences.
Broader developments on the ground will be covered
in the upcoming report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
The escalation that engulfed Gaza, the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and cities across
Israel led to terrible suffering and destruction and took
the lives of too many civilians. I share my condolences
with all who have lost loved ones or been affected by
the fighting.
The hostilities spread amid a spike in tensions
in occupied East Jerusalem. Long-standing protests
intensified over the potential eviction by Israeli
authorities of several Palestinian families in the Sheikh
Jarrah neighbourhood. In parallel, tensions escalated
sharply among Palestinians and Israeli security forces
and civilians in and around the Old City, including all
the Holy Sites, during the month of Ramadan, leading
to clashes and hundreds of arrests and injuries.
The violence was accompanied and amplified by
inflammatory statements and incitement, including
violent threats issued by senior Hamas leaders, racist
chants by Israeli extremists marching near the Old City
and provocative visits to Sheikh Jarrah by far-right
Israeli members of the Knesset and their supporters
On 10 May, amid a heavy presence of Israeli security
forces ahead of the Israeli-organized Jerusalem Day
march, thousands of Palestinians clashed with police in
and around Jerusalem’s Old City. Israeli security forces
reportedly shot and injured over 650 Palestinians with
rubber-coated metal bullets and other crowd-control
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8782

means. Thirty-two Israeli security forces personnel
were injured.

assessment to understand the full scale of destruction
and needs on the ground.

Although Israeli authorities took steps to reduce
tensions — including by rerouting the march,
postponing a Supreme Court hearing on the Sheikh
Jarrah evictions and barring Jewish visits to the Holy
sites — the violence and heavy security presence
continued. That very same day, Hamas fired seven
rockets towards Jerusalem, causing some property
damage and setting off the escalation of hostilities.

According to the Gaza Ministry of Health, 1,948
Palestinians were injured in these strikes and over
112,000 people displaced, with some 77,000 sheltering
in nearly 60 United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) schools,
where they had limited access to water and nearly no
access to health care or food. The vast majority have
returned home, but approximately 9,000 people remain
displaced, with their homes destroyed or uninhabitable.

From 10 to 21 May, during ensuing hostilities
between Israel and armed groups in Gaza, 253
Palestinians, including at least 66 children, 38 women
and three persons with disabilities, were killed during
Israeli air strikes and shelling. At least 126 of them
were civilians. One journalist was also killed. In some
cases, entire families, including women, children and
infants, were killed in their homes.
Over the same period, nine Israelis, including
two children and five women, and three foreign
nationals were killed by rockets and mortars launched
indiscriminately by Hamas and other militants in Gaza,
and one soldier was killed by an anti-tank missile fired
near the Gaza perimeter fence.
Hamas and other militants fired more than 4,000
rockets from Gaza at an unprecedented intensity and
scope. A significant number were intercepted by the
Iron Dome system and others landed inside Gaza. In
Israel, direct hits were reported in multiple locations,
causing damage to residential and commercial property,
as well as schools and energy infrastructure, including
power lines supplying Gaza. Hundreds of Israelis were
injured in these attacks.
In Gaza, the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) conducted
over 1,500 air strikes against what it said were militant
targets belonging to Hamas and Palestinian Islamic
Jihad. Nevertheless, there was significant damage to
homes and civilian infrastructure. During the hostilities,
the United Nations and partners reported that at least
57 schools, 9 hospitals and 19 primary health-care
centres sustained complete or partial damage. Initial
reporting during the hostilities indicated that at least
258 buildings, including four high-rise towers — one
hosting international media outlets — were damaged
or destroyed. This translates to nearly 2,000 housing
and commercial units. The United Nations and partners
are currently undertaking a rapid damage and needs

The violence we have witnessed and its tragic
consequences are unacceptable. Civilians should never
be the target of violence. Children, in particular, must
never be put in harm’s way. Journalists must be able to
carry out their work without fear of attack or harassment.
Throughout the hostilities, the United Nations
worked tirelessly with all sides to restore calm, including
through calls from the Secretary-General on Israel
and Palestinian armed groups to take immediate and
decisive steps to de-escalate the situation and prevent
any further loss of life. The Security Council convened
four times to discuss ways to end the hostilities, and
the General Assembly held a special debate on the
crisis (see A/75/PV.70). The sustained attention of the
international community provided crucial momentum
to ceasefire efforts at decisive moments in time.
On 20 May, Israel and Hamas announced that they
had agreed to a cessation of hostilities, which went into
effect in the early morning hours of 21 May. It has since
held, with no further rockets or air strikes reported.
The humanitarian impact of the fighting on Gaza
has been devastating, compounding an already-dire
situation. Humanitarian access was limited to only five
trucks of fuel for UNRWA installations, which entered
via Kerem Shalom on 18 May. Due to rockets fired from
Gaza, the majority of planned humanitarian supplies on
that day were not able to cross.
Following the cessation of hostilities, on 21 May,
40 truckloads of humanitarian supplies were permitted
entry. On 25 May, Israel announced the opening of
the crossings for certain humanitarian goods and
personnel, including a shipment of over 46,000 thousand
COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility vaccines. It
is critical that a predictable schedule for the entry of all
humanitarian materials and personnel be put in place at
both crossings. In addition, Israel reinstated the fishing

21-133443/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

zone off the Gaza coast on 25 May to six nautical miles,
which had been fully closed during the hostilities.
Repair to some damaged sewage and water
infrastructure has commenced. The entry of fuel
purchased through the United Nations for the Gaza
power plant has been barred by Israel since 10 May. Gaza
authorities reported that fuel purchased from Egypt has
been used to ensure that it continues to function, albeit
at reduced capacity, resulting in an average of five
hours of electricity per day. The Gaza power plant is
the only source of large-scale electricity supply within
Gaza, critical to ensuring that hospitals, health clinics
and water and sanitation facilities can operate.
The health-care system, already overwhelmed by
chronic drug shortages, inadequate equipment and the
coronavirus disease pandemic, will likely be unable to
meet the needs of those injured during the violence.
Propelled by events in Gaza and East Jerusalem,
there has also been a sharp rise in the number of clashes
between Israeli security forces and Palestinians, settlerrelated violence and Palestinian attacks against Israelis
in the occupied West Bank, as well as an apparent
increase in the use of live ammunition by the Israeli
security forces against Palestinians participating
in demonstrations.
I reiterate that all perpetrators of violence must
be held accountable. Israeli forces must exercise
maximum restraint and use lethal force only when
strictly unavoidable, in order to protect life.
Potential evictions in occupied East Jerusalem also
continue to be a major concern. On 9 May, the Supreme
Court temporarily postponed the eviction of several
families from Sheikh Jarrah until a hearing could be
held on their appeal. Nevertheless, they and many
others in Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan face the risk of
displacement, with eviction cases commenced by settler
organizations currently pending before Israeli courts.
I reiterate that all settlement activity is illegal under
international law, and I urge Israel to cease demolitions
and seizures of Palestinian property, in line with its
obligations under international humanitarian law, and
to allow Palestinians in Area C and East Jerusalem to
develop their communities.
The violence in Gaza has reverberated in the
immediate region, particularly in Lebanon. Since my
last briefing on 16 May (see S/2021/480), the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) detected
4/29

27/05/2021

several rockets fired from southern Lebanon towards
Israel on 17 and 19 May, one of which impacted east
of Haifa. The IDF fired artillery rounds in response,
impacting north of the Blue Line. No injuries or
damages were reported. In addition, a number of
demonstrations were organized throughout Lebanon
to express solidarity with the Palestinians. On 23 May,
over 900 protesters gathered in demonstrations in
southern Lebanon, including close to the Blue Line. In
the Shaba’a area, several individuals briefly crossed
south of the Blue Line and placed flags on the Israeli
technical fence. Throughout, UNIFIL and the Office
of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon
have engaged the parties to defuse tensions. As a
preventive measure, UNIFIL, in coordination with
the Lebanese Armed Forces, has maintained a strong
presence along the Blue Line and remained in close
contact with both parties.
This is not the first time we have witnessed the
end of a war in Gaza. Each time, those who lose the
most are the civilians. The loss and trauma extend far
beyond the period of hostilities. Ending the violence
and taking immediate steps to address the humanitarian
consequences are crucial priorities, but we cannot stop
there. This reality — and avoiding the recurrence of
hostilities — should be the point of departure for us all
as we look toward sustainable, long-term solutions to
this conflict.
I reiterate the Secretary-General’s appeal to the
international community to work with the United
Nations on developing an integrated, robust package of
support for a swift recovery and sustainable rebuilding
that supports the Palestinian people and strengthens
their institutions. I am committed to ensuring that
the United Nations plays its part. We must avoid the
pull of short-term fixes and focus instead on how to
work towards resolving the deadlock in Gaza and the
Palestinian divide, which have remained unresolved for
over 14 years and require real political solutions.
Palestinian national unity and the return of a
legitimate Palestinian Government to Gaza are needed
to ensure sustainability. At the same time, we must
create a political horizon that allows the parties to
return to the path of meaningful negotiations. To that
end, I remain in close contact with my fellow Envoys
in the Middle East Quartet, key Arab and international
partners, and Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

After decades of conflict, it is the lack of a
proverbial light at the end of the tunnel — of a political
horizon — that kills hope and provides space for those
not interested in sustainable peace. Only through
negotiations that end the occupation and create a
viable two-State solution on the basis of all relevant
resolutions, international law and mutual agreements,
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States, can we
hope to bring a definitive end to these senseless and
costly cycles of violence.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lazzarini.
Mr. Lazzarini: Allow me to express my sincere
appreciation for this opportunity to address the Security
Council today. I am addressing the Council from the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) headquarters
in East Jerusalem, only a few hundred metres from
the neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah, where eight
Palestinian refugee families face the threat of forced
eviction from their homes.
I am also addressing the Security Council after
having spent part of the week in Gaza listening to
countless stories of the tragic loss of loved ones.
Following 11 days of air strikes by Israeli military
forces and rocket attacks launched by Palestinian armed
groups, more than 250 people were killed in Gaza,
including 66 children, of whom 19 went to UNRWA
schools. In Israel, 12 people, including two children
were killed. All losses of innocent civilian lives are
unacceptable. I extend my deep condolences to those
who lost loved ones. In addition, thousands more were
injured. These are not just statistics; they are civilians
whose lives and dreams have been taken away.
Let me pause for a moment to acknowledge and
show my appreciation for my UNRWA colleagues in
Gaza, who — under the leadership of Director Matthias
Schmale — were on the front line to protect and assist
the population. Every morning, they overcame the
gripping fear and made the dangerous journey to our
health centres and schools, turned into shelters, in
order to help those in need. They went to work without
knowing whether the families would still be alive at
the end of the day. Our health and sanitation workers,
our social workers and engineers worked relentlessly
for 11 days in what they described to me as “hell on
Earth” — hell, because for 11 days there was no

S/PV. 8782

respite in the fighting, no humanitarian truce to allow
for emergency medical assistance to the wounded, no
relief for the displaced and no ability to simply get
food without the risk of being in the wrong place at the
wrong time. It was hell for 70,000 people who sought
refuge in our schools because living under blockade left
them with no other place to seek protection. It was hell
because of the intensity of the relentless air strikes on
densely populated areas in the heart of Gaza.
Almost everyone I met described feeling terrified
and traumatized. I met parents who every night asked
themselves whether to have all the children sleep near
them or to spread them around the house. Should
they all die together or should they try to save some
by scattering them? An UNRWA colleague described
how she discussed dinner plans with her sister on the
last day of Ramadan. An hour later, the sister and her
daughter were killed in an air strike. The daughter’s
wedding had been planned for the following week.
I met a man from the Abu Hatab family who lost 10
loved ones, including his wife and four children, when
his building collapsed. He had gone out to buy food
and returned to see his entire universe shattered. Days
after the event, he still wonders what happened and why
his only surviving child has stopped speaking. I had no
answer to give him.
The most recent conflict is the first such conflict in
14 years. Every conflict destroys lives, buildings, basic
infrastructure and sends Gaza back many years. These
conflicts happen against the backdrop of an enduring
blockade that, for 14 years, has crippled the economy,
has led to skyrocketing unemployment and has brought
Gaza’s health-care system to its knees, undermining its
current capacity to respond the surge of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and meet the needs of
the injured.
The international humanitarian community has
now shifted from emergency mode to assessing the
totality of the damage done to homes, infrastructure
and, most importantly, human lives. I am especially
concerned about the trauma and psychosocial impact
that relentless air strikes and rocket attacks have
inflicted on civilians, especially children. I am also
concerned about a new wave of COVID-19 infections
among the population in Gaza, as access to the vaccine
becomes more urgent than ever.
Last week, I met some members of the Sheikh Jarrah
families in East Jerusalem. Mohammed Al-Kourd

21-133445/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

shared his feelings of injustice and fear — injustice
because his family faces a second forced displacement,
fear of the deliberate harassment of those who wish to
expel him from his childhood home. In the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, thousands of people like
Mohammed live in fear, with eviction and demolition
orders pending on their homes and property.
During the escalation in Gaza, not enough public
attention was paid to the serious protection situation in
the West Bank, which has affected Palestine, refugees
and civilians alike. We saw a major increase in Israeli
security forces’ incursions, search and arrest operations,
and settler violence. Of particular concern was the
heavy use of live ammunition during demonstrations
where Palestinian refugees were among the injured
and killed.
I am also concerned by the potential excessive and
misuse of non-lethal weaponry, such as tear gas, in and
around the narrow alleys of Palestinian refugee camps.
Repeated exposure might create health challenges that
derive from tear gas seeping into homes and sticking
to clothes.
Despair is spreading in Palestinian refugee camps
beyond the occupied Palestinian territory. Despair and
loss of hope makes a dangerous mix in a highly volatile
region, particularly for youth, who feel increasingly
disenfranchised and trapped.
In Lebanon, nearly the entire population in the
camps lives under the poverty line. During my last visit
I saw hopelessness growing. I met a young Palestinian
refugee who said he constantly asked himself whether
he would die from COVID-19, from hunger or from
trying to cross the Mediterranean on a dinghy.
During my last visit to Syria, I saw children in
school uniforms emerging from the rubble of the
Yarmouk camp to jump on an UNRWA bus. Their
families had come to live amid debris because they
could no longer afford to pay rent.
In Jordan, despite relative stability, the pandemic
dealt a huge blow to the economy. Again, the most
vulnerable — Palestinian refugees, especially those
who have fled from Syria — are hit hardest.
Until there is a political solution to this conflict,
including a just and lasting solution to the plight of
Palestinian refugees, only a strong UNRWA can bring
a sense of normalcy into refugees’ lives. That sense
6/29

27/05/2021

of normalcy can contribute to the quest for peace
and stability.
But with a strong UNRWA, young Palestinian
refugees, girls and boys alike, can go very far thanks to
quality education.
Loay Elbasyouni, one of the engineers behind the
American helicopter that went to Mars, is a former
student of an UNRWA school in Beit Hanoun in Gaza.
He went from Gaza to NASA. That is how far our
students can go when they are empowered. Like their
peers elsewhere, they have unlimited potential.
A strong UNRWA requires predictable and
sufficient funding for adequate planning and delivery of
services. It is one of the most cost-effective investments
that Member States can make. It is an investment in
human beings and in the human development of
Palestinian refugees. It is an investment in the values
and principles of the United Nations.
Our pedagogy, based on the United Nation values
of human rights and tolerance, promote a sense of
purpose. This year alone, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the World Bank and the
British Council all acknowledged the excellence of an
UNRWA education.
The education we provide is an antidote to the
widespread violence, hatred and intolerance spreading
in the region. Weakening UNRWA will only fuel
existing division. I am asking Member States to stand
by the Agency and support UNRWA from repeated
political attacks that seek to undermine its role and
its mandate.
UNRWA is an agency that advocates refugee
rights in accordance with international law, including
relevant United Nations resolutions. Those who believe
that, by undermining the reputation of the legitimacy
of the Agency, they can somehow erase the Palestinian
refugee issue, are fooling themselves. Not only is
it discriminatory to erase or ignore history, but such
erasure is also based on misinformation and the denial
of established fact. Palestinian refugees derive their
status and rights from international law, the same law
that strives to promote peace and equality. By seeking
to weaken UNRWA, those who attack it only weaken
the prospects for peace.
Last week was a stark reminder that war and
violence persists in the absence of genuine and
comprehensive efforts aimed at resolving the Israeli21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinian conflict. Putting on hold the political
track by containing the conflict should not be an
option anymore.
In conclusion, I would like to share the
following recommendations for Council members’
consideration. First — and we heard this from the
Special Coordinator — we need to break the Sisyphean
approach to the post-conflict response in Gaza, which
is a response limited to humanitarian and recovery
assistance, will not prevent the next round of conflict.
The recovery phase needs to be accompanied by a
genuine political track aimed at lifting the blockade on
people, goods and trade, in line with resolution 1860
(2009).
Secondly, I echo the Special Coordinator’s call
for perpetrators of violations of international law on
all sides to be held accountable and swiftly brought
to justice.
Thirdly, to prevent further escalation of tensions
in West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, forced
evictions and administrative demolitions contrary to
international law should end.
Fourthly, humanitarian and reconstruction efforts
should be fully funded, and efforts to scale up the
availability of COVID-19 vaccines should be supported.
In conclusion, no one has asked to remain a refugee
for seven decades. Every Palestinian refugee I meet
wants a normal life, including the right to live without
fear and without discrimination. Like all people, they
have an equal right to the enjoyment of their human
rights in accordance with international law, which
means that children can play and go to school, parents
can protect and take care of their children, and young
people have dreams. It also means living in peace, not
fearful of the next conflict. Together, we must ensure
that the sense of normalcy and stability remains in the
lives of Palestinian refugees through a strong UNRWA.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Lazzarini for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Khalidi.
Mr. Khalidi: I am deeply grateful to the Security
Council and the Chinese presidency for the opportunity
to brief the Council, particularly at what may be a new
juncture in the evolution of the question of Palestine.
All Palestinians, wherever they are — in occupied
Arab East Jerusalem, where the latest round of

S/PV. 8782

violence started a few weeks ago, in the occupied West
Bank, in besieged Gaza, inside Israel, and in the vast
Palestinian diaspora — have responded to the events of
the past several weeks with an unprecedented degree
of unity. These events, and this show of unity, have
provoked a worldwide recognition of the realities on
the ground — realities of systemic discrimination,
oppression and settler colonialism — that can no longer
be brushed aside and hidden by stale clichés. Young
people and people of conscience the world over have
responded to the images that emerged from different
parts of Palestine, and which were diffused especially
by social media, but also by mainstream media. Public
discourse has begun to shift in consequence.
On 9 June 1967, at the height of the June 1967 war,
as a college student, I sat in the visitors’ gallery of this
very Chamber where the Council is sitting, watching as
a permanent member ensured the impunity that allowed
a Member State to ignore Security Council ceasefire
resolutions and continue its military offensive for another
24 hours. This action nearly 54 years ago exacerbated
problems that this body is still wrestling with. The
same pattern of guaranteeing impunity for violations of
international law and Security Council resolutions has
recurred repeatedly since then, most recently during
the Council’s deliberations on the events in Palestine
earlier this month.
As all Council members know, since the founding
of the United Nations, the Security Council has adopted
multiple resolutions on the Palestine problem and the
Israeli-Arab conflict Such issues that have taken up
more of the time and energy of this organ than any other
global issue. Most of those resolutions have not been
implemented or respected. In effect, they are in effect
dead letters. That systematic disrespect for Security
Council resolutions, encouraged by the impunity that
I have described, has left the Council and the United
Nations itself, I am sad to say, in justifiable disrepute.
More seriously, such impunity has been a major obstacle
to establishing peace, justice and security for all those
who live in Palestine and Israel
However, I have not been asked to brief on the
failings of the past. Instead, I hope to offer suggestions
based on my understanding of the history of the issue,
in order to reinforce the efforts of this organ to achieve
lasting peace and security in Palestine and Israel in
the future.

21-133447/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is clear to me, and I hope that it is clear to Council
members, that, whatever their merits, a number of
important palliatives currently under consideration are
not by themselves going to produce a lasting solution
to the problems of Palestine and Israel. They include
rebuilding the degraded infrastructure of Gaza with no
guarantee that it will not be destroyed for a fifth time;
stressing the quality of life for Palestinians without
providing them with a clear and fixed political horizon;
and, finally, yet again launching a meaningless peace
process, structured by the most powerful actors to
avoid all the difficult core issues central to achieving a
sustainable resolution of the issue.
Any effort to achieve real peace and lasting
security must belatedly grapple with those painful
core issues, which go back to the first efforts of the
General Assembly and the Council to deal with the
question of Palestine in the earliest years following the
establishment of the United Nations.
What are those core issues? They are the
dispossession of the Palestinian people, starting in
1948; the status of Jerusalem; the supposedly temporary
military occupation that has endured since 1967; and
ensuring that any projected solution is grounded in
international law and in the resolutions of the Council
and is not based on what happens to be convenient for
the most powerful actors involved in the issue.
I am a historian of the Middle East and a long-time
observer of the proceedings of the Security Council,
where my father worked for nearly two decades as a
member of the Secretariat. I understand perfectly that
power relations structure what is possible and what is
impossible. I understand perfectly how difficult it is
to make national agendas coincide such that collective
action becomes possible.
However, if there were a moment to transcend those
restraints and for collective action to address a source
of suffering that has endured for the better part of a
century, this is it. The most recent upheaval in Palestine
and Israel has sharpened contradictions, aroused new
passions, some of them ugly, and awakened consciences.
It has also pricked the bubble of cherished illusions,
such as the illusion that no one in the Arab world or
globally cares about Palestine. The solidarity marches,
the social media explosion, the unprecedented nature of
the mainstream media coverage of recent events and the
unprecedented wave of solidarity with the Palestinians
the world over — all those phenomena together show
8/29

27/05/2021

that, however much some may wish that this were not
the case, Palestine is important and cannot be ignored.
They also show that the Palestinians will not give up
their struggle to achieve their inalienable rights. A
problem that for decades many have hoped would
disappear has reappeared in an even more intense and
troubling form.
It is therefore time to call a spade a spade and
to abandon the cruel false equivalence that ignores
casualty ratios of from 4, 10 or 20 to 1, that places
the occupier on the same footing as the occupied and
that puts a nuclear-armed regional super-Power on the
same footing as a people that has never been allowed
to enjoy self-determination. If that false equivalence
is maintained and if the lopsided balance of power
between the two peoples is allowed to dictate outcomes,
there will never be an end to such bloodletting and
oppression, and the Security Council will continue to
issue empty resolutions with no force for the rest of
the twenty-first century, as it has done for the many of
the decades.
How can the impunity that enormous power grants
to one side be overcome? In my view, what are needed
are both small steps and big ones. Small steps can
include this organ urgently demanding, not requesting
from the blockading Powers, but demanding, under
penalty of sanctions, that the humanitarian, medical,
dietary and other basic needs of the people of Gaza
be freed of cruel political considerations and that the
collective punishment of 2 million people be ended.
Surely that small step is within the power of the
Security Council. I think that all can see how doing
that, which requires forceful action, would improve the
situation in Palestine.
Small steps include the Security Council working
to help cement the unity of the Palestinian people on a
democratic basis — a unity that the colonial Power has
worked ceaselessly to undermine. That could include
United Nations-mandated and -supervised elections
that cannot be obstructed either by the occupying Power
or by outside Powers that cultivate proxies and meddle
in Palestinian affairs.
Small steps may include the demand that the status
quo regarding the holy sites in Jerusalem — a status
quo that has been systematically infringed upon — be
strictly respected by all. That status quo goes back
not only to the many United Nations resolutions on
Jerusalem or to the British Mandate period; it is rooted
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the era of Ottoman rule, and it was hammered out
over many decades of war and diplomacy. As we have
seen in recent weeks, it is playing with fire, an unholy
fire, to allow that status quo to be trampled upon, as
has been happening for all too many decades, both in
the period of Jordanian rule of the eastern part of the
city and, especially, since the Israeli occupation and
annexation of 1967.
Larger steps should include forcefully reiterating
the basic building blocks of the international order, as
far as Palestine is concerned, as they have been laid
down in Security Council and other United Nations
resolutions. Those include the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by force, central to the principle
of resolution 242 (1967), adopted by this organ in
November 1967; the illegality of the colonization of
occupied territory by the occupier’s citizens, as set
out in the Fourth Geneva Convention; the right of
refugees to return and to compensation, as set out in
General Assembly resolution 181 (II); and the necessity
of an international role in resolving the question of
Jerusalem, as had been set out in repeated Security
Council resolutions.
For the Council simply to reiterate clearly and
explicitly that those building blocks, all of which
are rooted in international law and United Nations
resolutions, are the only possible basis of a just
and lasting solution would ameliorate the situation
immeasurably. I understand how difficult it may be to
achieve unanimity today, even on those points, every
single one of which has been voted for unanimously
or nearly unanimously by the Council or other United
Nations bodies in the past, but simply reiterating them
is crucially important.
Another larger step would be for the Council
to assert its prerogatives and forcefully push for a
more multilateral and less unilateral structure for the
resolution of the Palestine question. The unilateral
approach, which has prevailed since the Gunnar Jarring
mission, which was eclipsed towards the end of the
1960s, a half century ago, has manifestly failed to bring
peace to Palestine or to Israel, and it is time for it to be
replaced by more multilateral and less biased efforts. I
understand that power has its prerogatives and cannot
be ignored, but it is time to realize that a century of
unmitigated failure should bring this organ to search
for a better, a more multilateral, way to structure
a negotiation than the unilateral one that has been
followed with no success until now.

S/PV. 8782

A much bigger step, albeit one that should not be so
hard for this organ to adopt, or for the world community
to accept, is the principle that, in any projected solution
in Palestine-Israel, all citizens of both the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples and both collectivities must enjoy
rights and security on a basis of complete equality.
Whatever rights one enjoys, the other must enjoy as well.
Those rights include the right of self-determination and
political, civil, human and religious rights.
That is not such a far-fetched notion. In November
1947, the General Assembly voted for the creation
of two States in Palestine. One was eventually
established, one was not. For all its many flaws and
the injustice to the overwhelming Arab majority of
the Palestinian population that it embodied at that
time, General Assembly resolution 181 (II) contained
one kernel that we can look back on and build on: that
is the indisputable principle that two peoples live in
Palestine/Israel. In whatever way those two peoples are
to structure their relations in the future — whether on
a two-State or some other basis — the weaker cannot
be left to the mercies of the stronger, with its powerful
ally putting its thumb on the already tilted scales. That
is where the Security Council can and must play a role
by insisting that the principle of complete equality of
rights and international law be the essential basis of any
lasting solution.
I know a little bit of the difficulties that the
representatives of Council members and the States
they represent must confront in dealing with this
intractable issue. I understand that it is an issue that has
profound resonance within the internal politics of their
countries and provokes intense passions on all sides.
Nevertheless, this is the moment to grasp that sharp
nettle to bring concepts of right, principle, justice and
equality to bear in order to overcome the decades of
expediency that have given the hollow shell of a process,
but have manifestly not brought peace to Palestine or
to the two peoples who live there. As I have recently
written, rather than bringing peace, the efforts of the
United Nations and outside parties in Palestine have all
too often failed to prevent further displacement, further
misery, further war. May the opportunity presented by
the most recent crisis in Palestine and Israel lead the
Security Council to efforts that will break that pattern
and set the two peoples on the path towards a just,
lasting and sustainable peace and real, equal security.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Khalidi for his briefing. I would like to thank

21-133449/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

him for sharing his proposals and views based on his
long-term research. At the same time, I would like to
thank the other two briefers for their contributions to
the meeting.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Mr. President, for your valuable efforts during
this month since the beginning of the aggression
directed against us. We also thank all our brothers and
friends in the Security Council who have cooperated
with you, Sir, to put an end to that aggression since it
began. Indeed, several formal meetings of the Security
Council have been held — be they open or closed or at
the ministerial level — to put an end to the aggression
against our Palestinian people, our holy sites and our
property. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General
and Mr. Tor Wennesland for their efforts to achieve
peace and justice in our region. On behalf of Palestine,
I wish to thank Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
for all the services provided by UNRWA to millions
of Palestinian refugees. In the same vein, I wish very
much to thank my friend and brother Professor Rashid
Khalidi for his valuable briefing.
Israel has failed. Israel has failed in defeating
Palestinian consciousness and in breaking up our
national affiliation. Over the course of 73 years, Israel
has developed the most cunning policies and adopted
the worst practices, has wielded threats by adopting the
gravest plans and imposed the strongest sanctions. Israel
has invested enormous resources towards changing
the historic, geographic and demographic status in
our homeland, believing that eventually a Palestinian
generation will acknowledge defeat and surrender to it.
Today, after more than 70 years since the Nakba,
Israel’s scheme is falling apart in the face of the courage
of young Palestinians who are more attached to their
homeland and their life, believing in unity and in the
inevitability of victory. Generation after generation,
we have remained dedicated to Palestine — we carry
the colour of its soil — simply because there is no
alternative to justice and freedom. No occupation can
last forever, regardless of the occupier’s military might,
military technology or its colonial policies.
Israel has also failed in misleading the peoples
of the world: its colonialist and racist face is plain for
10/29

27/05/2021

all to see. Its arguments are obsolete. It is no longer
possible for Israel to hide behind aggressive reactions
by accusing all those who dare to criticize its occupation
and call for its end and all those who express their
solidarity with Palestine and its just cause. There is a
worldwide generation that stands unafraid of Israel and
its threats.
After what has happened today, how can Israel
continue to hide the apartheid regime it imposes, which
is visible everywhere from the river to the sea? How can
Israel justify the so-called right of return of Jews 5,000
years later while denying the right of Palestinians to
return to their land and homes after 73 years? How can
Israel justify the forced displacement in Sheikh Jarrah
and Silwan under the pretence of alleged property for
Jews while denying the property rights of Palestinians
all over historic Palestine? How can Israel justify the
racial nationalism act that grants rights to Jews and
deprives the Palestinians of those rights? How can Israel
justify the demolition of our homes, our properties and
our fields? How can it justify stealing our water and our
livelihoods while at the same time claiming its right to
build illegal settlements, military checkpoints and even
a wall on our land? How can Israel justify violence?
How can it justify attacks on Christian and Muslim
holy sites while claiming that its colonization is quite
simply a divine, ideological right? How can Israel call
for the release of its bodies while Palestinian bodies
pile up, corpses refrigerated, with families unable even
to give them a dignified burial?
How will Israel justify saying that it has an
absolute right to so-called self-defence at a time when
any Palestinian who defends her home, family, land,
right to practice her religion or access to holy sites is
considered a criminal? These are the same Palestinians
that face soldiers and military forces.
How can Israel justify the fact that its courts
condemn Palestinians who are simply exercising their
rights? How can it justify that its courts condemn the
fact that Palestinian children are seeking refuge when
Palestinian children are attacked and killed among their
families with their parents? How is all of this going to
be justified? Who will believe Israel after all of this?
Did the Security Council not receive the many
United Nations reports sounding the alarm about the
catastrophic situation in Gaza? We have heard a lot of
the information in such reports delivered to us today:
those reports issued a warning regarding a situation
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on the verge of collapse. We were warned about the
possible resumption of violence for the past 15 years
as a result of the resumption of Israeli violence. Did
Palestinians not speak out during the Great March of
Return? They spoke out to ask for the lifting of the
siege, which United Nations experts believe violates
international law and constitutes collective punishment
against Palestinian civilians in Gaza.
Did we not come, time after time, to warn of the
consequences of Israeli attacks on holy Islamic and
Christian sites and East Jerusalem? We spoke out
against acts of provocation at Al-Haram Al-Sharif
and the policy of forcible displacement in the Old
City, Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan, and indeed in all of
Palestine. Did Israel not come over and again to the
Council, displaying stubbornness and resorting always
to the argument of anti-Semitism to justify its grave
violations as if it were entitled to act as if above the law?
Israel attacks anyone who calls for an end to its
settlement policy in the West Bank, for respect for the
character and status of Jerusalem, as well as of the
historic status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and for the
lifting of the blockade over the Gaza Strip.
Israel has not upheld its legal obligations as an
occupying Power. The deterioration of the situation
in the occupied State of Palestine, as seen recently in
Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip, is of Israel’s making.
It is an inevitable result of its oppressive policies and
colonialist occupation.
Before the Council here today, we stress the need to
end Israeli aggression against Gaza. But putting an end
to that recent aggression did not end the catastrophe.
It did not restore the lives of fallen martyrs. It did not
return houses that were destroyed. It did not spare
orphans the loss of their parents, or bring back the
loved ones of the bereaved.
The postponement by the Israeli courts of decisions
on the forcible displacement of Palestinian families in
Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan did not free families from
the ongoing aggression by settlers, or spare them the
tragedy endured in occupied Jerusalem. It did not mean
that Israel’s provocations that the Al-Aqsa Mosque
have ceased, or that measures to change the status of
the city and its character have stopped. This has not
put an end to Israel’s colonial appetite, or the desire to
annex occupied Palestinian land, remove Palestinians
from their land, or besiege them on it. It does not put an
end to restrictions on their freedoms.

S/PV. 8782

As Professor Khalidi has said, today we all stand at
a crossroads. If we leave things to Israel, it will simply
choose the same path and the same approach. Israel
will choose to impose apartheid upon us. It will choose
annexation, besiegement, blockade and destruction. At
the same time, it will demand security and stability for
itself, because Israel does not acknowledge the failure
of its colonialist and racist policies, which are the
source of violence and the root cause of the conflict.
We Palestinians will not surrender. We will not be
subjugated by this miserable occupation. That is what
Israel must understand. That is the reality Israel must
face. The Palestinian people — young and old, women
and men — will not throw in the towel. The Palestinian
people will continue to call for freedom, independence
and self-determination. We will accept only the path
that leads to the freedom of our people, upholds our
national dignity and guarantees all our rights as
enshrined in international law.
With regard to the Security Council and the
international community, for decades they have set
out an international vision for peace. The Council’s
resolutions have defined the bases and parameters for a
solution. It also determined the obligations of the parties
and obligations on countries not to recognize illegal
actions or support the perpetrators of such actions. The
Council also called for the need to distinguish between
occupied territory and the territory of the occupying
Power. And it called for respect for international law. It
is now up to the Council to implement those resolutions
and establish a just and comprehensive peace as
foreseen in various resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, including resolution 2334
(2016).
The Council has preserved the international
consensus against all attempts to legitimize occupation
and colonization and to distort the terms of reference.
Now that the Trump Administration has gone, and along
with it the propaganda and illusions it sought to promote,
the United States has returned to the international
consensus and the Quartet has been reactivated, it is
no longer enough to simply reiterate the provisions of
international law. We have full respect for international
law, of course. Quite simply, the Council is duty-bound
to implement it.
Please do not ask us to be patient. We have been
so patient. Jacob was the prophet of patience, and our
patience has run out — because, as every hour passes,

21-1334411/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

we endure more suffering. For how long are we supposed
to be patient — until the next massacre occurs, until
children under occupation grow into adults, until a
family is displaced for the third or fourth time, or until
the settlements expand to ultimately cut off the veins
of life in Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley? Does the
Council want us to be patient until an entire generation
grows up knowing nothing but siege and deprivation?
The battle for existence in Palestine, and
Jerusalem at its heart, is taking place on the ground,
house by house, and in the alleys of the Old City, in
our Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Holy Sepulchre, and on
every hilltop, neighbourhood, village and camp. Peace
cannot be achieved in the city of peace without the
recognition of Palestinian sovereignty and respect of
the Hashemite custodianship.
The Council’s responsibility is not only to adopt
resolutions here, although we value that, but to change
the reality there in order to protect the Palestinians there
and to ensure that freedom and peace prevail there.
The reconstruction of the besieged Gaza Strip
must be a top priority right now, as we have heard and
which we welcome, starting with providing immediate
health care and humanitarian assistance to the
internally displaced persons, especially in the context
of the pandemic. But the Council and we know well
that the solution in Gaza Strip must be a radical one
in a manner consistent with the unity of our people,
land and destiny, while lifting the Israeli blockade
completely against Gaza and ensuring the freedom of
movement of people and goods. That would ensure the
revival of economic life, the provision of fuel, medical
equipment, medicine and construction material, as well
as the sustainable functioning of the power plant so as
to end the humanitarian tragedy that the Palestinian
people in Gaza have endured for the past 15 years. It
would also allow the youth in Gaza to achieve their
maximum potential and creativity.
The past few weeks have demonstrated that Israel’s
claim — that the question of Palestine no longer inhabits
the hearts and minds of peoples in the Arab and Muslim
world or of peoples worldwide, and that it has become
a marginal issue — is false and void. The Palestinian
question cannot be overlooked or ignored neither
regionally nor internationally. We commend all regional
and international efforts to put an end to the Israeli
aggression against Gaza and to launch a serious political
process that places Palestine, which is the Middle East
12/29

27/05/2021

cause, at the top of the list of priorities. We reiterate,
however, that the success of such a political process
will be contingent on ending the ongoing aggression
against our people, our land and our sanctities, and on
the ability of the Council to implement its resolutions,
as well as on the international community’s ability to
reject double standards and to enforce respect of the
international rules adopted and enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, in addition to international law
and all international resolutions.
Despite all of the killing and destruction, we, the
Palestinian people, are a living nation that thrives
because of its history, legacy, civilization, culture,
poetry, dreams, creativity, bravery, diversity, love,
anger, tolerance, patriotism and humanity. We resemble
our land and belong to it, and will never abandon it;
either we live in it or it lives in us as generations of
revolutionaries follow one after another, “like twenty
impossibles”, as said by one of our great poets.
Here in Palestine, we have a past, a present and a
future — regardless of who agrees and who objects.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): It has been nearly a week
since the ceasefire came into effect, and while some
things are clear, a few things remain to be seen. It is
clear that this is not a conflict between Israel and the
people of Gaza or between Israelis and Palestinians.
This is a conflict between Israel and Hamas.
The people of Gaza are victims of Hamas and are
not our enemy. It is clear that the full responsibility for
the escalation lies with Hamas — an internationally
designated terrorist organization with an ideology
similar to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams.
Hamas indiscriminately fired over 4,300 rockets at
innocent civilians in Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and other
cities throughout Israel. That is an average of roughly
400 rockets a day. Any other country facing similar
threats to its citizens would have responded just as
Israel did.
It is also clear that this escalation had nothing to
do with the legal dispute in Sheikh Jarrah or with the
events in the Al-Aqsa Mosque. During the month of
Ramadan and throughout the rest of the year, hundreds
of thousands of Muslims pray peacefully at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. It was Hamas, not Israel, that disrupted the
peace, incited extremists to stockpile rocks and
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8782

firebombs in the Holy Mosque, which were then thrown
at Jewish worshippers and the police.

security of all those involved, and civilian international
aid donations could not enter Gaza.

Israel had to restore the peace, consistent with its
long-standing policy to ensure the freedom of worship
in all holy sites in Jerusalem. The events at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque were used by Hamas as an excuse for terror.
There is never an excuse for terror, which should
always be condemned. One cannot turn a blind eye
to the fact that the actions of Hamas to escalate and
inflame tensions had very little to do with Israel and
were directly related to internal Palestinian politics,
with Hamas attempting to assert its pre-eminence over
the Palestinian Authority.

In fact, the Security Council press statement
ignored Hamas altogether. How can there be a
statement about a ceasefire necessitated by the actions
of a terrorist organization without mentioning it at
all or recognizing the role that Iran plays in arming,
funding and training this terrorist organization? Hamas
leader Ismail Haniyeh publicly boasted about receiving
funds, weapons and technological know-how from
Iran — proving once again what a destructive role Iran
plays in the region.

Israel’s operations succeeded in destroying a
significant part of the terror infrastructure of Hamas.
Israel targeted over 1,500 terror assets in Gaza. Over
100 kilometres of the group’s network of terror tunnels
were destroyed and more than 200 terrorists were
neutralized. We carried out those operations while doing
everything in our power to limit civilian casualties.
Israel is deeply saddened by the civilian casualties
in Gaza. Every loss of life is a tragedy. As a country
that puts the sanctity of life above all else, we mourn
the loss of every innocent person taken by this conflict.
It is clear that Hamas, on the other hand, committed
a double war crime of firing at Israeli civilians while
hiding behind Palestinian civilians. Moreover, Hamas
cynically tries to drive up the number of casualties
on their own side and have the Security Council
blame Israel for those tragic losses. It is crucial to
remember that Hamas is responsibility for the fatalities
on both sides. Israel conducts its operations in strict
accordance with the law of armed conflict, including
the rules relating to distinction, precautions in attack
and proportionality.
The Security Council’s response to the facts
mentioned above is worrying. In its press statement
(SC/14527), the Council completely ignored the
launching of over 4,300 rockets at Israeli civilians from
within populated areas in Gaza. The Council did not
even acknowledge that 680 of those rockets misfired
and landed short, in Gaza, killing and injuring dozens
of Palestinians. Moreover, the Council ignores the fact
that, during the transfer of humanitarian aid into Gaza
via the Kerem Shalom crossing, Hamas deliberately
fired mortar shells towards the crossing, killing two
civilians and injuring many others. Due to those attacks,
the border crossing had to be closed for the safety and

Another thing that was completely ignored in the
press statement was the issue of the captive or missing
Israeli persons being held by Hamas in Gaza. Israel is
committed to the fate of Hadar Golding, Oron Shaul,
Avera Mangistu and Hisham al-Sayed, and insists that
the international community does everything in its
power to ensure their return.
Ignoring these things will not make them go away.
In fact, in this case, it will only make them worse. The
members of the Security Council and the international
community must condemn Hamas and express their
support for Israel’s right to defend its citizens. We
thank the countries that have already done so.
The Security Council must also call for the
disarmament of Hamas. Any assistance sent to the
Palestinian people must not fall into the hands of
terrorists. Effective mechanisms must be put in place to
ensure this does not happen. Failing to condemn Hamas
or attempting to create any sort of moral equivalency
between a murderous terrorist organization and
a democratic country acting in accordance with
international law encourages terrorism, promotes
anti-Semitism, hurts the Palestinians living in Gaza
and destroys any chance for dialogue.
Hamas indiscriminately fired rockets at innocent
Israeli civilians while using Palestinians as human
shields because it knows that too many in the
international community will give it a free pass. They
know that the blame for the loss of life will be placed
on Israel. And unfortunately, once again, some have
proven them right.
The inability of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) to mention Hamas, let alone condemn
the Islamic terror group for attacking humanitarian

21-1334413/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aid convoys or for indiscriminately firing rockets
into Israeli civilian population in effect strengthened
Hamas’ terrorist objectives. Even Tor Wennesland,
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, stated that the indiscriminate
launching of rockets and mortars violates international
humanitarian law and must cease immediately.
But UNRWA, instead of exerting its influence on
Hamas to stop the indiscriminate firing towards Israel,
was engaged during Operation Guardian of the Walls in
twisting the facts through false tweets and in spreading
politicized propaganda, which is incompatible with the
Agency’s mandate. Every statement made about the
operation failing to condemn Hamas or acknowledging
the responsibility for war crimes actively encourages
the organization to continue with its terrorism.
But the danger in such statements does not stop
with putting the lives of more Israelis and Palestinians
at risk. It also put the lives of Jews all around the world
at risk, including in Council members’ own countries.
By blaming Israel for the death of Palestinians caused
by Hamas be it by direct attacks or by using them
as human shields, by accusing Israel of advancing
a disproportionate response based on a simplistic
comparison of Israeli and Palestinian casualties, one
feeds into Hamas’ propaganda machine and fans the
flames of anti-Semitism.
While rockets were targeting Israeli civilians, Jews
and Jewish institutions were targeted by pro-Palestinian
mobs around the world. Verbal and physical attacks
became part of legitimate discourse, putting Jewish
citizens in situations where their lives were endangered.
Blaming Jews for the deaths caused by a terrorist group
feeds into the oldest of anti-Semitic tropes. The results
of these dangerous statements have already begun to
appear. We could see and hear clearly the anti-Semitic
attacks coming out of the pro-Palestinian rallies
and demonstrations — attacks on Jews and Jewish
institutions, alongside the demonization of Israel and
the call for its annihilation.
Never has there been a clearer example of the fact
that anti-Zionism is anti-Semitism. The connection
between anti-Zionism and the hateful anti-Semitic
attacks against Jews was made by pro-Palestinian
groups that took it to the streets. We expect every
country around the world to take effective actions in the
fight against anti-Semitism, uphold their responsibility
14/29

27/05/2021

to protect Jews and Jewish communities and hold
perpetrators accountable.
The devastating effects of emboldening Hamas
and not holding it accountable will also have a lasting
calamitous effect on the people of Gaza. When Israel
withdrew from the Gaza Strip in 2005, it purposely
left behind greenhouses and other structures that could
have enabled the Palestinian population there to thrive.
Israel and the international community were ready
to help Gaza flourish, but Hamas had other plans.
Since seizing control of the territory in 2007, after
an internal battle in which it executed members of
the rival Palestinian group, Fatah, Hamas has created
a tyrannical regime and turned Gaza into a terror
hub. Instead of using international aid or essential
materials to build homes, offices or factories, it created
a network of subterranean terror tunnels. It placed its
headquarters in a multistorey residential building and
stored its missile and rockets inside schools.
A strong Hamas means more suffering for the
people of Gaza. It is crucial that the aid provided not be
used to strengthen Hamas in any way.
Finally, as we look towards the future, it is crucial
to understand that not holding Hamas accountable and
allowing it to grow its political power and influence are
detrimental to any sort of dialogue. Israel will always
work to advance peace. The Abraham Accords served
as a clear example of Israel’s peaceful intentions.
However, Hamas continues to be an obstacle to
peace. Hamas rejects the Quartet principles. It refuses
to accept Israel’s right to exist. It refuses to renounce
violence or to acknowledge past agreements.
There should be no mistake: if the international
community strengthens Hamas, it will make the
possibility of Hamas replacing the Palestinian Authority
much more likely and eliminate the chance of future
dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians. There is
nothing to discuss with a terror organization committed
to one’s annihilation. As President Biden said, there
cannot be peace in the region until Israel is recognized
by all as an independent Jewish State. Hamas has made
it clear that it will never do so.
The week-old ceasefire should be used as an
opportunity to prevent Hamas from continuing to
terrorize the people of Israel or the people of Gaza.
The Security Council and the entire international
community must join Israel in preventing Hamas from
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

growing both militarily and politically. This is the
only way to prevent another round of violence, and it
is the only way to keep the chances for dialogue and a
brighter future alive.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give
the floor to those Council members who wish to
make statements.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of Note 507, which encourages all
participants in Council meetings to deliver their
statements in five minutes or less, in line with the
Security Council’s commitment to making more
effective use of open meetings.

S/PV. 8782

the recovery process. The humanitarian need is great,
and this is the moment to step up and meet it.
Building on our March and April announcements
of $250 million in United States assistance to the
Palestinians, Secretary Blinken recently announced
more than $38 million in new assistance to support
humanitarian efforts in the West Bank and Gaza. That
includes nearly $33 million to UNRWA in support of
its West Bank and Gaza emergency operations and
an additional $5.5 million in humanitarian assistance
provided through the United States Agency for
International Development.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Mr. Wennesland for his thorough
briefing and for all the work that his team has done to
support the ceasefire efforts and to bring some calm to
the situation in the past two weeks.

That life-saving aid will support humanitarian
partners, which will use it to provide food, health
care, relief items and emergency shelter to those
displaced by the recent conflict. It will also provide
mental health and psychosocial support for those who
have experienced trauma. We will work closely with
the United Nations, the Palestinian Authority and the
other partners and will not — I repeat not — direct any
assistance to Hamas.

I also thank Mr. Lazzarini for his update and for
the life-saving work that the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has undertaken in very challenging
circumstances. I thank Mr. Khalidi for taking the time
to share his opinions with the Security Council today.
I thank the representatives of Israel and the Observer
State of Palestine for joining us.

In addition, Secretary Blinken noted our intention
to work with Congress to provide $75 million more in
development and economic assistance in the West Bank
and Gaza over the next year. Our aid will go far, but the
needs, especially in Gaza, are vast. We call on the rest
of the Council, as well as the international community,
to support those efforts and provide humanitarian
assistance to the most vulnerable.

I also want to start by thanking the Government
of Egypt for working with us to achieve this ceasefire
as well as the Governments of Jordan and Qatar and
other partners that contributed through their good
offices. Quiet, intensive, relentless diplomacy at
the highest levels has brought a temporary end to
the violence, and the United States is determined to
continue that diplomacy to ensure that the calm holds.
That is why President Biden sent Secretary Blinken to
the region — to build on this ceasefire, to thank our
partners and to foster stability and security.

As in every humanitarian emergency, funding and
access are needed in equal measure. Specifically, an
effective humanitarian response requires the continued
opening of the Erez and Kerem Shalom border
crossings, the fast-track processing of humanitarian
convoys and the unimpeded movement of relief and
recovery supplies into Gaza. Let us work together to
protect those conditions and help those in need. In
addition, we need to promote progress and economic
stability in both the West Bank and Gaza. We need to
strengthen the private sector, and we need to expand
trade and investment.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States.

That starts by recognizing the tremendous human
toll of the violence. Casualties are often reduced to
numbers, but behind every number is a real person:
a daughter, a son, a father, a mother, a grandparent,
a friend, a human being. And beyond those killed
are those who were wounded, be it physically or
psychologically. For them we need to find a solution.
Thoughts are not enough. We are committed to helping

As President Biden has said, Palestinians and
Israelis equally deserve to live safely and securely,
to enjoy equal measures of freedom, opportunity and
democracy and to be treated with dignity. As we work
with the parties and others to address the urgent needs
on the ground, let us therefore also start to think through
how we can support better lives for both Palestinians

21-1334415/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and Israelis and turn this fragile calm into something
much more sustainable.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Coordinator, the Commissioner-General
and Mr. Khalidi for their briefings.
Like the Security Council last weekend, France
welcomed the announcement of the cessation of
hostilities on 21 May and calls for its full respect.
It was the result of collective efforts. France fully
played its part in calling for an immediate cessation
of hostilities, coordinating closely with its Jordanian,
Egyptian, United States and European partners, and
being in contact with the Israeli authorities and the
Palestinian Authority. In that way, we contributed to
the international pressure that brought about an end of
the fighting on the night of 20 to 21 May.
France also ensured that the Security Council
participated in those efforts by taking the initiative
for a draft resolution. We welcome the fact that
the Council was finally able to make a statement
(SC/14527) following the truce. We again welcome the
key role played by Egypt, the role of the United State,
and the contribution of other countries of the region, in
particular Jordan and Qatar.
The truce, which has so far been respected,
must now be sustained through sustainable ceasefire
arrangements. We will be very careful to ensure that no
new rockets are fired against Israeli territory. I recall
our very strong condemnation of the attacks carried
out, particularly by Hamas. There has been a heavy
human toll for the civilian population after 11 days of
fighting. The number of displaced persons is extremely
high and numerous homes and civilian infrastructure
have been destroyed or damaged.
The truce must therefore enable the most urgent
humanitarian needs to be met, particularly in Gaza.
France calls for unhindered humanitarian access. It
welcomes the first steps taken in that direction with
the opening of crossing points for humanitarian aid
and personnel. It intends to allocate several million
euros, in addition to its annual aid, so as to meet the
most pressing needs. We call on all Member States to
also contribute.
In Gaza, beyond the emergency response, a more
extensive reconstruction programme will be required,
especially for critical civilian infrastructure, as
well as in the medical field, including to address the
16/29

27/05/2021

coronavirus disease. We are ready to fully play our part
in those efforts, in conjunction with the United Nations,
by ensuring that aid reaches only those for whom it
is intended.
The truce must ultimately be accompanied by an
easing of tensions throughout the Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and in Israel. We remain
very concerned by the threats of eviction of Palestinian
families in East Jerusalem, which we call on the Israeli
authorities not to implement, and recall our strong
opposition to settlement in all its forms. We also call
for full respect for the 1967 status quo regarding the
holy sites. In addition to that, all provocations and all
incitement to hatred and violence must stop.
Those 11 days of serious violence remind us that
we cannot remove the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. If we
choose to live with it or forget it, it will come back to us
in new episodes of violence.
Without a political perspective and respect for
international law, the same causes will produce the
same effects. The cycles of violence will continue to
follow one after the other and the civilian population
will once again be the main victims.
France reiterates its resolute support for a twoState solution, living in peace and security within
secure and recognized borders on the basis of the 1967
lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital, within the
framework of international law and the resolutions of
the Council. That is the only way to meet the aspirations
of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples and to ensure the
security of all.
France is determined to fully play its part in
maintaining that prospect, in conjunction with all its
international partners. The Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, Jean-Yves Le Drian, will continue
his efforts in the context of the Amman format, with
his German, Egyptian and Jordanian counterparts.
Together, we remain determined to work step by step to
restore confidence between the parties with a view to
resuming negotiations.
The Security Council has been mobilized
throughout this crisis. It must now engage in supporting
the efforts to relaunch the political process.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Given the latest developments,
the expanded list of briefers is welcome, and I thank
them for their perspectives.
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

As the past couple of weeks unfolded, we were
reminded once again that the resolution of the situation
in the Middle East and the question of Palestine,
however remote it may seem, would require new
thinking and a fresh impetus. Every cycle of conflict
puts all international agreements and mechanisms into
question. Even when tensions are low, the Council’s
monthly reports and briefings remind us that what is in
place has offered little prospect of a resolution. We urge
both parties— Israelis and Palestinians — to give the
resolution of the conflict the appropriate level of urgency
it requires and to re-engage on the normalization of
relations and direct negotiations.
Kenya welcomes the Egyptian-brokered ceasefire
on 21 May. We also recognize that in order for the
ceasefire to hold, numerous other bilateral and regional
de-escalation and mediation efforts continue to be
pursued. We also recognize the committed efforts of
Tunisia, Norway, China and France to the 22 May press
statement of the Security Council on the Gaza ceasefire
(SC/14527). We commend all those efforts, including the
continued engagement of the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, alongside
the work of Secretary-General António Guterres and
the Special Envoys of the Middle East Quartet. The
Security Council, as the only United Nations body
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, will need to ensure
that the ceasefire is not only sustained but that there is
also a cessation of hostilities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem.
Kenya has consistently supported diplomatic
negotiations, conducted in an environment of peace,
to achieve a two-State solution in which Israel and
Palestine live within secure and recognized borders,
in line with the June 1967 borders. All regional
and international efforts should be underlined by
multilateralism and guided by the agreed international
mechanisms, including resolution 2334 (2016).
The human toll, injuries, thousands of
displacements, the demolition of homes and critical
infrastructure, the psychological effects and other
forms of harm — all within an extremely fragile
Palestine and amid a global pandemic — will require
the identification of immediate steps for prevention and
recovery, not only in Gaza, but also in Jerusalem, Tel
Aviv and the West Bank. The field visit and the 23 May
statement made by the Deputy Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and United Nations

S/PV. 8782

Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator for
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, Ms. Lynn Hastings,
reveal that the impact on the economy, health and food
security on the ground will require multisectoral and
inter-agency coordination.
Kenya welcomes the launch of the humanitarian
appeal towards reconstruction efforts and the provision
of basic goods and services, including water, fuel and
medicine. As humanitarian and reconstruction work is
undertaken, Kenya believes that efforts to monitor and
prevent their exploitation by militants should be taken.
We cannot allow the Palestinian people to suffer from
the use of their civilian objects for hiding weapons and
launching attacks, thereby inviting retaliatory strikes
against extremists, which then lead to further suffering
among the Palestinian people.
We support the continued role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East as key in reinforcing humanitarian efforts.
We encourage the re-opening of the Kerem Shalom
crossing and full access for humanitarian deliveries.
As much as humanitarian aid is needed and useful,
funding appeals following cycles of conflict have
proved not to be a sustainable approach. As I stated
at the beginning, we need to rethink how to avoid
the next cycle of conflict and address the underlying
causes of hostilities. Humanitarian efforts will require
integration, with the establishment of sustainable
building blocks and institutions. The time is ripe for the
international community to prevent and not wait for the
next flare up. Perhaps it is also time to start speaking of
peacebuilding and sustainable development within the
conflict continuum.
The Council needs to revisit the political file and
reinvigorate its efforts, in partnership with regional and
neighbouring States, towards direct negotiations and
the resolution of the final status issues as a pathway
for a permanent and secure peace for both Israelis
and Palestinians.
Kenya continues to raise the alarm with regard to
how hostilities, such as those we witnessed in those
11 days, can have a spillover effect and fan extremism
and even hatred globally. We observed how quickly
terrorist groups and their backers jumped on the
opportunity to renew their message of radicalization
and recruitment the world over. No cause can excuse
Hamas’s rocket launches against civilian targets in
Israel, the exploitation of civilian infrastructure, use

21-1334417/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of human shields or hiding weaponry inside civilian
objects. Kenya reaffirms its strong condemnation of
such acts, especially given the collateral damage it has
caused to already vulnerable populations and innocent
civilians, particularly children.
As we focus on the political solution to this
protracted conflict, let us also put in place preventive
and mitigating measures to address the issue of
multigenerational radicalization and extremism,
especially given the increasing sophistication of
weaponry and operational strategies currently being
employed by those groups.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I would like to thank
the briefers — Special Coordinator Wennesland,
Commissioner-General Lazzarini and Professor
Khalidi — for their valuable contributions.
It is now almost one week ago that a ceasefire
agreement was reached between Israel and Hamas,
following the efforts of Egypt, Qatar, the United
Nations, the United States and other regional and
international actors. During 11 days of fighting, we saw
thousands of rockets being fired by Hamas and other
militant groups from Gaza into Israel, as well as the
heavy Israeli bombardment of Gaza.
Norway continues to condemn all attacks against
civilians. As the Special Coordinator has elaborated, the
civilian casualties have been significant, and children
have been especially affected. It is now imperative
that the ceasefire be fully implemented and respected
by all parties. Furthermore, priority must be given to
providing humanitarian aid to the civilian population of
Gaza. We call for rapid, safe and unimpeded access for
humanitarian actors to bring in food, health services
and other humanitarian relief, including essentials,
such as fuel and gas.
As announced last week, Norway will increase its
humanitarian support in Palestine to a total of more
than $12 million in 2021. As a major donor to the United
Nations Central Emergency Response Fund (CERF), we
will also contribute to CERF’s $4.5 million allocation
for the humanitarian response in Gaza.
Although we have all been focused on achieving
a swift end to the most recent conflict, we should not
forget the underlying issues. This escalation did not
occur in a vacuum. So long as the Israeli occupation
continues and there is no political process towards a
solution, similar bouts of conflict will continue to flare
18/29

27/05/2021

up regularly. The clashes in East Jerusalem, including
on the Al-Haram Al-Sharif, the Temple Mount, as well
as possible evictions in Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan,
illustrate how the current situation is not sustainable.
We continue to follow with great concern the tense
situation in the West Bank.
The parties, as well as the international community,
should take this opportunity to intensify efforts to
restart negotiations towards the two-State solution. We
recognize the Middle East Quartet’s important role in
that regard, as well as the role of countries in the region.
We must continue our efforts to strengthen the
institutional foundation for the two-State solution.
As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), Norway remains focused on
the State-building agenda and on the efforts of donors
and partners to strengthen the Palestinian economy
and improve the fiscal situation for the Palestinian
Authority. Since 2014, that agenda has also included
the reconstruction of Gaza and improving life for
its inhabitants. As the people of Gaza again face
tremendous destruction and humanitarian needs, we
must all base our response on the fact that the Gaza
strip will remain an integral part of Palestine. Our
efforts to address the enormous needs of Gaza should
be guided by our goal of contributing to the building
of Palestine, and our efforts must help ensure calm and
security for all civilians.
The AHLC remains the best-suited mechanism for
coordinating assistance to Gaza. It brings together the
parties, donors and development partners. It brings a
holistic view of Palestine’s development and governance
needs, with the Palestinian Authority at the centre.
Norway will convene working meetings at the expert
level to align priorities and make recommendations as
soon as the United Nations and the World Bank can
present their assessment of damage and needs. We will
assess how structures and mechanisms already financed
and in operation, such as the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism, can be continued and the necessary
amendments made. We also reconfirm our intention
to convene an AHLC meeting at the ministerial level
in late September or early October in collaboration
with the co-sponsors, the European Union, the United
States, as well as regional and other partners.
I will conclude with a few words about the Security
Council’s role. We are pleased that the Council was
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

able to agree, on 22 May, a press statement to welcome
the ceasefire and call for humanitarian assistance
(SC/14527). It is crucial that the Council speak with
one voice on issues such as those. The Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. And people on
the ground listen to what the Council says — and
what it does not say. The Council therefore bears a
heavy responsibility to live up to its mandate and the
expectations of people affected by conflict. Norway
will continue its efforts to contribute to Council action
and to finding solutions.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland and Commissioner-General Philippe
Lazzarini for their informative and insightful briefings.
I also thank Professor Rashid Khalidi for sharing his
perspective on the issue.
I welcome the representatives of Palestine and
Israel to our meeting today.
Viet Nam once again welcomes the ceasefire
announced between the parties, after 11 days of
violence, which killed over 200 people and wounded
thousands from both sides, the vast majority of them
Palestinians. We highly commend the constructive
efforts by Egypt, Qatar, Jordan and other regional
countries, the United Nations, the Middle East Quartet
and other international partners in that regard.
We would like to emphasize that the ceasefire
remains very fragile, as the situation on the ground
continues to be volatile. We urge all parties to fully
adhere to the ceasefire and make it permanent. In
order to do that, restraint on the part of all parties is
of paramount importance. We continue to call upon all
parties to refrain from any actions or rhetoric that can
ignite a new cycle of violence. Lessons from decades
of conflict tell us that any lack of restraint, whether by
an individual or a group, can risk triggering subsequent
actions that drag both sides into a spiral of escalation.
That has happened, and it will likely continue to happen.
Favourable conditions for the implementation of
the ceasefire are crucial. We once again commend the
ongoing efforts by relevant countries and organizations
to restore calm and ensure full adherence by all parties
to the ceasefire. We encourage mediation efforts
to maintain stability and avoid the risk of further
escalation.

S/PV. 8782

A permanent ceasefire also requires concrete
steps to deal with the causes of the conflict. We urge
Israeli authorities to halt all settlement activities in
the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and stop
the demolition of Palestinian homes and the eviction
of Palestinian people. All measures aimed at altering
the demographic composition, character and status of
the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, are illegal under international law and
run counter to United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016).
We once again reaffirm our strong belief
that the only way forward is a two-State solution,
including the establishment of the State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital that peacefully
coexists alongside the State of Israel, with secure and
internationally recognized borders on the basis the pre1967 lines, and a negotiated settlement in accordance
with international law, the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant United Nations resolutions.
We call on the parties concerned to take steps
towards resuming negotiations with a strong vision to
find a just, comprehensive and sustainable settlement
of the Palestine question. To that end, the role of the
international community, including regional countries,
the United Nations, the Quartet and other international
partners, is essential.
Last but not least, I would like to emphasize the
urgency of humanitarian assistance to Palestinians,
particularly in Gaza. Besides human casualties,
the violence destroyed or damaged a wide range of
vital civilian structures, including water and power
infrastructure and health-care and educational facilities.
The situation is all the more worrisome in the context
of the coronavirus disease pandemic in the Gaza Strip.
In that connection, we would like to underscore the
importance of unimpeded humanitarian access to all
the people in need. The reconstruction of Gaza will take
years and require a large amount of financial support.
The priority now should be to rebuild infrastructure
indispensable to the survival of the civilian population.
We appreciate the tireless efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) and other international
organizations in providing relief to the Palestinians in
Gaza during and after the conflict, and we continue to
call on the international community to increase support
for humanitarian and reconstruction efforts in Gaza,
including those undertaken by UNRWA.

21-1334419/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Tor Wennesland, and the
Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), Philippe Lazzarini, for their briefings
on the situation in the Palestinian territories. We also
listened carefully to Professor Khalidi.
I would like to welcome Linda Thomas-Greenfield,
Permanent Representative of the United States, to
today’s meeting. For her, this is the first in-person
meeting in the Security Council Chamber. She is not
in the Chamber now, but I think Rodney Hunter will
transmit our welcome, which I think we all share.
Today’s discussion of the situation in the Middle
East is taking place against the backdrop of the tragic
events that claimed the lives of 230 Palestinians,
including 66 children, as well as 12 Israelis. We express
our condolences to the families of the victims and the
injured. The population of the Gaza Strip is in urgent
need of humanitarian assistance, including through the
reconstruction of infrastructure. UNRWA, whose work
we support, can play a key role in that regard. We hope
that the Agency’s funding in the current challenging
conditions will be stable.
We were relieved and glad to learn that a ceasefire
was established in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
zone. For our part, we worked vigorously from the
outset to bring an end to the hostilities and intensively
engaged with key regional partners. We actively used
the communication channels established within the
Quartet. We thank all those who took part in that
process, and we note in particular the mediation of
the leadership of Egypt and Qatar. The United Nations
and Special Coordinator Wennesland also made an
important contribution to calming the situation.
There is no fighting in Palestine or in Israel
today. However, that does not mean that we can put
off resolving the Palestinian question to a later date.
Unfortunately, history has proven time and time again
that this is the key issue for the entire Middle East and
the world as a whole. And that is not just a figure of
speech or an overstatement. We all saw how sensitive
was the reaction of the Muslim Ummah to the events in
East Jerusalem around the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound.
It is obvious that there will be no final peace
status in the Middle East until all issues are resolved.
To prevent a relapse into armed confrontation, it is
20/29

27/05/2021

necessary to focus international and regional efforts on
creating conditions for restarting direct talks between
Palestinians and Israelis on the basis of United Nations
resolutions and the principle of two States, Palestine
and Israel, living side-by-side in peace and security
within the 1967 borders.
One factor that would help create such conditions
is the rejection of unilateral steps, including settlement
activity and provocations that repeatedly antagonize the
parties. Israel’s security concerns must be addressed.
It is important to work to restore Palestinian unity
on the basis of the Palestine Liberation Organization
platform. The status quo of the holy sites of Jerusalem
must be respected, and here we know that the Jordanian
monarchy plays a special role.
Active discussions on the Palestinian question
over the past two weeks in the Security Council as
well as in the General Assembly have shown that the
international community as a whole is unanimous in its
understanding of the ultimate goal of a settlement, as
well as its legal framework. It is important to preserve
this unity, including among the members of the Security
Council. The support expressed for these parameters
must be translated into concrete actions.
We do not believe that the whole set of problems can
be solved by any one actor alone. To do so will require
working together through collective efforts. In that
regard, we once again invite our colleagues, including
those in the Quartet, to consider our proposals to hold
a ministerial meeting of the Quartet, as well as one in
an expanded format, with the participation of regional
States and the Palestinians and Israelis themselves. We
are ready to study proposals and views in that regard,
and the sooner we begin our collective work, the sooner
the situation in the region will become stable.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland, CommissionerGeneral Lazzarini and Professor Khalidi for their
briefings today.
The United Kingdom joins others in strongly
welcoming the ceasefire. We reiterate our thanks to the
United Nations, Egypt, Qatar and other regional actors
for their mediation. My Prime Minister has conveyed
my country’s deepest condolences to the families of the
civilians killed, particularly those who lost children.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the cycle of
violence has taken too many lives.
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

We now need to focus on making the ceasefire
durable. My Foreign Secretary travelled to the region
yesterday and met Israeli and Palestinian leaders. As he
made clear, the latest escalation underlines the urgent
need to make progress towards a more positive future
and to address the drivers of conflict.
The United Kingdom has been clear that violence
against peaceful worshipers at the Al-Aqsa Mosque was
unacceptable. Maintaining the historic status quo and
the safety and sanctity of the holy sites is crucial. We
support the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s important
role as Custodian.
We have all been deeply disturbed by the scenes
of violence in Sheikh Jarrah. The United Kingdom
has been clear that settlement activity is illegal under
international law and damages prospects for peace; and
that the Government of Israel must end its settlement
expansion, demolitions and evictions in East Jerusalem
and elsewhere on the West Bank. Events at the holy sites
and in Sheikh Jarrah do not justify the indiscriminate
rocket attacks on Israel by Hamas and other militant
groups. We condemn those attacks in absolute terms.
We continue to call on those groups to permanently
end their incitement and rocket fire against Israel.
We have been clear that Israel has a legitimate right
to self-defence in responding to attacks. In exercising
that right, it is vital that all actions be in line with
international humanitarian law and make every effort
to avoid civilian casualties.
We are gravely concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Gaza, including damage and destruction
of key civilian infrastructure. Rapid and unhindered
access into Gaza for humanitarian actors and essential
supplies remains critical. We urge the continued
opening of all crossings in and out of Gaza, including
for life-saving medical treatment.
The United Kingdom has provided an initial
$4.5 million in aid to the emergency flash appeal of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to help address
immediate humanitarian needs. We commend UNRWA
for its continued efforts and its support to Gazans
displaced during the conflict.
Economic growth in the occupied Palestinian
territories remains vital to give hope to the Palestinian
people. For too long, it has been stifled. We call
on the Palestinian Authority and Israel to resume
dialogue on economic issues, to reconvene the Joint

S/PV. 8782

Economic Committee and to address the financial and
coronavirus-disease crises together.
We applaud the efforts of all who have engaged
the parties since the ceasefire to try to find a political
way forward. We welcome calls for equality of safety,
security, freedom, peace and dignity for Palestinians
and Israelis.
In conclusion, a longer-term political horizon is
essential. Recent events must galvanize us all in our
commitment to achieving a two-State solution that
ensures a safe and secure Israel living alongside a
Palestinian State based on 1967 lines, with Jerusalem
the shared capital of both States — the only solution
that we believe can end the cycle of violence and deliver
a just and sustainable peace.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for the briefing this morning
and express special thanks, too, to CommissionerGeneral Lazzarini and Professor Khalidi for their truly
valuable insights this morning.
Ireland welcomes the ceasefire agreed last weekend
following 11 days of violent conflict. The job now is
for all parties to respect and maintain the ceasefire to
avoid the risk of further bloodshed. All of those with
influence on the parties must continue to use that
leverage to ensure that the ceasefire is maintained and
built upon. Israeli and Palestinian leaders must work to
reduce rhetoric and to reduce tension.
We welcome the fact that the Security Council was
finally able to adopt a press statement (SC/14527) after
the ceasefire was agreed. We have no cause, however,
for self-congratulation. Our inability as a Council to
utter a single agreed word as the conflict raged for
11 days marks a sobering failure of our collective
diplomacy. As Professor Khalidi noted, recent events
and the weakness of our response put into perspective
the scale of the challenge in charting a political path
towards sustainable peace in the Middle East. The
Council must shoulder its responsibility. We must
support the parties to meet that challenge and to help to
end the cycle of violence and bloodshed.
In the immediate aftermath of the conflict, meeting
humanitarian need is essential, in particular for the
stricken population in the Gaza Strip.
Ireland has announced additional funding for
both the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and

21-1334421/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

UNICEF in Gaza, and we urge all donors to increase
their support at this critical moment, including through
the inter-agency flash appeal launched today.
Ireland is very concerned that UNRWA buildings,
among them hospitals and schools, were damaged
during military operations in Gaza. The Agency plays a
vital humanitarian role in Gaza and must be protected.
Through Commissioner-General Lazzarini, I pay tribute
to the dedicated staff of UNRWA and other United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations
that provided critical services and support throughout
the crisis and continue to do so now.
We call on Israel, as the occupying Power, to
facilitate unimpeded access for humanitarian relief. We
call on Hamas to facilitate unhindered humanitarian
access in the Gaza Strip.
Ireland supports an integrated approach to
reconstruction. We renew our call on Israel to end the
blockade of Gaza. The Gaza Strip is an integral part
of the occupied Palestinian territory. Reconstruction
efforts must take that into account.
Israeli and Palestinian authorities must launch
investigations, in line with international standards, into
alleged violations of international humanitarian law
during the conduct of hostilities. All parties, including
Israel, Hamas and other militant groups, have a
responsibility to respect international humanitarian law.

27/05/2021

illegal settlements into occupied Palestinian territory,
must stop. Evictions of Palestinians from their homes
in East Jerusalem and elsewhere in the West Bank must
stop. The demolition of Palestinian property, settler
violence, intimidation and incitement must stop.
We must acknowledge that these actions, occurring
at an unacceptable rate for many years, are a source
of legitimate grievance among the Palestinian people
and undermine prospects for peace and reconciliation.
The Council must require of Israelis and Palestinians
that they live up to their commitments and comply with
international law. Fundamental rights, in particular
those of freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and
association, must be vindicated and respected equally.
We believe that the Council, acting in concert
with the Quartet, key Arab States and other major
stakeholders, should now urge the parties to make serious
and sustained efforts towards credible negotiations. The
establishment of a genuine political horizon towards
a negotiated two-State solution, in line with United
Nations resolutions, international law and the agreed
parameters, is essential to the delivery of a peaceful
future where equal rights and equal opportunities can
be enjoyed by Palestinians and Israelis alike.

The recent crisis has taken a devastating toll,
especially on Palestinians. Many innocent Palestinians
and Israelis have needlessly lost their lives, and many
more have seen their lives torn apart. These terrible
events underscore the simple fact that the Palestinian
question cannot be ignored or put on the back burner.

Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland
for his important briefing and his valuable efforts to
de-escalate the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. I would also like to thank Mr. Philippe
Lazzarini, Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), and Professor Khalidi for their
briefings. We also express our great appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his efforts to reach a ceasefire.

Ireland echoes the Secretary-General’s call on
Israeli and Palestinian leaders to move beyond the
restoration of calm and to promote serious dialogue
to address the root causes of the conflict. We believe
that it is critical that women be part of this process,
and Ireland was pleased to facilitate a briefing just
yesterday by women civil society leaders in Palestine
to members of the Council.

We commend the international community’s
efforts to de-escalate the situation and put an end to the
aggression. Tunisia has intensely contributed to these
efforts at the highest level through coordination with
Council members. We also commend all international
and regional actors for their contributions in that regard,
especially the members of the Middle East Quartet, as
well as Egypt, Qatar and Jordan.

As our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Simon Coveney,
said last week (see S/2021/480), we must ask ourselves
how we move past the recurring cycles of violence
between Palestinians and Israelis. Terrorist attacks must
stop. These attacks cannot and should not be justified.
The flouting of international law, with the expansion of

Today’s meeting is being held amid a cautious calm
in the occupied Palestinian territories following the
announcement of a ceasefire approximately one week
ago. However, reports of continued provocations by
groups of settlers and Israeli forces against Palestinian
civilians in East Jerusalem are a source of concern

22/29

21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and could lead to a renewed outbreak with devastating
consequences, not only in the occupied Palestinian
territory, but in the region as a whole.
Given the delicate and sensitive situation, Tunisia
calls once again calls the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to uphold its
responsibility and pressure the occupying Power to
abide by its obligations pursuant to international law,
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, and to cease its violations, plans
of expansion and settler activity, as well as unilateral
actions that would only lead to violence and destruction
and would undermine the prospects for achieving a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
Tunisia also reiterates its call on the international
community to guarantee the protection of Palestinian
civilians and to end the unjust blockade of Gaza
Strip and all forms of collective punishment of the
Palestinian people.
The horrifying acts of repression and intimidation
committed by the occupying Power against the
Palestinian residents of the West Bank and East
Jerusalem and its shameless aggression against the
Gaza Strip have resulted in hundreds of deaths and
thousands of injuries, including to many women and
children, and have caused widespread destruction
of the infrastructure. Tunisia calls on regional and
international actors to step up their assistance and
humanitarian response in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially Gaza, in order to contribute to
reconstruction efforts. We also reiterate the need to
respond to UNRWA’s appeals to support its emergency
relief interventions and enable it to continue to provide
services to more than 5.5 million Palestine refugees. In
that context, Tunisia commends the exceptional efforts
that the United Nations, international humanitarian
actors
and
non-governmental
humanitarian
organizations have been making in the occupied
Palestinian territories. We also applaud the generous
support of donors to advance those efforts.
The victims and the long-term psychosocial and
humanitarian impact of the aggression, the destroyed
infrastructure and the immense economic losses
resulting from the siege and coronavirus disease
pandemic all add to the suffering of the Palestinian
people, who have been subjected to ongoing repression
and abuse by the occupying Power for decades
with impunity.

S/PV. 8782

After more than seven decades of occupation,
killing, destruction and displacement, is it not time to
achieve justice, restore Palestinian rights and impose
respect for resolutions of international legitimacy in
order to end this unjust occupation and establish a
sovereign independent Palestinian State? Until when
will authorities of the occupying Power continue to
challenge the international community and ignore
international law and resolutions of international
legitimacy? When will Palestine become a full-fledged
State Member of the United Nations?
We reiterate that we stand before a historic
responsibility today. We must champion right and
justice and be partial to international legitimacy for
the sake of achieving international peace and security
and restoring stability in the region so as to prevent
cycles of violence, such as those we have witnessed
recently, from repeating themselves, killing civilians
and dashing the hope of achieving peace.
Accordingly, we renew the call for unified
international action through coordination between the
Security Council, the Secretary-General, the Middle
East Quartet and parties of the region, in order to
create the conditions necessary to ensuring active
and binding engagements of the relevant parties to
practically relaunch serious and credible negotiations
within a specific time frame. This is the path to a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle
East, on the basis of international law, resolutions of
international legitimacy, the agreed parameters of a
settlement and the Arab Peace Initiative.
In conclusion, Tunisia will pursue its efforts
inside the Security Council and in other regional
and international forums, through cooperation and
coordination with sisterly and friendly States, to achieve
those ends. We will remain firm in our principled
support for the struggle of the fraternal Palestinian
people, in order to end the occupation, restore their
legitimate rights that are not subject to statute of
limitations and establish their sovereign, independent
State along the borders of 4 June 1967, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and with the settlement of all
other final status issues.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Tor Wennesland,
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency

21-1334423/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and
Mr. Rashid Khalidi for their briefings.
The situation in East Jerusalem and other Palestinian
territories has been the focus of the Security Council
in the last two weeks. During these Council meetings,
India expressed her deep concern over violence in
the old city of Jerusalem, especially during the holy
month of Ramadan, and over the possible evictions in
the Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan neighbourhoods in East
Jerusalem, an area which is part of an arrangement
facilitated by the United Nations. We also underlined
the need to respect the historic status quo in Jerusalem.
We welcome the announcement of the ceasefire
and recognize the important role of the international
community, members of the Middle East Quartet, and
countries of the region, in facilitating the ceasefire and
in continuing their efforts towards peacebuilding. The
ceasefire has arrested the sharp deterioration of the
security situation and restored relative calm. However,
the situation continues to be fragile. We reiterate
our call for all parties to observe maximum restraint
and avoid acts of violence, provocation, incitement
and destruction.
The latest cycle of violence has resulted in loss
of precious human lives, including that of an Indian
national. We extend our deep condolences to all
the affected families. The immediate delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian civilian
population, particularly in Gaza, and ensuring the
smooth flow of humanitarian aid into Gaza through
verified channels are matters of importance.
For our part, India continues to provide
developmental and humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian Authority both bilaterally and through
contributions to United Nations-led mechanisms. India
has always supported UNRWA’s strong role in human
development and humanitarian services.
Rehabilitation and reconstruction will now form
an important aspect of the international community’s
efforts in Gaza, and these must be prioritized. The
Palestinian Authority should continue to be the fulcrum
for such assistance to ensure the well-being and interests
of all Palestinians.
Even as we focus on the immediate situation, we
must underline the need for resuming dialogue between
Israel and Palestine for a two-State solution. The
absence of direct and meaningful negotiations between
24/29

27/05/2021

the two parties has only widened the trust deficit, which,
in turn, increases the chances for similar escalations
in future. As the rehabilitation efforts continue, it is
important for the international community and the
Middle East Quartet, in particular, to exert all efforts
to resume these direct negotiations.
We firmly believe that only a two-State solution
achieved through direct and meaningful negotiations
between both sides on final status issues will deliver an
enduring peace that the peoples of Israel and Palestine
desire and deserve.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland,
Commissioner-General Lazzarini and Mr. Khalidi for
their timely briefings. I also welcome the representatives
of Palestine and Israel to the Security Council.
Like other members of the Council, Mexico
welcomes the announcement of the ceasefire that came
into effect last Friday. We also welcome the mediation
efforts of Egypt, Qatar and others, which were all
important in achieving that goal. Unfortunately, after 11
days of conflict, the toll, as we have heard repeatedly,
is grave: nearly 300 fatalities, 9,000 wounded, 77,000
displaced and millions of dollars in material damage.
And yet, despite this, we note that the fighting in
Jerusalem continues unabated, a sign of the fragility
of the agreement that has been reached. This cycle of
violence is added to the list of clashes that have been
occurring between Israel and Palestine for the past
13 years.
In that context, reconstruction plans and funds
from international donors spurred by temporary truces
naturally help, but to some extent they fall on deaf ears.
As long as the historical and underlying causes of the
conflict are not addressed, we will continue to deplore
episodes of confrontation followed by temporary truces
and reconstruction processes.
There is no reason for Israeli children to have to run
to a bunker in the middle of the night or for Palestinian
children to have to seek temporary refuge in schools.
The only way to break this vicious cycle and offer a
prosperous and peaceful future for Israeli and Palestinian
children is through the full implementation of the twoState solution based on United Nations resolutions and
well-known international parameters — a solution
that addresses Israel’s legitimate security concerns
and supports the consolidation of a politically and
economically viable Palestinian State.
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

While reaffirming its commitment to the twoState solution, Mexico urges the Palestinian leadership
to set a new date and plan for its electoral process.
The holding of free and transparent elections is the
backbone of any democratic State. We also urge Hamas
and other organizations in Gaza to refrain from firing
rockets or incendiary devices or from engaging in any
other attack against Israel.
We also call on Israel to promote conditions
conducive to peaceful and prosperous Palestinian
economic development and, among other measures,
to lift the blockade on Gaza. Similarly, we urge it to
end all settlement activity in the occupied territories,
including the appropriation, eviction and demolition
of Palestinian properties, as well as the construction
and expansion of settlements, which are illegal under
international law and represent an obstacle to the twoState solution. Likewise, and in line with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, we call for the preservation
of the special status of Jerusalem.
We reiterate our call on political, social and religious
leaders to refrain from the use of inflammatory rhetoric
that fosters social polarization and fuels violence.
My delegation welcomes the prompt allocation
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and some international partners of funds to
begin reconstruction work in Gaza. We hope that
the contributions of the international community
will continue.
In conclusion, reconstruction and economic
reactivation efforts in Palestine must go hand in hand
with the realization of the legitimate aspirations of selfdetermination of the Palestinian people. An independent
and economically viable Palestinian State will benefit
Israel’s security. The responsibility to resume this
process undoubtedly rests with the parties in conflict.
However, all of us in the international community have
an obligation to support this process.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Coordinator
Wennesland,
Commissioner-General
Lazzarini and Professor Khalidi for their briefings.
We followed with deep concern the latest round of
escalation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territory
and the loss of civilian lives resulting from the violence,
especially among children. We strongly condemned the
indiscriminate firing of rockets by Hamas and other

S/PV. 8782

militant groups, while stressing the need for the parties
to abide by international humanitarian law.
Estonia welcomes the ceasefire between Israel
and Hamas. It is vital that the parties respect and
fully observe the ceasefire and do their utmost to
avoid further tensions and violence. We commend the
important role the United Nations, the United States,
Egypt, Qatar and other international partners played in
that regard.
The ceasefire creates space to address urgent
humanitarian needs. We support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a robust package of support for
reconstruction and recovery in Gaza. Estonia is
planning additional funding for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to address the tremendous humanitarian
consequences of the recent conflict.
Considering the dire humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip, it is vital to grant unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to all those in need and to work for
sustainable reconstruction and recovery.
It is also important to calm the volatile situation in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem, including around
the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. All acts of
provocation, incitement, violence and destruction must
end. The status quo of the holy sites must be respected.
We also call on Israel to halt the continued settlement
expansion, evictions and demolitions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem, as
they are contrary to international law.
We call on all parties to refrain from unilateral
actions that would further increase tensions and
undermine the viability of the two-State solution.
The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can
be achieved only through meaningful negotiations.
We call upon the international community, including
the Middle East Quartet, to create conditions for
resuming direct negotiations between the Israelis and
the Palestinians, with the aim of achieving a twoState solution, based on international law and relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in the Middle East. I also
thank Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, whose agency is doing
outstanding work in occupied Palestine, and Mr. Rashid
Khalidi for their briefings.

21-1334425/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I welcome the presence here of the representatives
of Palestine and Israel.
I would also like to thank the Chinese presidency
for the dynamism and effectiveness it has shown
throughout this month in the organization of our
various meetings on the situation in the Middle East,
including today’s, which has given us the opportunity
to meet in person.
The Niger has followed with great interest the latest
developments in the region, in particular the ceasefire
reached on 21 May between the Israelis and the
Palestinians, putting an end to one of the most deadly
escalations of violence of recent years.
While the guns fell silent almost a week ago, the
security situation on the ground remains precarious.
The upsurge in incidents between Palestinians and
the Israeli security forces, provocative speech and
incitement to hatred, as well as the tensions observed in
the West Bank, must demand the greatest vigilance on
our part in order to prevent backsliding and guarantee
overall respect for the ceasefire. In that regard, we
welcome the visit to the region by United States
Secretary of State Anthony Blinken with a view to
consolidating the hard-won truce between the parties.
We call on the parties to exercise the utmost
restraint in refraining from taking any action that could
jeopardize the ceasefire, as well as the calming and
rebuilding of trust between them. That is an essential
step for the resumption of the peace talks.
The cessation of hostilities between Israelis and
Palestinians and the return to calm, which we welcome
today, remain the fruits of intense diplomatic efforts,
both regionally and internationally. That all once again
demonstrates the effectiveness of collective engagement
in resolving conflicts, including the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. In that regard, we commend the efforts of
Egypt, Qatar, the United States, the United Nations and
all the other actors in the great efforts to bring about a
ceasefire between Israelis and Palestinians.
The events of the past few weeks, like the other
bloody episodes that have marked the tumultuous
history of Israeli-Palestinian relations, teach us that
the support of the international community is crucial
in bringing the parties to engage in dialogue. We
therefore call on the international community, the
Quartet, the members of the Council and the regional
actors that have influence on the parties to continue
26/29

27/05/2021

to put the necessary pressure in order to relaunch the
peace process, which has stalled for several years. The
achievement of the two-State solution, the only solution
to the conflict, to which we had reiterated our strong
commitment over the past weeks, must now not be
paralysed in any way. It must be set as a priority to
permit these two peoples, who, for so long, have been
subjected to violence and misunderstandings, to enjoy
peaceful coexistence. However, if that is to occur, the
underlying cause of the issue must be resolved — that
is, ending Israel’s unrestrained settlement policy in
the Palestinian territories, as expressly called for in
resolution 2334 (2016).
Furthermore, the continued settlement activity
and injustice against the Palestinian people serve
as a breeding ground for discontent and rebellion,
which, in turn, leads to radicalization and violence.
For Palestinians who have been bullied and martyred,
the future must cease being perpetually bleak. Just
as the African National Congress of South Africa
fought against the contemptible system of apartheid,
Palestinians have the right to fight for their freedoms,
their territory and, quite simply, their human dignity in
the face of oppression and colonialism.
My delegation deplores the considerable loss of life
caused by the recent escalation of violence between
Israelis and Palestinians. While the loss of human
life, including of women, children and even infants, is
deeply regrettable, the death of defenceless Palestinian
civilians under occupation is unacceptable. Bombing
by the Israelis has left Gaza in a critical humanitarian
situation. Long before current tensions erupted, the
Gaza Strip — a veritable open-air prison — languished
under the weight of an illegal blockade that has lasted 15
years. Nearly 43 per cent of its population is unemployed
and its population density is approximately 5,500
inhabitants per square kilometre. Its health system is
on the verge of collapse as it grapples with a soaring
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) transmission rate.
This already tragic situation is compounded by the
total or partial destruction of the remaining civilian
infrastructure, on which the people of Gaza depended.
The infrastructure affected includes schools and health
facilities, including the central COVID-19 testing
laboratories, as well as power lines, the drinking
water supply system and commercial and residential
buildings. Despite the end of the fighting, the mix of
all those elements explains the numerous humanitarian
challenges that require urgent measures that would
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

enable Gaza to recover and its population to have a
semblance of normal life.
We launch an urgent call for greater international
generosity towards the long-suffering people of Gaza.
The reconstruction and recovery of Gaza cannot be
delayed, as thousands of innocent lives depend on
it. The success of efforts towards a lasting easing of
tensions also depend on it. We welcome the delivery
of humanitarian convoys to Gaza, including from
Egypt, and the financial aid already announced by
some countries. To emerge from this particularly
worrisome situation, Israel, the occupying Power, must
take urgent and effective measures, under international
humanitarian law, to ensure the well-being and survival
of the population under its control.
The Niger welcomes the tireless efforts of
Mr. Tor Wennesland and reaffirms its full commitment
to supporting all efforts of the international community
towards a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing
and mediation efforts. I also thank the CommissionerGeneral of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
Mr. Lazzarini, for his briefing. We have taken note of
his four recommendations. We greatly appreciate the
enlightened perspective of Mr. Khalidi of Columbia
University. We also thank the representatives of the
State of Palestine and the State of Israel for their
statements. All briefings were essentially about loss
and despair and an urgent call for new thinking and a
changed approach.
The briefings come at a particularly acute time
for the consideration of the situation in the Middle
East, especially in Gaza, where oppression and settler
colonialism continue. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
follows with great concern and consternation the spike
in violence in Gaza since 10 May, leading to more than
250 deaths; more than 1,900 wounded, the majority of
whom are civilians, including women, children and the
elderly; and more than 75,000 displaced persons. That
has all been compounded by the destruction of civilian
infrastructure — houses, schools and hospitals.
As we mourn the loss of life among Palestinians
and Israelis alike, we welcome the announcement of
an unconditional ceasefire between Israel and Hamas,
brokered under Egyptian auspices. We also commend

S/PV. 8782

the countries of the region, including Qatar, the United
Nations, the Middle East Quartet and others for their
mediation efforts. It is our hope that the parties will
exercise maximum restraint and ensure that the ceasefire
represents a full and complete end to the violence.
Moreover, we welcome the Council’s adoption last
week of press statement SC/14527 on the ceasefire.
That outcome reflects the extent of the Council’s
determination to alleviate the human suffering in Gaza
despite the political obstacles that have hampered the
Council’s ability to act decisively to prevent the crisis.
We condemn the storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which resulted in the wounding of dozens of worshippers
and the arrest of six Palestinians. We repeat the call for
the status quo at holy sites to be upheld and respected.
Israeli aggression, in particular the attacks and
storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque by extremist settlers,
must end immediately.
Our absolute priority today is to restore calm and
immediately halt the suffering of Palestinian civilians
on the ground, particularly in Gaza. The international
community must take a closer look at the far-reaching
human suffering and dire humanitarian situation in
Gaza. In that connection, we call for the opening of
all crossings into Gaza and urge the international
community to provide rapid humanitarian aid and
respond to the UNRWA flash appeal for $38 million
to address the most pressing humanitarian needs of the
people of Gaza. We must do all we can to alleviate their
suffering. Furthermore, the 14-year blockade draining
life from Gaza must be lifted as an imperative.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the two-State
solution remains the only way to achieve lasting
peace and security for Israelis and Palestinians. The
international community needs to find a way to help
the Israelis and the Palestinians return to negotiations
on the two-State solution. The absence of a political
dialogue runs the serious risk of further deterioration
in security conditions in the future.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of China.
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland,
Commissioner-General Lazzarini and Mr. Khalidi for
their briefings.
Over the past month, Palestinian-Israeli tensions
have tugged at the heartstrings of the entire world. The

21-1334427/29

S/PV.8782

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Security Council held several emergency deliberations
on the matter and issued a press statement (SC/14527)
last week, in which Council members welcomed and
called for full adherence to the ceasefire, mourned the
loss of civilian lives resulting from the violence and
reiterated their support for comprehensive peace, based
on the two-State solution. We hope the message from
the Council, as it speaks with one voice, will lead to
a de-escalation of the situation and a resumption of
the peace process. China commends the mediation
and good offices by Egypt, Qatar and others. We are
particularly grateful for the tireless efforts of Special
Coordinator Wennesland.
Nonetheless, we must be cognizant of the
persistent fragilities on the ground and the need for the
international community to step up efforts to ensure
that the parties concerned respect the ceasefire in
good faith, in the interest of restoring full calm as soon
as possible.
The renewed confrontations last weekend within
and outside the Al-Aqsa Mosque point to continued
tensions in East Jerusalem. We once again urge all the
parties concerned to exercise restraint and refrain from
any moves that might escalate the situation.
Israel must genuinely put an end to violence, threats
and acts of provocation against the Muslim community,
maintain and respect the historical and current status
of Jerusalem as a religious holy site, cease evicting
Palestinians and halt all settlement activity.
The humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories is a matter of concern. Years of blockade in
Gaza, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
and, now, more than 10 days of clashes and turmoil
have conspired to plunge the over 2 million residents
of Gaza into dire straits. We call on the international
community to act without delay and provide
humanitarian assistance to Palestine through multiple
channels, as well as emergency funding support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We call on Israel
to facilitate humanitarian access and completely lift the
blockade on Gaza as soon as possible.
China will send $1 million in cash to Palestine
as emergency humanitarian aid, make a $1 million
donation to UNRWA and provide 200,000 doses of
COVID-19 vaccine. In addition, we will continue to do
whatever we can to help the Palestinian people in ways
that address their practical needs.
28/29

27/05/2021

The Palestinian-Israeli issue has been on the
agenda of the United Nations for more than 70 years.
Every time the Palestinian-Israeli situation is thrown
into turmoil, it is an alarm bell for the international rule
of law and justice, weighs on the human conscience
and tests the effectiveness of multilateral mechanisms.
The latest round of conflict once again reminds us
that we cannot afford to allow the Middle East peace
process to go off the rails, or to push the question of
Palestine to the margins, or to overlook the suffering of
the Palestinian people and their well-deserved rights,
or to forget the many binding resolutions adopted by
the Security Council or to shirk the responsibility the
Council must undertake.
While addressing the emergency meeting of
the Security Council on 16 May (see S/2021/480),
His Excellency Mr. Wang Yi, State Councilor and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, pointed out that
an enduring settlement can be achieved only on the
basis of the two-State solution. Only once the question
of Palestine is resolved in a comprehensive, just and
sustainable way will lasting peace and security for all
be truly achieved in the Middle East.
We must push the two parties to relaunch dialogue
on an equal footing at an early date, rebuild trust,
overcome their differences and find a way to live in
peace side by side. The international community, and
especially countries with influence on Palestine and
Israel, must take an objective and impartial position
and work hard to facilitate the Middle East peace
process, while enhancing international coordination
and strengthening the synergy for peace.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
As such, it must take robust actions to address the
Palestinian-Israeli issue and reaffirm its unwavering
commitment to and support for the two-State solution.
As a genuine friend of the Palestinian people,
China supports the resumption of peace talks between
Palestine and Israel on the basis of the two-State
solution as soon as possible. China supports the early
establishment of a fully sovereign, independent State of
Palestine on the basis of the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. That is the ultimate solution that
makes possible peaceful coexistence between Palestine
and Israel. We call on all parties in the international
community to uphold equity, justice, fairness and good
conscience, practice genuine multilateralism and make
21-13344

27/05/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

their due contributions to a just and lasting settlement
of the Palestinian question.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
As this is the last scheduled meeting of the
Council for the month of May, I would like to take
this opportunity to express the sincere appreciation of
the Chinese delegation to the members of the Council
and to the Secretariat for all the strong support and
assistance they have given us. It has been a busy month,
and one in which we have taken active measures on
the issues on the Security Council’s agenda and the
current serious challenges facing the international

S/PV. 8782

community in an effort to bring into play the role of
the Security Council, making unremitting efforts to
maintain world peace and security. We would like to
thank all delegations, representatives of the Secretariat,
including the technical support team, conference
officers, interpreters, translators, verbatim reporters
and security staff for their hard work, support and
positive contributions. In particular in the context
of the pandemic, their support was extended to us
after overcoming many difficulties, which we can all
imagine. Without their participation and contributions,
we could not have done it alone.
As China ends its presidency, I know I speak on
behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
Estonia good luck in the month of June.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

21-1334429/29
