II.

36/4.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Observer status for the African, Caribbean and
Pacific Group of States in the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the African. Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States for co-operation between the United Nations
and that organization,
I. Decides to invite the African, Caribbean and Pacific
Group of States to participate in the sessions and the work
of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary
action to implement the present resolution.
35th plenary meeting
15 October /98/

36/5.

The situation in Kampuchea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/22 of 14 November 1979 and
35/6 of 22 October 1980,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 35/6, 8
Welcoming the convening of the International Conference
on Kampuchea, held at United Nations Headquarters from
I 3 to 17 July 198 I, as a step forward towards a comprehensive political settlement of the Kampuchean problem,
Noting the joint statement issued in Singapore on 4 September 1981 by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Mr. Son Sann
and Mr. Khieu Samphan concerning their agreement, in
principle, to form a coalition, 9
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Kampuchea and resolution 1 (I) adopted by the Conference on 17 July 1981.
as contained in the report of the Conference, 10
Deploring that foreign armed intervention continues and
that foreign forces have not been withdrawn from Kampuchea, thus causing continuing hostilities in that country
and seriously threatening international peace and security.
Greatly concerned that the continuing deployment of foreign forces in Kampuchea near the Thai-Kampuchean border has heightened tension in the region,
Gravely disturbed that the continued fighting and instability in Kampuchea have forced more Kampucheans to flee
to the Thai-Kampuchean border in search of food and safety,
Recognizing that the assistance extended by the international community has continued to reduce the widespread
food shortages and health problems of the Kampuchean
people,
Emphasizing that it is the inalienable right of the Kampuchean people who have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries to return safely to their homeland.
Emphasizing further that no effective solution to the humanitarian problems can be achieved without a just and
lasting political settlement of the Kampuchean conflict,
Convinced that, to bring about durable peace in SouthEast Asia, there is an urgent need for a comprehensive
political solution to the Kampuchean problem which will
provide for the withdrawal of all foreign forces and ensure
respect for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and neutral and non-aligned status of Kampuchea,
as well as the right of the Kampuchean people to selfdetermination free from outside interference,
N36/583.
A/36/498-S/14687, annex. For the printed text, see Official Records
of the Security Council, Thirtv-sixth Year. Supplement for Julv, August
and September I 98 I.
·
0
'
A/CONF.109/5 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.81.1 20),
annexes I and II.
8
9

13

Com·incedfurther that, after the comprehensive political
settlement of the Kampuchean question through peaceful
means, the countries of the South-East Asian region can
pursue efforts to establish a zone of peace. freedom and
neutrality in South-East Asia so as to lessen international
tensions and to achieve lasting peace in the region,
Reaffirming the need for all States to adhere strictly to
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
call for respect for the national independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of all States, non-intervention and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States, nonrecourse to the threat or use of force, and peaceful settlement
of disputes,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 34/22 and 35/6 and calls for
their full implementation:
2. Reiterates its conviction that the withdrawal of all
foreign forces from Kampuchea, the restoration and preservation of its independence. sovereignty and territorial integrity, the right of the Kampuchean people to determine
their own destiny and the commitment by all States to noninterference and non-intervention in the internal affairs of
Kampuchea are the principal components of any just and
lasting resolution to the Kampuchean problem:
.1. Approves the report of the International Conference
on Kampuchea and adopts:
(a) The Declaration on Kampuchea, which includes
four elements of negotiations for a comprehensive political
settlement of the Kampuchean problem;
(b) Resolution 1 (I) in which the Conference, inter alia,
established the Ad Hoe Committee of the International Conference on Kampuchea:
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with. to
assist and to provide the Conference and the Ad Hoe Committee with the necessary facilities to carry out their
functions;
5. Authorizes the Ad Hoe Committee to convene during
regular sessions of the General Assembly in order to carry
out its tasks:
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to undertake
a preliminary study of the possible future role of the United
Nations, taking into account the mandate of the Ad Hoe
Com_mittee _a!1d the elements of negotiations for a comprehensive poht1cal settlement as set out in paragraph 10 of the
Declaration on Kampuchea:
7. _Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for takmg appropriate steps in convening the Conference:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the situation closely and to exercise his good offices in order to
contribute to a comprehensive political settlement;
_9. Deci~es to reconvene the Conference at an appropnate time m accordance with Conference resolution I (I):
10. Urges all States of South-East Asia and others concerned to attend future sessions of the Conference:
11. Requests the Conference to report to the General
Assembly on its future sessions:
12. Expresses its deep appreciation to donor countries,
the United Nations and its agencies and other national and
international humanitarian organizations which have rendered relief assistance to the Kampuchean people, and appeals to them to continue to assist Kampucheans who are
still in need, especially those along the Thai-Kampuchean
border and in the holding centres in Thailand:
13. Deeply appreciates the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in co-ordinating humanitarian relief assistance and
in monitoring its distribution, and requests him to continue
such efforts as are necessary to deal with the situation:
14. Urges the countries of South-East Asia, once a comprehensive political solution to the Kampuchean conflict is
