120

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

sions, in conjunction with relevant United Nations specialized agencies and multilateral development institutions, might suggest ways of
improving United Nations assistance efforts and enhancing their coordination in the context of the particular economic and social
development needs of each region.
175. At the sectoral level, the relevant specialized agencies, organs
and organizations of the United N ations will con tribute from the experience of their respective sectors to the process of review and appraisal at both the global and regional levels.
176. At the global level, review and appraisal will be carried out by
the General Assembly, with the assistance, as appropriate, of a body
of universal membership, which would report through the Economic
and Social Council. The process will take into account the results
achieved at the sectoral. regional and national levcls. The Committee
for Development Planning will be invited to submit its observations
and recommendations. The Secretary-Gencral will prepare and submit
a comprehensive report and other appropriate documentation in order
to assist the process of review and appraisal.
177. Developed countries, individually or through their relevant
organizations, are invited to transmit reports of lheir development assistance efforts in the light of the commitments undertaken by them in
the lnternational Development Strategy and in relevant international
forums.
178. The process of review and appraisal should, based on an assessment as provided for in General Assembly resoldion 33/201 of
29 January 1979, ensure that the operational activities of the United
Nations system con tribute effectively to the implementation of the International Development Strategy.
179. The review and appraisal will. at all levels, take into account
the results of the global negotiations relating to international
economic co-operation for development, the United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, the United Nations Conference on New and Renewable Sources of Energy, the International
Conference for the Promotion of International Co-operation in the
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, and of such United Nations conferences as effectively contribute to the implementation of the Strategy,
as well as the results of relevan! regional and interregional meetings.
The agreed results will be incorporated in the Strategy by the General
Assembly when and as appropriate. with a view to contributing to its
effective implementation.
180. The first review and appraisal will be carried out by the
General Assembly in 1984, on which occasion a decision as to the timing of a subsequent review or reviews will be taken.

35/57.

Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New lnternational
Economic Order, contained in its reso lu tions 3201 ( S- V 1)
and 3202 (S-VI) of I May 1974, and the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States, contained in its
resolution 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, which
laid down the foundations of the new international
economic order,
Bearing in mind article 34 of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and General Assembly rcsolution 3486 (XXX) of 12 December 1975, relating to
the review of the implementation of the Charter,
Concerned by the limited and partial progress in the
attainment of the aims and objectives established in the
resolutions on the new international economic order
and in the implementation of the provisions contained
in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of Sta tes
which are directed towards more just and equitable
economic relations and towards the structural changes
needed to promote the development of developing countries,
Reaffirming solemnly the determination to establish a
new international economic order,

Mindful of the great importance that the international
community attaches to the launching and successful
conclusion of the round of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development and to
the implementation of the International Development
Strategy for the Third U nited Nations Development
Decade, 41
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the assessment of the progress made in the establishment of the new international economic order and appropriate action for the promotion of the development
of developing countries and international economic cooperation, ''
1. Reaffirms the role of the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
lnternational Economic Order and of the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States as principal
sources for international economic co-operation for
development;
2. Urges Member States, in this context, to take ali
appropriate measures for the launching and successful
conclusion of the round of global negotiations and the
implementation of the lnternational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade;
3. Decides, in the light of the results of the negotiations on international economic co-operation for
development, to hold at its thirty-sixth session a comprehensive, in-depth review of the implementation of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, as
provided for in article 34 thereof.
83rd plenary meeting
5 December l 980
35 / 58.

Specific action related to the particular needs and
problems of land-locked developing countries

The General Assemb/y,
Reiterating the specific actions related to the particular needs of the land-locked developing countries
stated in resolutions 63 (111) of 19 May 1972," 98 (IV) of
31 May 1976"' and 123 (V) of 3 June 1979' 7 of the
United N ations Conference on Trade and Development,
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31 / 157 of
21 December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150of
20 December 1978 and 34/ 198 of 19 December 1979 and
other resolutions of the United Nations relating to the
particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly, its related organs and the
specialized agencies, emphasizing special and urgent
measures in favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the
sea, aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world
markets. and the great transit, transport and transshipment costs impose serious constraints on their
socio-economic development,
'' See resolution .15/56 above. annex.
"A/S-11/5 and Corr.1 and Add. I-3.
'' See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. Third Session, vol. l. Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.7.1.11.D.4), annex l.A.
"!bid.. Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D. IO and corrigendum). part one.
sect. A.
"!bid., Fifth Session, vol. l. Report and Annexes (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14). part one. sect. A
