United Nations

A/RES/64/147

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 67 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/437)]

64/147. Inadmissibility of certain practices that contribute
to fuelling contemporary forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 3
and other relevant human rights instruments,
0F

1F

2F

Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2004/16
of 16 April 2004 4 and 2005/5 of 14 April 2005 5 and relevant Human Rights Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 7/34 of 28 March 2008, 6 as well as General
Assembly resolutions 60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006,
62/142 of 18 December 2007 and 63/162 of 18 December 2008 on this issue and
resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December 2007 and 63/242
of 24 December 2008 entitled “Global efforts for the total elimination of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and the comprehensive
implementation of and follow-up to the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action”,
3F

4F

5F

Recalling also the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and the Judgement of
the Tribunal, which recognized, inter alia, the SS organization and all its integral
parts, including the Waffen SS, as criminal and declared it responsible for many war
crimes and crimes against humanity,

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
2

09-47065

*0947065*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/147

Recalling further the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 7 in
particular paragraph 2 of the Declaration and paragraph 86 of the Programme of
Action, as well as the relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference, of 24 April 2009, 8 in particular paragraphs 11 and 54,
6F

7F

Alarmed, in this regard, at the spread in many parts of the world of various
extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and
skinhead groups, as well as similar extremist ideological movements,
Recalling that the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly coincides with
the sixty-fifth anniversary of victory in the Second World War,
1.
Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration7 and of the
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference,8 in which States condemned
the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and violent nationalist
ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
0H

1H

Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur on
2.
contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, prepared in accordance with the request contained in General Assembly
resolution 63/162; 9
8F

3.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for her commitment to maintain the fight against racism as one of the
priority activities of her Office;
Expresses deep concern about the glorification of the Nazi movement
4.
and former members of the Waffen SS organization, including by erecting
monuments and memorials and holding public demonstrations in the name of the
glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism, as well as by
declaring or attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the
anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement participants in
national liberation movements;
Expresses concern at recurring attempts to desecrate or demolish
5.
monuments erected in remembrance of those who fought against Nazism during the
Second World War, as well as to unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such
persons, and urges States in this regard to fully comply with their relevant
obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949; 10
9F

6.
Notes with concern the increase in the number of racist incidents in
several countries and the rise of skinhead groups, which have been responsible for
many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic violence
targeting members of ethnic, religious or cultural communities and national
minorities, as observed by the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in his latest report;

_______________
7

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
9
See A/64/295.
10
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
8

2

A/RES/64/147

7.
Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified to fall within the scope of
activities described in article 4 of the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination3 and that they may represent a clear and
manifest abuse of the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association as
well as the rights to freedom of opinion and expression within the meaning of those
rights as guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
2H

3H

4H

8.
Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of
the countless victims of crimes against humanity committed in the Second World
War, in particular those committed by the SS organization and those who fought
against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and
poison the minds of young people, and that failure by States to effectively address
such practices is incompatible with the obligations of States Members of the United
Nations under its Charter and is incompatible with the goals and principles of the
Organization;
Also stresses that such practices fuel contemporary forms of racism,
9.
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the
spread and multiplication of various extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups;
10. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to put an end to the
practices described above, and calls upon States to take more effective measures in
accordance with international human rights law to combat those phenomena and the
extremist movements, which pose a real threat to democratic values;
11. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of
education, including human rights education, as a complement to legislative
measures, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur in his report to the General
Assembly;
12. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur regarding the
importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and human suffering
that resulted from the ideologies of Nazism and Fascism, especially in view of the
upcoming sixty-fifth anniversary of victory in the Second World War;
13. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed
at bringing communities together and providing them with space for genuine
dialogue, such as round tables, working groups and seminars, including training
seminars for State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising
activities, especially those initiated by civil society representatives which require
continued State support;
14. Underlines the potentially positive role that relevant United Nations
entities and programmes, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
15. Reaffirms that, according to article 4 of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, States parties to that
instrument are, inter alia, under the obligation:
(a) To condemn all propaganda and all organizations that are based on ideas
of racial superiority or that attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and
discrimination in any form;

3

A/RES/64/147

(b) To undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to
eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination with due regard to the
principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the rights
expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention;
(c) To declare as an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas
based on racial superiority or hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well
as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons
of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
(d) To declare illegal and prohibit organizations and organized and all other
propaganda activities that promote and incite racial discrimination and to recognize
participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable by law;
(e) To prohibit public authorities or public institutions, national or local,
from promoting or inciting racial discrimination;
16. Reaffirms also that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
should be prohibited by law, that the dissemination of ideas based on racial
superiority, hatred, acts of violence or incitement to such acts shall be declared
offences punishable by law, and that these prohibitions are consistent with freedom
of opinion and expression;
17. Underlines, at the same time, the positive role that the exercise of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression, as well as the full respect for the
freedom to seek, receive and impart information, can play in combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
18. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
to give serious consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a matter of
priority;
19. Recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution
2005/55 that the Special Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue, make relevant
recommendations in his future reports and seek and take into account in this regard
the views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
5H

20. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session and to the Human Rights Council, reports
on the implementation of the present resolution based on the views collected in
accordance with the request of the Commission on Human Rights, as recalled by the
Assembly in paragraph 19 above;
21. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that have provided
information to the Special Rapporteur in the course of the preparation of his report
to the General Assembly;
22. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to
cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in
paragraph 19 above;
23.

Decides to remain seized of the issue.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

4
