General Assemhly-:Fifth Session

14

2. Determines that for the realization of lasting
peace and security it is indispensable:
(I) That prompt united action be taken to meet
aggression wherever it arises;
(2) That every nation agree:
(a) To accept effective international control of
atomic energy, under the United Nations, on the basis
already approved 8 by the General Assembly in order to
make effective the prohibition of atomic weapons;
( b) To strive for the control and elimination, under
the United Nations, of all other weapons of mass
destruction ;
( c) To regulate all armaments and armed forces
under a United Nations system of control and inspection, with a view to their gradual reduction ;
(d) To reduce to a minimum the diversion for armaments of its human and economic resources and to strive
towards the development of such resources for the
general welfare, with due regard to the needs of the
under-developed areas of the world ;
3. Declares that these goals can be attained if all the
Members of the United Nations demonstrate by their
deeds their will to achieve peace.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.
381 (V).

Condemnation of propaganda against
peace

The General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 110 (II) and 290 (IV),
paragraph 8, which condemn all propaganda against
peace and recommend the free exchange of information
and ideas as one of the foundations of good-neighbourly
relations between the peoples ;
2. Declares that such propaganda includes:
( 1) h1citement to conflicts or acts of aggression;
( 2) Measures tending to isolate the peoples from
any contact with the outside world, by preventing the
Press, radio and other media of communication from
reporting international events, and thus hindering mutual comprehension and understanding between peoples;
( 3) Measures tending to silence or distort the
activities of the United Nations in favour of peace or to
prevent their peoples from knowing the views of other
State~ Members.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.

382 (V). Threats to the political independence
and territorial integrity of Greece

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the unanimous conclusions 8 of the
United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans con11 See resolutions 1 (I), 41 (I), 191 (III), 192 (III), 290
(IV) and 299 (IV).
'See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth SesJ'ion, Stt/>Plement No. 11.

cerning those members of the Greek armed forces who
were captured by the Greek guerrillas and taken into
countries north of Greece,

Having noted that, with the sole excepti~:m of \':u~oslavia the other States concerned are still detammg
these ~embers of the Greek armed forces without justification under commonly accepted international practice,

l. Recommends the repatriation of all those among
them who express the wish to be repatriated,
2. Calls upon the States concerned to take the necessary measures for the speedy implementation of the
present resolution,
3. Instructs the Secretary-General to request the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
League of Red Cross Societies to ensure liaison with
the national Red Cross organizations of the States concerned, with a view to implementing the present
resolution.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 10 of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans and having
noted that, although a certain improvement has taken
place in the situation on the northern frontiets of
Greece, there nevertheless remains a threat to the
political independence and territorial integrity of
Greece,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans;

2. Continues the Special Committee in being until
the sixth session of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of reference and administrative
arrangements contained in General Assembly resolutions 109 (II), 1.93 ((III) and 288 (IV), unless
meanwhile the Special Committee recommends to the
Interim Committee its own dissolution;
3. Authori::;es the Interim Committee to act on such
recommendation as it thinks proper.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
C

The General Assembly,
Noting with grave concern the reports11 of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League
of Red Cross Societies and of the Secretary-General,
and particularly the statement 12 that "not a single
Greek child has yet been returned to his native land
and, except for Yugoslavia, no country harbouring
Greek children has taken definite action to comply
with the resolutions unanimously adopted in two successive years by the General Assembly",
10 /bid.

11
12

See documents A/1480 and A/1480/Add.l.
See document A/1480, paragraph 17.

15

Resolutions adopted on reports of the First Committee

Recognizing that every possible effort should be
made to restore the children to their homes, in a humanitarian spirit detached from political or ideological
considerations,
Expressing its full appreciation of the efforts made
by the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the League of Red Cross Societies and by the Secretary-General to implement General Assembly resolutions 193 C (III) and 288 B (IV),
1. Requests the Secretary-General and the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League
of Red Cross Societies to continue their efforts in
accordance with the aforementioned resolutions ;
2. Urges all States harbouring the Greek children to
make all the necessary arrangements, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General and the international Red
Cross organizations, for the early return of the Greek
children to their parents and, whenever necessary, to
allow the international Red Cross organizations free
access to their territories for this purpose;
3. Establishes a Standing Committee, to be composed
of the representatives of Peru, the Philippines and
Sweden, to act in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral, and to consult with the representatives of the
States concerned, with a view to the early repatriation
of the children ;
4. Requests the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the League of Red Cross Societies to cooperate with the Standing Committee;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report from
time to time to Member States on the progress made
in the implementation of the present resolution, and
requests the international Red Cross organizations and
the Secretary-General to submit reports to the General Assembly at its sixth session.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
383 (V). Threats lo the political independence
and territorial integrity of China and to
the peace of the Far East, resulting from
Soviet violations of the Sino-Soviet Treaty
of Friendship and Alliance of 14 August
1945 and from Soviet violations of the
Charter of the United Nations
A

Decides to instruct the Interim Committee to continue inquiry on this question, in order to obtain more
information and facts having a direct bearing upon the
case if such findings are obtainable, and to report to
the General Assembly at its next regular session. The
records 14 of the discussion of the First Committee on
the case shall be made available to the Interim
Committee.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly
Decides to draw the attention of all States to the
necessity of complying faithfully with the recommendation contained in General Assembly resolution 291
(IV), the object of which is to promote the stability
of international relations in the Far East, and which
recommends specific principles for that purpose, including, inter alia, the principle of the scrupulous observance of the treaties in force when the resolution
was adopted, the purpose of which was to secure the
independence and territorial integrity of China.
314th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
384 (V). Intervention of the Central People's
Government of the People's Republic of
China in Korea
The General Assembly,
l "iewing with grave concern the situation in the Far
East,

,1nxious that immediate steps should be taken to
prevent the conflict in Korea spreading to other areas
and to put an end to the fighting in Korea itself, and
that further steps should thet, be taken for a peaceful
settlement of existing issues in accordance with the
Purposes and Principles of the United Nations,

Requests the President of the General Assembly to
constitute a group of three persons, including himself,
to determine the basis on which a satisfactory cease-fire
in Korea can be arranged and to make recommendations
to the General Assembly as soon as possible.

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Interim Committee, to which the
Assembly, during its fourth session, referred 13 the
complaint concerning "Threats to the political independence and territorial integrity of China and to the
peace of the Far East, resulting from Soviet violations
of the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance
of 14 August 1945 and from Soviet violations of the
Charter of the United Nations", has not yet submitted
recommendations thereon,

11

See resolution 292 (IV).

324th plenary meeting,
14 December 1950.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly, at the 325th
plenary meeting on 14 December 1950, announced the
constitution of a group consisting of the following persons: Mr. L B. Pearson (Canada), Sir Beneqal Rau
(India) and Mr. N. Entezam (Iran).
·

14 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Session, First Committee, 400th-404th meetings inclusive.
