UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

2579”

MEETING:

10 MAY

1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. ..*........................................
Provisionalagenda
(SIAgendal2579)

1

Adoptionof the agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Letterdated6May 1985fromthePermanent
Representative
of Nicaragua
to theUnited
Nationsaddressed
to the President
of the SecurityCouncil(S/17156).
.. ... .,... .. 1

SiPV.2579

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with f$rres. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the O&ial Records of the Securiry Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Aesolurions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adoptedbefore I January 1965,becamefully operative
on that date.

2579th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 10 May 1985, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Birabhongse KASEMSRI

(Thailand)

places reserved
Chamber.

Present: The renresentatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkiia Faso, China, Denmark,- Egypt,
France. India. Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. United States of
America.

I. Adoption of the agenda
Letter dated 6 May 1985 from the Permanent Rep
resentative of Nicaragua to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
iS117156)
The meeting

was called

to order

at the side of rhe Council

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Mutliz (Argentina),
Mr. Ott (German,
Democratic
Republic),
Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana),
Mr. Vongsay (Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic)
and Mr. Le Kim Chung (V&t
Nom) took the &ces- resewed for them at theside of
the Council Chamber.

at 11.30 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda

them

2. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to inform the Security Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Argentina, the German Democratic Republic, Guyana, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and Viet Nam. in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Provlslonal agenda (SIAgendal2579)

2.

jOr

was adopted.

tative of Nkaregua to the United Natlone addraaaed ta

3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
resume its consideration of the item on its agattda.
Members of the Council have before them do&ment
S/17172. which contains the text of a draft resolution
presented by Nicaragua.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken at the previous meetings on this item
[2577fh ard 2578th meefings].
I invite the represeatative of Nicaragua to take a place at the Council table:
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Bali.via, Brazil,
Colombia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Ethiopia, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Mexico, Mongolia, Poland. the United Republic
of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zimbabwe to take the
alaces reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

4. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the following documents also: S/17169,
letter dated 9 May 19g5 from the repreaeatatlve of
Uruguay to the President of the Security Council;
S/17170, letter dated 9 May from the representative of
Democratic Yemen to the Secmtary-oeneral; S/17171,
letter dated 9 May from the representative of Suriaeme
to the President of the Security Council; and s/17174.
letter dated 9 May from the representative of El Salvador to the Secretary-General.

Letter

dated 6 May

1985hm thePermanen
t Repreaes-

the Prealdent
of the seawhycouadi@/17lsa,

5. The first speaker is the representative of Burkina
Faso, and 1 now call on him.

AI the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Chamorro
Mora (Nicaragua)
took a place at the Council table;
Mr. Djoudi (Algerra),
Mr. Gumucio
Granier (Bolivia),
Mr. Maciel (Brazil),
Mr. Albcfn-Holguln
(Colombia),
Mr. Oramas Oliva (Cuba), M,r.*Moushoutas
(Cyprus),
Mr. Knippi,ng
Victorta (Do.muntca.!! ---pm
R- public), .Mr. A!bornoz (Ecuador).
Mr. Dinka (Ethiopia),
Mr. FqiordoMaldonado
(Guatemala),
Mr.
Rqiaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Reoublic of Iran), Mr. MuAoz Ldo (Mexico).
Mr.
Nyamdoo
(iongoija),
Mr.
Nowak
(Polandj;
Mr. Lweno (United Revublic
of Tanzania).
Mr. Golob
(Yugoslaviaj
and Mr. -Mudenie
(Zimbabwe)
took the

6. Mr. BASSOLE

(Burkina Faso) (Interpretation
delegation of Burkina Faao would
!ike !o congra!u!ate yott, Sir, on your assumption! &he
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We are convinced that, thanks to your far-sigbtedness and your qualities as a seasoned diplomat.
the
Security Council will be able to fultll its mandate
successfully. I wish also to thank your predecessor,
Mr. Javier Arias Stella of Petu. for the excellent

from

I

French):

The

work he accomplisheddurinn the month of April. We
undoubtedly owe the successifour work to his-wisdom
and tact; and particularly his profound knowledge of
international problems.

egationsof non-aligned
countriesadopteda communique[S//6773,annex]in whichthey reiteratedtheir
tit% condemnation
of theuseof economic
measures
as
a meansof exertingpoliticalandeconomicpressure
againstStates,in violationof theirsovereign
rightsand
decisions.

7. Nearly a year has elapsedsince the Securitv Council met to discuss the very disquieting situation-inCentral America. Those meetings [2.525rhto 2529th meetifigs] followed the mining of the ports and territorial
waters of Nicaragua, a brother country with which we
share the same ideals within the Movement of NonAligned Countries.

14. Thewisdomof manyof theauthorsof theCharter
neverceases
to astonishus.
15. A greatmanyreasons
havebeengivento justify
the UnitedStatesembargoagainstNicaragua
andthe
coerciveeconomicmeasures
that accompanyit. My
delegation
believesthat, asthe sayinggoes,he who
wishes
to drownhisdogaccuses
it of havingrabies.In
the nameof what kindof democracy
doesonespeak
andactthus?Is it that“democracy”inwhich25million
blacksbendbeneath
the yokeof apartheid imposed
by
the racistr6rdmein Pretoriaanddeclareto the world
theirhunger?orjustice.
freedomandindependence?
Or
is it that other“democracy”whichtheiniquitousSomoxaregimeimposedon-thevaliant peopleof Nicaraguafor somanyyears?

8. The very instructive and constructive debatethat
took place at that time gave reason for hope that the
Security Council would be able to make a positive
contribution to the search for a peaceful, negotiated
political solution to the problems that beset that subregion. We know what the result of that was: hope
vanished because a veto was cast.
9. It was therefore clear that a great deal remainedto
be done in order to reduce tension andto persuadethe
parties involved to abideby the principles of the Charter of the United Nations concerning the settlement of
disputes. My delegationwelcomes the efforts that have
been undertaken in that direction by the Contadora
Group, to which my country gives unswerving support.
We also welcome the reasonableandopen-mindeda. itude which the Government of Nicaragua has evinced
throughout the process.

16. TheSecurityCouncilmustdenounce
andcombat
not onlytheactthat hasbroughtustogethertoday,but
alsoandaboveahthetacitcomplicityof allthosePowerswhicharenolongerrestrainedby anykindof morality and sacrificeeverybodyto satisfytheir thirst
for conquestandworlddomination.In doingso,the
SecurityCounciiwill, we arequiteconvinced,protect
mankindfrom this doublestandardof justice,which

10. It is not our intention to rehearse to the Council
the background to the present situation in Latin Amerweak,the co& judgs oneto be rightor wrong.
ica. The reasons for the situation have been identifled by the representative of Peru in his statement 17. For us the solutionto the problemof Central
[2578th meeting)
andarestill freshin our memories. Americaliesnotin atrial of strengthbutin negotiation.
No coercivemeasure
can overcomethe will andthe
11. Thedevelopment
of thesituationinCentralAmer- determination
of a peopleto beIidly responsible
for its
ica,whichhasrecentlybeenmarkedby coerciveeco- destinv.That is why. in its resolution
38110.
of 1I N*
nomicmeasures
unexpectedly
adoptedby theGovern- vemb&1983:theG&era! Assemblyunequi&callyrementofthe UnitedStatesagainst
Nicaragua
leadsusto afumedthemalienable
rightof all thepeoples
of Cenwonderwhatis aoinnto hannento all theseefforts. tral Americato live in peaceandto decidetheir own
future, & from all outsideinterferenceor intervenon tradeandair andseacommunications
between&e tion. That is also why, in its resolution3914,of
two countries,will undoubtedly
bea heavyburdenfor 26October1984,it expressed
itssupportfor theefforts
of theContadora
Groupandurgedall interested
States
of theproblem,thisunilaterald&isiou,apartfromvia- to co-operate
fully withthe Groupthrougha frankand
latingtheprinciples
enunciated
in theCharter,hasfur- constmctivedialogue,in the convictionthat thatisthe
theraggravated
thesituationandthreatened
thealready bestpossibleway to bring abouta just andlasting
precarious
peaceandsecurityin theregion.
solutionto their differences.
12. Faithfulto theprinciples
of theMovement
of NonAlignedCountries,IJurkinaFasocondemns
anyform
of outsideinterferenceor intervention,whateverits
source.Gur positiononthr situationin CentralAmericaisin keepingwiththatof theSeventh
Conference
of
Headsof Stateor Governmentof Non-~ligttedCountries,heldat NewDelhiin March 1983.

18. In his statementof 8 May [25771/t meeting] the
representativeof Nicaraguainformedthe Security
Councilof the situationwhich his country is now
facing.He rearmed the willingness
of hisGovemmentto pursueits effortsto resume
thedialoguewith
theGovernmentof the UnitedStates,whichwe hope
will showthe samereadiness.

13. Morerecently,duringthethirty-ninthsession
of
the GeneralAssembly,theministers
andheadsof del-

19. TheSecurityCouncilmustdoeverythingpossible
to encourage
all partiesto takethat course.
2

20. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. 1 invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

article32of theCharterof EconomicRightsandDuties
of Statescontainedin GeneralAssemblyresolution
3281(XXIX) andto the principlesand -tiea of the
GeneralAgreement
onTariffsandTrade,particularly
paragraph
7(iii) of theMinisterialDeclaration
adopted
on29November1982by thecontractingpartiesto the
GeneralAgreement.Ii tramplesunderfbotGeneral
Assembly
resolution
39/2IO,entitled“Economicmeasuresas a meansof politicalandeconomiccoercion
againstdeveloping
countries’*,
which,inter alla, called
upondeveloped
countriesto

21. Mr. DINRA (Ethiopia): Let me begin, Sir. by
offering you the sincere felicitations of the Ethiopian
deiegationon your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May and extend to
you my best wishes for a successful term. May I also
extend the admiration of mv delegationto your nredecessor, the representative-of Pet%.Mr. Javier Arias
Stella.for the able manner in which he guidedthe work
of the Council last month.

“refrain fromthreateningor applyinetraderestrictions, blockades,embargoes
-&cl oiher economic
sanctions,
incompatible
with the provisionsof the
Charterof theUnitedNations. , . against
developing
countriesas a form of politicaland socialdevelopment”.

22. My delegationlistened with great attention to the
statement made by the representative of Nicaragua on
the afternoon of 8 May regarding the situation in Central America and the serious developmentsarising out
of the embargo which the United States recently
imposed against Nicaragua. Having also listened with
25. As iswellknown,Nicaragua
isa non-aligned
dc
equalattention to all the speakers yesterday afternoon velopingcountrywhosefragileeconomycontinues
to
[2578rhmeeting], mydelegation
isof theview thatthe
matterbeforetheCouncilisoneof graveconcernnot war imposed
uponit byexternalPowers.To helpmitlonly to thepartiesto theissue,but to theinternational
community
asawhole.Whatisat stakeisthechallenge andto assist
theGovernment
of Nicaragua
in itsreeonposedto the cardinalpreceptsof theCharterandthe structionefforts,the GeneralAssemblyadoptedrem+
very normsgoverninginter-Staterelations.The de- lution 39/204,in whichit urgedall Goveritmentato
cisionof the Councilin thematter,therefore,will indi- contributeto the reconstruction
anddevelopment
of
cate whetherthe world is headedfor the continued
supremacy
of theruleof lawor adarkageof bruteforce that “Nicaraguashould&&tue to &ive treatment
whereinchaosreigns.
appropriate
to thespecialneeds
ofthe countryuntilthe
economic
situationretumsto normal”.
23. The internationalcommunityis painfullyaware
that ever sincethe downfallof the Somozadictator- 26. In viewof that, it isinconceivable
to mydelegashipin Nicaraguathe valiantpeopleof that country tionthat sucha smalldeveMplng
countrycould~mrae
a
havebeenfacedwithcriticalchallenges
to theirinalleti- threatto any of it.; neighbours.
let aloneto a superable right to choosethe form of govemmer under Power.It is indisputable,
on the otherhand,that the
whichthey wantto live. Externalinterference
in the tradeandeconomic
embargoda&red by the United
internala&in of Nicaraguawith the aimof destabi- Statestotallynegates
theletterandaphitofthat naolullzingandeventuallyoverthrowhtgthepopularlyelec- tkm. Wethereforedeplorethetradeembargo
lmpoaad
by the UnitedStatesagaiaatNicaragua.
of the day. To thisend, Nica&uan portshavebeen
blockadedand mined,whilemercenaries
havebeen 27. TheissuebeforetheCotmelliscry&Mar. Carorganized,trained,financed,equippedandinfiltrated dlnalprhtciplesoftbeCharteraadofM&mmMmd
into Nicaragua
to murderinnocentpeopleanddestroy arebeingsystematically
Y&ted. mtemotivebet!E
theeconomic
andsocialinfrastructure.
Furthermore,
a thoseViolationsisalsoequallyclear.lt isto mtUlfythe
sophisticated
formof pressure
andintimidationispur- ~vmiendecisionafthepeopleaPNicaresueaadoversuedthroughthenever-ending
militarymanoewres
by throwtheireleetedGovemmeat.No amountofobfustheUnitedStatesvery closeto theNicamguan
border, uuion canhidethat truth. Indeed,it wasthe cl&y
thuscreatinganever-present
threatof directinvasion. of the issues
underdiscussion
andth& &a&ance
It is in the context of thosecontinuingattemptsto in the relationsbetweenStatesat largethat pmmpted
reversetherevolutionaryprocess
in Nicaragua,
asmall the Statesmembers
of the Movementof Non-Aligned
non-aligned
developingnation,that the recentdeci- Countriesto take the positionspeltout in the comsionof theUnitedStatesGovernment
declaring
a trade muniqu6of theMovement’s&o&mtmg Eureaureandeconomic
embargo
againstNicaragua
mustbecon- leasedon 7 May 1985[S/f7163.annal.
sidered.
28. The questionthat remainsto be answeredis
24. That actionof the UnitedStatesAdministration whetherthe SecurityCouncilwill riseto thechallenge
is. tirst andforemost,in violationof bilatentlagree- orremainimpotentin thefaceof suchunwarranted
acts
mentsbetweenthe UnitedStatesandNicaragua,
par- of interference
andcoercionagainstasmallStateMemticularlytheTreatyof Friendship,
Commerceand
Nav- berof theUnitedNations,It isthe hopeof mydelegaigation,whichis still in force, It is alsocontraryto tion that theCouncilwill act with courageandresolve
3

commensurate
with the crisis, with a view to redeeming
its own credibility,
which will enable it to continue
serving effectively
the interests of peace and security
in the contemporary
international
system, whose very
fabric is being threatened
by creeping anarchy.
29. Nicaragua
has demonstrated
its good faith to the
international
community
beyond
any doubt
by
accepting without reservations
the Contadora
Act. and
it continues to co-operate
closely with the Contadora
Group, which persistently
seeks the establishzrent
of a
framework
of peace and co-operation
between tile nations of Central America.
Hoping for a peaceful solution to outsuutding
uroblems
betweeu
itself and the
United States, Nicaragua
participated
in bilateral talks
at Manxanillo,
Mexico,
until the talks were unilaterally
discontinued
by the United States. Nicaraguadeserves
the recognition
and appreciation
of the international
community
for those peaceful efforts on its part.
30. The Government
and people of socialist Ethiopia
note with admiratior,
tbe determination
of the Govemment and people oi Nc‘i -‘arma to protect the gains of
their revolution
sru! ;hc ter,:torial
intr.xritv
of their
motherland
against Z “r: fir;res :.li” d;%unaiioti,
reaction
and counter-revolution,
ruid r&ttm
once again their
support for and fraternal solr:!~ it) -.t it!t rhe Nicaraguan
people in their struggle. We alsu congratulate
the Govand
in the pursuliof
ihe peaceful ;:solution
oidisputes
their continued
commitment
to international
legality.
We are confident
that those efforts by Nicaragua
will be
crowned by impressive
victories.
3 I. The Government
of Ethiopia is convinced
that the
Contadora
process is thb only path that will lead to
peace, security and development
in Central America,
end it fully supports the efforts of the ContadoraGroup.
32. In conclusion,
Mr. President,
I should like to
thank you and, through you, the other members of the
Council for acceding so readily to my delegation’s
request to address the Council on this important
item.
33. The PRBSIDENI?
The next speaker is the representative
of Cyprus.
I invite him to take aplace at the
Council table and to m&e his statement.
34. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus):
I should like first
to congratulate
you warmly.
Sir, on your assumption
of
the presidency
of the Security
Council for the month
of May and to thank you and your colleagues
on the
Council for allowing
us to participate
in the debate.
We are co&dent
that under your most able guidance
this body will discharge its responsbilities
effectively
and successfully.
I should like to take this opportunity to express to your predecessor,
Mr. Javier Arias
Stella of Peru, my deleption’s
appreciation
of the
excellent manner in which ne conducted
the Council’s
proceedings
during the month of April.
35. The situation in Central Americaand
in Nicaragua
in particular
has be~e Lonsidered
i-epearedly
by the

Security
Concil
and Ge-teral
Assembly
and by the
Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries-by
the latter as
recently as 7 May at the meeting of its Co-ordinating
Bureau in New York.
36. The Security Council, by its resolution 530 (1983),
reatllrmed,
inter aLa, the right of Nicaragua
and of all
other countries of the area to live in peace and security
free from outside interference.
In that same resolution
the Council commended
the efforts of the Contadora
Group and appealed
to the interested
States to cooperate fully with that Group so as to resolve their
differences.
37. Moreover,
the General
Assembly
in resolution
38/lO of II November
1983 reaBirmed,
inter alia, the
right ofall the countries in the Central American
region
to live in peace and to decide their own future free from
all outside interference
or intervention.
It afllrmed that
respect for the sovereignty
and independence
of all
States of the region was essential for ensuring the security and peaceful coexistence
of the countries of Central
America,
and at the same time it expressed support for
the efforts of the Contadora
Group.
38. We regret to note that, despite such resolutions,
decisions
and declarations
which reflect the overwL,lming
wish of the international
community,
the
situation
in the region is deteriorating.
The fact that
the Government
of Nicaragua
has felt it necessary
to
brhtg the matte. before the Security
Council
many
times during the past two years is deeply disturbing
and
evidences
the degree of gravity
which Nicaraaua
attributes to such negative developments.
The representative of Nicaragua,
Mr. Chamotro
Mora, explained the
extent of the new hostile economic measures and acts
of subversion
launched against his country.
We fullv
comprehend
the seriousness
of the situation and, in a
non-aligned
spirit of solidarity,
share Nicaragua’s
grave
concern.
39. The Government
of the Republic of Cyprus has
persistently
and consistently
advocated
and abided by
the principle
that bilateral,
regional and international
problems
must be solved peacefully,
by negotiation,
not by recourse to the threat or use of force, and that
the sovereignty,
lttdependence,
territorial
integrity and
unity of all countries
must be fully respected.
Thus. in
his address to the Seneral Assembly
on 3 October 1983
on the situation in Tentral America,
the Resident
ofthe
Republic of Cyprus,
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou.
said:
“We follow
with grave concern
the events in
Nicaragua
and other countries
in Central
America
and sincerely hope that efforts within and outside the
United
Nations;
including
those of the Contadora
Group,
wiii succeed. What is of paramount
importana
is that the right of all States in the region to
independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
be fully respected,
as well as the sovereign
tight of
the peoples of the region to choose freely their own
oolitical,
economic
and social systems without
any
foreign interference.”

46. Once again the Security Council is called upon to
consider an extremely
serious situation
which obtains
in this part of the world as a result of further subversive
action on the part of the United States. The imposition
by Washington
of trade and other sanctions
against
Nicaragua indicates once again that the United States is
by no means anxious to seek a genuine settlement
of
Central American
nroblems and is trying at all cost. and
in defiance
of generally recognized
norms of international law, to force the Government
and the people of
Nicaragua
to give up their independent
path of development.

40. Cyprus,
a non-aligned
country
sharing common
aspirations with many Latin American
countries, unreservedly
supports General Assembly
resolution
39/4,
on the peace efforts of the ContadoraGroup.
and pays a
tribute again to the efforts made by the four members of
the Group to bring about a just and lasting solution to
the problem of Central America based on the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. At the same time, we endorse the recent communique of the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries
on the situation in Crentral
America
[S/1716,?, annex], in which the Bureau “reiterated its firm solidarity
with Nicaragua and called for
an immediate end to all threats, attacks, hostile acts and
coercive
economic
measures
against the people and
Government
of that country”.

47. The latest actions of the United States Administration are a violation
of the existing United StatesNicaragua
Treaty of Friendship,
Commerce
and Navigation, the Charter
of the United
Nations and the
charter of the Organixation
of American
States. These
subversive
activities
run completely
counter to a number of important
documents
approved
by the General
Assembly,
such as the Declaration
on principles
of
International
Law concerning
Friendly
Relations
and
Co-operation
among States in accordance
with the
Charter of the United Nations [resolution
2625 (XXV),
uanex], the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of
States [resolution 3281fXXfXJl
and the De&ration
and
Programme
of Action on the Establishment
of a New
International
Economic
Order [resolurion
3201 (§-VI)
and 3202 (S-WJ], as well as all the universally
recognized norms in established
international
practice.

41. My delegation
hopes that the Security
Council,
which is primarily
entrusted
with the maintenance
of
international
peace and security, wig exert every effort
to achieve, finally, an immediate end to the hostilities in
the region and to the threats directed against the sovereignty,
independence
and territorial
integrity
of
Nicaragua.
4%. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation from Russian): First, I should
like to welcome
you, Sir, to the responsible
post of
President of the Security
Council and wish you every
success in your work. I also wish to express our thanks
to your predecessor,
Mr. Arias Stella, who so skiIfuUy
and tactfully
discharged
the duties of Resident
of the
Council last month.

48. As history has proved,
a policy of economic diktat, bIackmail
and threats is fraught with very serious
consequences
which run counter to the interests and
progress of mankind and involve a further deterioration
of the international
climate,
in the final anelysis constituthtg a threat to universal
peace and security.

43. At this time the fortieth anniversary
of the historic
victory over fascism and naxism is behtg widely commemorated,
a victory
that was achieved
by the joint
efTorts of the countries of the anti-HitIer
coalition.
The
Soviet Union made a decisive contribution
to that vic-

49. Recently
we have been seeing that arbitrary
and
dkcriminatow
sanctions
are beim used aminst the
deveMping
c&ntries
in order to ca&e them&cutontic
difftcuhies
and thus ro “punish”
them for certain acts
thatarenottothelikingoftheimperialiste.Whcnsvera
devaloning
country
chooses the indenendent
gatb of
develoimt&tt
and ih the exorcise of itasover&nty
naticmakes
the property
of foreign mono@ks,
it may

pe&e f&t&
side by side with the
Union in the
Fames of the Second World War. The victory
indeed
cost us dear. One out of every six inh&ants
of the
UkrainelaiddownhisBfeforthefreedomandhtdependence of his motherIand
and for the kiiott
of other
peoples t?om the yoke of fascism.
44. Unfortunately,
the main lesson of the Second
World War-that
States must strive for peace &kctively, with respect for each other’s so&reignty
and
independence-is
beii
more and more frequently
forgotten today by those who subordinate
everything
to
their ambition for world hegemony.

securhtg
the hrvuhmrability
of foreign
political
and
economic poshions
in particular
countries
and at preventing progressive
so&I and economic reforms, thus
maintainingthosecountrkshtastateofeconomk
depend=Y.
50. Simply because the present Government
of Nicaragua; which was dected by the peopk af that courttry, chose the democratic
and independent
path of
development-a
choice that dit not suit the United
States-the
United States has openly set itseIfthe
task
of topplhg
the lega! Government
of Nicaragua.
In
choosing the means to achieve this end, the United
States Administration
did not shrink even from dii

45. A typ~ka! exantpk
in the &ration
prevailing
in
Central America. To serve its ambitions,
Washington,
in pursuing a policy of State terrorism
and subve&ive
activity agahtst other States and propks,
has for many
years now been aggravating
the situation in that area
and virtually
waging an unde&red
war against a smaR
non-aligned
country.
5

to support the efforts of the Contadora Group and the
first to express its willingness to affix its signature to
the Contadora Act on Peaceand Co-operation in Central America. The Government of Nicaragua has proclaimeda liberal amnesty for all those who cease their
counter-revolutionary activity. It has consistently
taken a constructive position at the Nicaragua-United
States talks at Manzanillo. which were broken off by
the United States, and favoured their resumption.

intervention in the internal affairs of countries in that
reaion or from the onen threat of force or the oolicv of
State terrorism. We have only to recall the mining of
Nicaraguan ports by Central IntelligenceAuency (CIA)
agentsrthe diversionary American-assistance given by
the CIA to terrorists and mercenary bands and other
openly hostile actions of the United States against that
country, which were referred to in the statement made
by the representative of Nicaragua in the Security
Council on 8 May [2577rhmeeting].

55. Such a constructive attitude on the part of Nicaraguais the only way in which Central American problems can be resolved-the path of negotiations,taking
into account the legitimateinterests of all parties with
full respect for their sovereignty.

51. World publicopinion is deeplyconcernedover the
rangeand possible consequencesof this policy in internationaleconomic relations as a whole, and in particular in Nicaragua, and demandsits immediatecessation.
The heads of State or Government of Non-Alinned
Countries, at their Seventh Conference, held at hew
Delhi in March 1983,reiected all forms of economic
aggression, the use of threats in commerce, and all
types of blockades andcoercive measures or blackmail
as a means of exerting political pressure against nonalignedand other deveiopingcountries. They reiterated
the right of all States fully to exercise national sovereignty and to choose whatever social and economic
systems they felt best served their own development
goals.

56. The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic stands
squarely behind Nicaragua’s just struggle againstimperialism’s aggressive inroads and supports its inalienable
right to free and democratic development. We vigorously condemn the United States escalation of intervention in Central America andits subversive activities
against Nicaragua, and we believe that the Security
Council should take steps that will leadto the cessation
of these acts of aggression and subversion agaiust that
country.

52. The General Assembly, in resolution 39/2lO
appealedto countries to “refrain from threatening or
applying trade restrictions, blockades, embargoes and
other economic sanctions, incompatiblewith the provisions of theCharter of the United Nations”. The most
recent hostile acts committed by the United States
againstNicaraguaquite clearly indicatewhy the United
States voted againstthat resolution, which was supported by 1I6 States.

57. Mr. RABETAPIKA (Madagascar)(interpretation
French):
I am sure you will readily understandmy
personal satisfaction, Sir, at seeing you presiding over
the work of the Security Council becauseof the friendship that has existed between us for some time. I should
also like to avail myself of the opportunity to say how
much I value the political sense and exquisite courtesy
to which we have-allbecomeaccustom&l. To our Pre&
ident for the month of April, Mr. Arias Stella, I should
like on behalf of my delegation to pay him a sincere
tribute and to express our thanks for the sure-handed,
well-thought-out and responsible way in which he directed our work. We expected no less of a person who
was kind enough to make availableto us his political
experience and humanistic qualities.

fiotn

53. In their communiqueof 7 May this year, the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries vigorously condemned the actions of the
United States and emphasii that
“these new acts of political and economic coercion,
ib addition to the military action, are to be seenin the
context of a larger plan to destabii and topple the
Government of Nicaragua and that they further endanger peace and security in the region.” [See
SII 7163,annex.]

58. It has becomea commonplaceto say that in recent
decades most Central American countries have had to
suiTer social, economic and political injustice and that
the situation there becomes more and more precarious
as long as it remains subject to the caprices of intemational circumstances. The judgements that we can
make about the underlying reasons for tha? crisis differ according to our ideologies, our options, our systems of values and the solidarity we share with others.
Nevertheless it is a real crisis and it has, unfortunately,
becomea virtually permanentfeature and has lost none
of its acuteness. In less than three years the Council has
taken up the matter nine times, while the Contadora
Group. despite all the demands and counterdemands,
has been trvine to get all the parties inside and outside the region to accept a political and contractual
ftamework within which normalization and stabilization of relations amongthe states concerned would be
achieved.

S4. It is extremely significant and suggestive that, at
approximately the sametime that Washington was proclaimingits measures aimedat aggravatingthe situation
in and around Nicaragua and in Central America as a
whok, in Managuaa series of measures was also proclaimedwhich wer? directly aimedat creating a climate
of peaceand mut;lal trust in the area and which are a
logicalcontinuation of the peace-loving policiesof the
Government of Nicaragua, something which was also
very cogently stated by the representative of Nicaragua in his statement. Unfortunately, Washington has
turned down any constructive proposal put forward by
the Nicaraguan Government. The latter was the first
6

59. At first sight there should be no divergency among
us since we all. whether here at the United Nations, in
the Movementof Non-Aligned Countries or in the Contadora Group, base our beliefs on the same premises
and the same tenets, which it is essential for us to
respect if we want peace,understandingand co-operation, political and economic stability and security and
coexistenceto prevail in Central America. The fact that
there is some imbalance between these various elements and that sometimes they are perceived according
to nationalinterests-and we witness accusations and
touter-accusations, including the recent complaint by
Nicaragua againstthe United States the Council is now
considering-merely serves to illustrate this point.

expressing our commitment to certain principles, our
desire tc preserve ajust andcoherent internationallegal
and economic orde:. our solidarity with Nicaraguaand
our support for the efforts of the Contadora Group.
Indeer’, the vicissitudes of the Central American crisis
confirm our belief that there can be only a political and
negotiated solution if we wish to see the triumph of
those principles and those commitments contained in
the draft agreementsubmitted to the States concerned.
64. That is also why we support the draft resolution
submitted by Nicaragua, for it contains the essential
elements to which the Council has the right and the
duty, in this particular case, to draw the attention of all
parties concerned, that is: the necessity for respect for
international law; the needfor relations of friendship
and co.operation amongStates, in accordance with the
Charter; the pre-eminence of dialogueover direct or
indirect confrontation; and, finally, the peaceful settlement of disputes.

60. The Council cannot overlook nor treat lightly
the matter of trade and economic sanctions. The nonalignedcountries have learnedthis to their cost whenever they have attempted to call for the applicationof
such sanctions to the Pretoria r&ime, whose apartheid
policy has, after all. been universally condemnedand
rejected.

65. If there is no desire to be mindful of these elements, we fear that the Contadom process is now

61. If we are to abide strictly by the Charter and the
solemn declarations and reshuiions adopted by the
United Nations, we wonder whether Nicaraaua ouaht
to be punished because it has decided its oh f&e
without any foreign interference under any pretext or in
any context. Is it not true. accordillp to the Declaration

replace it. Nicaragua will therefore be quite right to
come before the appropriate international bodies to
seek the necessary arbitration, and we shall be conin Central Am&a takes on such dimensionsthat it will
be beyond our control and undoubtedly endanger reglonal and international peace and security.

in the Internal Affairs of States, annexed to General
Assembly resolution 36003, that it is

66. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Bolivia. I invite Mm to take a placeat the
Council table and to make his statement.

“The duty of a State, in the conduct of its international relations in the economic, social, technical
and trade fields, to refrain from measures which
would constitute interference or intervention in the
internal or external affairs of another State, thus
preventing it from determining freely its political,
economic and social development”?

Mr. GUMUCIO GRANIER (Bolivia) (interpreruMr. President,my delegation
thanksyoufor having&en ustheopporrunityto take
part in this meetingto considera matterthat is of
concernto my country, respectfulas it is of internationallaw and a staunchsupporterof peaceand
collectivesea&y. I wishalsoto expressour satisfacticmat seeinn
YOU. Sir. nresidii over the Council.At
thesamet&i eipreii ourgra%tude
to the re~resentativeof Peruandhisdelegation
for theskilfulat&lance
of thedeliberations
of 6 CounciIlastmonth:
67.

rion from Spun&h):

internationallaw which state; that “no State mayipply
measures to constrain another Staie to subordln& the
exercise of its sovereign rights and to 0btaIn from it any
kind of advantagewhatsoever”?
62. It is thereforedl&ult to agreethat the trade sanctions decreed by the United States agahsst Nicaragua
and the embargoes on air and sea traffic do not contravene these principles-some of which, we should
recall, were solemnly reaffhmed at the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Grganizatiot+and it is also difficult
to agreethat invoking the concept of nationalsecuritv is
a suflicient argument to justify them. We deeply regret
this step and believe that the Council cannot give its
approval to the measures tIowittg therefrom.

68. Fiist, 1wishto readoutthestatement
issued
ln La
Pazon 8 May by theGovernmentof Bolivia:
[The speaker read the text contained
document
Sil718!2.]

in the annex

to

69. The Governmentof Bolivia hason manyoecasionspublicly demonstrated
its concernabout the
CentralAmericansituation.For instance.
at thethbtyseventhsession
of the GeneralAssembly,the ConstitutionalPresident,Hem&nSilesZuazo.said:“The
gravecrisisaffectingthe brothercountriesof Ceutral
Americais a causeof deepconcernfor my Government.Tension,threatsandescalating
violenceareall

63. The same considerations led the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
on 7 May to adopt a communiqut [S/17163, onner]
7

factors in the conflict which is developing”.’ incmasingly weakening the foundations of peace. The President added that the peoples of Central America had
already suffered too much under totalitarian regimesto
have to suffer the horrible scourge of war.

edly wouldtake placesubsequently
in other Latin
Americancountries
weresocio-economic
changes
that
hadto be understood
in a broadhistoricalcontext.

75. For the countriesof the region,peaceandcollectivesecuritycan be basedonly on the principles
70. Furthermore, the Government of Bolivia has in of inter-American
andinternational
law.TheCharterof
many forums expressed its solidarity with the Governthe UnitedNations,the charterof the Grganization
ment and people of Nicaragua in their efforts to carry
of AmericanStatesandmanyotherlegalinstruments
out fully the process of their liberating revolution,
enshrine
therightof thepeoples
to self-determination.
which entails the establishmentof a democratic, plural- non-intervention
in domestic
alfairsandrespectfor the
istic system and of a mixed economy system, guaran- territorialintegrityandpoliticalandeconomic
indepenteeinga more equitabledistribution of incomeso that a denceof States.I mustspecificallymentionthe Decnew society may be built on the basis of genuineparlarationon Principles
of InternationalLawconcerning
ticipation by the people.
FriendlvRelations
andCo-operation
amongStatesin
accord&e with the Chartedof the UnitedNations,
71. MY Government.for thosereasons,hascon- adoptedbyGeneralAssemblyresolution2625(XXV);
stantlysupported
theprocess
undertaken
by theCon- the-Declaration
on the Inadmissibility
of Intervention
tadoraGroup;webelievethat it is theonly validand and Interferencein the Internal Affairs of States,
stillviableoption,withintheLatinAmericanfamily,in adoptedby Assemblyresolution36/103;the Manila
thequestfor realandspecificsolutionsto theCentral Declaration
onthePeacefulSettlement
of International
Americanconflict. The realmeaning
of Contadorais Disputes,
adoptedby Assemblyresolution37110;
and.
that it is a genuinereply of the region,withoutthe finally, Assemblyresolution39/210,adoptedat the
participationor distortionentailedby interference
by lastsession.
In all thoseresolutions
anddeclarations
protagonists
fromoutsidetheregion.
the principlesof the coexistenceof Statesare reaffirmed;someof themprovidethat Statesmustabstain
72. Bolivia,whichin 1952underwent
a profoundso- fmmthe threator the useof traderestrictions.blockcialtransformation
achievedthroughtheestablishment
of a modelof a nationalliberatingrevolution,fully incompatible
with the provisions
of theCharterof the
understands
thepresent
difftcultiesinCentralAmerica, UnitedNationsandinfringebilateralcommitments.
difficultieswhicharetheresultof socialtensions
arising
fromtheattemptto overcomeinjusticeandbackward- 76. For thosereasons,
my Governmentdeplores
the
nessthroughthebuildingof a morejust andequitable decision
of theUnitedStatesGovernment
to impose
an
order.
economicandtradeembargo
agahtstthe Republicof
Nicamgna.That actioncan only increaseevenmore
73. Theexperience
of theBolivianrevolutionalsohas the sufferingof the penpIeof Nicaragua,the victim
enabled
usto realizethat theestablishment
or strength- of theSomozadictatorship,oneof theworstandmost
eningof basicinstitutionstakesa certainamountof shameful
everto havebeenseenin LatinAmerica.We
timeandrequiresthe right atmosphere.
It is worth- alsourgethe UnitedStatesandNicaragua
to resume
while mentioning
that duringthe early yearsof the diiogtte andnegotiation
in thecontextof international
Bolivianrevolutiontherewerecertainsectorswithin law and, in particular, the legalnormsthat havebeen
andoutsidethecountrythatrejectedtherevolutionand created and perfectedin Latin Americanlaw.
conspired
againstit. At that time. they eventried to
imposean economicblockadeandto jeopardii the 77. The PRESIDENT:The next speakeris the repfreetransitofgoods,takingadvantage
ofthe structural resentative
of Mottgolia.I invite himto takea placeat
problems
that Boliviawasexperiencing
because
of its theCounciltableandto makehisstatement.
maritimeisolationresultingfromanunjustwarofconquest.Today. 33yearsafter the epicevent of April
78. Mr. NYAMDOD (Mongolia)(inrerpreration from
1952,the revolutionarychanges
areirreversible;they Russian): I sincerelycongnuulateyou, Sir, on your
arethe basisof thenewnationalState.
assumption
of the Presidency
of the SecurityCouncil
for themonthof May andwishyoueverysuccess
in the
74. I mustnote that thosewho opposedthe revo- performance
of your duties.1shouldalsolike to take
lutionary changesin Bolivia-that is, the counter- thisopportunityto thankyour predecessor,
Mr. Arias
revolutionaries-knocked
on the doorsof Govem- StelIa,the representative
of Pent, for all he did as
>..!a--’
-f-t.
..:I lr..
*IQ
mentsof neighbouring
countriesandsoughtaidfrom
CSWDL
v t K Secittiy Count,.
,-. ..sa
....n....
them,includingthe UnitedStates.Fortunately,they
cyerenot head, andhereI mustcommentthat in the 79. The supsrecentlytaken by the UnitedStates
caseof the UnitedStatesthe wiseandtimely advice Administration
againstthe Republicof Nicaragua,in
givenby Mr. Milton Eisenhower,
whorecentlydied, particularthe comprehensive
tradeembargoandthe
wasvery important.He pointedout to theAdministra- cessation
of air andseacommunications
betweenthe
tion in Washington
that thedeepsocialchanges
that two countries,haverightly beenjudgedby intemawerebeingexperienced
by Boliviaandthat undoubt- tionalpublicopinionto becrudeactsof coercionand
8

blackmail that are at variance with the norms of the
internationallegaland economic orders.
80. It is no secret that from the first days ofthe victory
of the Sandinist revolution in Nicaragua the United
States has been taking various steps to destabilizethe
situation in that country and to overthrow its legitimateGovernment. To that end it has beencarrying out
increased financing and training of Somozist bands,
supplyingthem with the most modemtypes of weapons
and directing criminal subversive and terrorist activities against Nicaragua and its peaceful populatiou.
Recently that Administration has been stepping up its
hostile and aggressive acts against the Republic of
Nicaragua. It has beenescalatingits military presence
in Central America and expanding its intervention in
the affairs of the countries of that area. All this has
seriously underminedthe efforts of the world community and the Contadora Group to bring about a peaceful settlement of the Central American problem and
created a direct threat to the sovereignty and independence of Nicaragua and to peace and security in the
region.
81. The measures of economic pressure adopted by
the United States therefore represent a further dangerous escalationof its interventionist policies against
Nicaragua. Judgingby what we learn from the United
States pr.:ss, these measuresare only the beginningof
anevenmore far-reachingaggressiveplanon the part of
Washington.
82. This situation has caused serious alarm in the
internationalcommunity. As the Council is aware, the
Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement
adopted a short time ago a communiqu6 [S/17163,
annex] vigorously condemningthe steps taken recently
by Washington and its aggressive policy towards Nicaragua.
83. The Mongolian People’s Republic, in keeping
with its policy in favour of peace, totally rejects any
policy of diktat directed againstsovereign, independent
States. The unilateral imposition by the United States
of an embargo on trade and economic relations is a
gross violationof the Charter of the United Nations, the
fundamentatprinciples and norms of internationallaw
and specific obligations undertaken by the United
States both bilaterally and multilaterally.
84. The Mongolian People’s Republic fully supports
the position of the Government of Nicaragua as set

forth in the statement made by Mr. Chamorro Mora in
theSecurityCouncilon Wednesday
[2577rhmeefing].
We believethat the Councilshouldvigorouslycondemntheillegalactsof the UnitedStatesanddemand
the immediate
endingof all aggressive
acts by the
United Statesagainsta sovereignand independent
StateMemberof this Grganization,the Republicof
Nicaragua.At the sametime,the Councilshoulddo
everythingpossible
toencourage
theeffortsbeingmade
by theContadora
Groupto find a peacefulsolutionto
the problemsof the CentralAmericanregionandto
establish
lastingpeacein that part of the world.
85. The MongolianPeople’sRepublichas consistentlysupported
theGovernment
andueodeoffriendly
Nicaragua.
Thispolicywasreiteratedmthedeclaration
madeby the Ministry for ForeignAlfairs on 22April,
whichwasrecentlyissued
in anofftcialGeneralAssembly document.
A/40/269.It states,inter alia:
“If the UnitedStatesisreallyinterestedin establishingpeacein CentralAmerica,it shouldfast refrainfromattempts
to strangle
theSandiistpeople’s
revolution,ceaseitspolicyof Stateterrorismagainst
Nicaraguaandresumethe talks with that country
whichit brokeoff.
“The MongolianPeople’sRepublicfully and
whole-heartedly
supports
boththejuststruggle
of the
Nicaraguanpeople,who are defendingtheir freedom,independence
andrevolutionaryachievements
fromtheencroachments
of imperialism
andreaction,
andthe peaceinitiativesof theGovernment
of Niearaguaaimedat fmdinga peacefulsolutionto the
problemof CentralAmerica.
“The MongolianPeople’sRepublicf&y de
mands
that theUnitedStatesAdministration
should
stopits criminalactivities,whichamountin effect
to an undeclared
war againstthe Republicof Nicaragua.”
The meeting

rose at 12.40 p.m.

i
i

Lilb

in L’nit:d

Nations.

New York

olMo
