S/2016/897

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 October 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to resolution
2299 (2016)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2299
(2016), in which I was requested to report every three months on the progress made
towards the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). It covers key developments relating to Iraq and provides
an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since the issuance of my
report dated 5 July 2016 (S/2016/592).

II. Summary of key political developments pertaining to Iraq
A.

Political situation
2.
On 15 August, the Council of Representatives confirmed five new ministers to
head the Ministry of Oil, the Ministry of Transportation, the Ministry of Water
Resources, the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research and the
Ministry of Construction and Housing. Nominations are yet to be made to fill key
posts, including that of Minister of the Interior, after Mohammed al -Ghabban
resigned on 5 July, Minister of Defence, after the Council withdrew confidence in
Khaled al-Obeidi on 25 August, and Minister of Finance, after the Council withdrew
confidence in Hoshyar Zebari on 21 September. The endorsement by the Council of
An Nafi‘ Awsi as Minister of Construction and Housing brings the number of
female ministers to 2 out of a total of 17 ministers currently endorsed by the
Council.
3.
On 30 July and 25 August, respectively, the Council of Representatives passed
two important pieces of legislation, a law to ban the Baath Party and a general
amnesty law, both part of the national political accord of 2014 and the programme
of the Government. The former prohibits the Baath Party and any other party or
entity that incites, glorifies or promotes racism, terrorism, takfirist ideology or
sectarian cleansing. The latter grants amnesty for a number of lesser crimes and
establishes a judicial review mechanism that, upon request, can allow for retrial and
reinvestigation if criminal procedures were initiated on basis of testimony by secret
informers or in cases in which confessions were extracted by force. The passa ge of

16-18112 (E)

011116

*1618112*

S/2016/897

the General Amnesty Law, in particular, proved controversial, with significant
disagreements among political parties over the exemption of terrorist crimes and
additional restrictions on the option of reinvestigation under the judicial review
mechanism. Last-minute compromises between the National Alliance and the Iraqi
Forces Coalition led to the adoption of the law with amendments to the more
contentious articles. A number of parties within the National Alliance continue to
criticize the law, which they argue will lead to the release of convicted terrorists.
4.
The Council of Representatives continued to focus on allegations of corruption
and mismanagement against senior members of the Government. The then Minister
of Defence, Khaled al-Obeidi, was questioned by parliamentarians on 1 August
regarding allegations of corrupt practices and graft, specifically in relation to
defence contracts. During the questioning, he countered the accusations against him
by accusing several senior legislators, including the Speaker, Salim al-Jubouri, of
corruption relating to military contracts. The Prime Minister, Haider al -Abadi,
instructed the Commission of Integrity to investigate the allegations on 2 August.
For his part, the Speaker requested on 9 August that his immunity be lifted by the
Council to allow him to appear before the investigative court charged with
examining the accusations against him. The case was dropped by the court after his
appearance before it. Following the withdrawal of confidence in the Mini ster of
Defence on 25 August, the acting Army Chief of Staff, Othman al -Ghanimi, was
appointed as Minister of Defence ad interim on 29 August.
5.
On 25 August, the then Minister of Finance, Hoshyar Zebari, was questioned
by the Council of Representatives regarding allegations of mismanagement of State
funds for personal use and release of funds to the Kurdistan region of Iraq in
contravention of the Federal General Budget Law of 2015. On 27 August, the
Council declared that his answers had been insufficient. The Prime Minister stated
on 6 September that the Council had overstepped its scrutinizing role in its attempt
to impeach the Minister. On 21 September, however, the Council adopted, through a
secret ballot, a motion of no confidence in Mr. Zebari, who a nnounced that he
would challenge the decision before the Supreme Court.
6.
Recent pro-reform and anti-corruption protests were muted compared with
earlier in 2016, probably owing to fatigue within the protest movement and record
high temperatures. All eyes were on Baghdad on 15 July, given that Muqtada
al-Sadr had called for a “peaceful, popular million-man demonstration” at the end of
Ramadan. With estimated numbers of protestors ranging between 50,000 and
70,000, however, the turnout was lower than anticipated.
7.
As military progress continued in Ninawa governorate in efforts to combat
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), growing attention was being paid by the
international community and within Iraq to the development of a political,
humanitarian and stabilization plan for the post-liberation phase in the city of Mosul
and Ninawa. In addition, political and military discussions between Baghdad and
Erbil resulted in an agreement on the conduct of military operations and the
composition of military forces for the retaking of the governorate and the city.
8.
The President of Iraq, Mohammed Fuad Masum, utilized his good offices to
convene high-level meetings with a small number of key political stakeholders to
overcome differences and stimulate political progress on important issues, including

2/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

political and administrative concerns after liberation, reform of the electoral legal
framework and the timing of elections. The efforts are continuing.
9.
Regarding elections, there were increasing discussions a mong political parties
about the timing of the Provincial Council elections, due in April 2017, and the
Council of Representatives elections, due in April 2018. While some maintain that
the Provincial Council elections should be held as scheduled in April 2017, others
have suggested that they should be postponed and possibly combined with the
Council of Representatives elections in 2018 for the sake of operational, budgetary
and security considerations. The discussions continue.
10. Iraq made good progress in strengthening its public financial system. On
19 July, the Council of Ministers approved a financial management law, in line with
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) economic programme aimed at stabilizing
the economy. The Council of Representatives held a first reading of the legislation
on 22 September. Meanwhile, on 10 September, the first review of the stand -by
arrangement, as approved by the IMF Executive Board on 7 July, was concluded in
Amman. During the discussions, the IMF team and a government delegation,
composed of representatives from the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Planning,
the Ministry of Oil and the Central Bank of Iraq, concluded that sufficient progress
had been achieved in areas such as reducing expenses, increasing transpar ency,
rationalizing costs and improving some non-oil resources.
11. On 27 September, the Council of Ministers revised the budget proposal for
2017 from 100 trillion Iraqi dinars (some $83 billion) to 90.224 trillion dinars (some
$75 billion), with planned oil exports set at 3.75 million barrels per day, up from
3.6 million barrels per day at $42 per barrel, up from $35, but a dollar less than the
IMF had recommended. The projected budget deficit for 2017 is estimated at
5.608 trillion dinars (some $4.5 billion), which is lower than the IMF estimate of
12 trillion Iraqi dinars (some $10 billion).
12. Relations between the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government improved. On 29 August, the Prime Minister of the Kurdistan Regional
Government, Nechirvan Barzani, led a delegation to Baghdad and met the Prime
Minister to discuss the resumption of oil exports and revenue -sharing. On
9 September, the Ministry of Oil issued a statement to clarify that the agreed
resumption of oil exports was part of the original oil agreement between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government of December 2014, relating to
oil exports from Kirkuk governorate to the port of Ceyhan, Turkey. On
28 September, the President of the Kurdistan region of Iraq, Masoud Barzani,
visited Baghdad for the first time since July 2013 and met the Prime Minister, the
President, the Speaker and heads of political blocs. In a meeting with the Prime
Minister, issues of common concern were discussed, including preparations f or the
liberation of Mosul and bilateral financial matters.
13. Efforts to reactivate the Kurdistan Regional Parliament, which has been
inactive since 12 October 2015, made limited progress, and political disputes within
the Kurdistan region of Iraq continued. On 10 August, the Kurdistan Democratic
Party put forward an initiative seeking to relaunch negotiations with the Patriotic
Union of Kurdistan, the Kurdistan Islamic Union and the Kurdistan Islamic Group,
which is yet to yield results. Meanwhile, the Patriotic Union and Gorran continued

16-18112

3/18

S/2016/897

the implementation of their agreement on enhanced cooperation of May 2016. On
10 September, the two parties announced their intention to form a single bloc in the
Council of Representatives.

B.

Security
14. The Iraqi security forces, the Peshmerga, the popular mobilization forces and
local fighters, with support from the international counter -ISIL coalition, made
further progress in retaking Iraqi territory from ISIL, with military successes in
Anbar governorate and along the central axis of Iraq towards the city of Mosul.
Between 23 and 25 August, the Iraqi security forces launched a major operation to
recapture Qayyarah, south of Mosul, which was consolidated on 10 September. The
Iraqi authorities announced on 20 September concentrated efforts to regain control
of Sharqat, Salah al-Din governorate, which were successfully completed two days
later. That progress notwithstanding, ISIL continues to operate in pockets in the
surrounding areas, from northern Tikrit to Qayyarah, including the outskirts of
Sharqat and Bayji.
15. The security situation remained unstable throughout Iraq during the reporting
period. ISIL continued to encounter consistent losses of resources and territory. In
response, it increased the number of terrorist attacks. A total of 44 vehicle bombs
and suicide vest attacks targeted the Iraqi security forces, killing 346 security
personnel and wounding 249 others. ISIL continued to target civilians on a daily
basis, with an average of more than five incidents per day across Iraq. In Baghdad
governorate alone, there were a reported 297 incidents involving explosive devices,
killing 427 civilians and wounding 1,658 others.
16. Attacks on internally displaced persons occurred frequently during the
reporting period, with 83 civilians killed and 100 wounded in 23 bomb attacks, in
Ninawa, Kirkuk and Salah al-Din governorates. On 27 July, a mortar attack struck
the Salam camp in Dawrah, southern Baghdad, killing four displaced persons.

C.

Regional and international developments
17. Iraq continued to engage with its neighbours, the international counter -ISIL
coalition and the wider international community to secure political, economic,
humanitarian and military support for combating ISIL. Meanwhile, the Government
continued to work towards its national reconciliation and reform objectives,
including addressing its fiscal constraints. Iraq remained active in multilateral
organizations, including the League of Arab States, as well as the Parliamentary
Union of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation Member States, of which Iraq
holds the presidency for 2016.
18. A series of senior-level regional visits by Iraqi officials sought to expand
bilateral relationships and garner political and military support. The Iraqi National
Security Adviser, Faleh al-Fayad, visited the Islamic Republic of Iran on 16 August
to exchange views on bilateral security issues. A parliamentary delegation led by the
Speaker followed on 21 August, meeting the Chair of the Islamic Shura C ouncil and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran to discuss issues of
sovereignty and efforts to combat ISIL.

4/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

19. Following the failed coup d’état in Turkey, the President of Iraq, on 16 July,
declared his country’s support for the democratically elected institutions in Turkey
and expressed the hope of a return to peace and stability. On 25 August, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic, Walid al-Moualem, visited
Baghdad and met his counterpart, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, in addition to the President and
the Prime Minister, to discuss the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and efforts
to combat terrorism. In his capacity as Chair of the Parliamentary Union of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Member States, the Iraqi Speaker attended the
Democracy and Solidarity Summit, held in Ankara on 1 September, seizing the
opportunity to meet the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and his
counterpart, İsmail Kahraman, to discuss, among other things, preparations for the
liberation of Ninawa governorate and the city of Mosul. Efforts to strengthen Iraqi
relations with the country’s neighbours suffered a setback, however, when, on
28 August, Baghdad formally requested the replacement of the Saudi Arabian
Ambassador subsequent to some of his statements regarding the popular
mobilization forces.
20. On 8 August, a delegation from the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan travelled to
the Islamic Republic of Iran to pursue follow-up discussions on a potential pipeline
agreement. There were repeated incidents of armed conflict between the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps and the Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan across
the Iranian-Iraqi border. Following these developments, a delegation from the
Kurdistan Regional Government led by its Minister of the Interior, Karim Sinjari,
visited Tehran on 14 August and met the Secretary of the Supreme National Security
Council, Ali Shamkhani, to discuss how to resolve the cross -border skirmishes. The
incidents have ceased for now.
21. On 23 and 24 August, the President of the Kurdistan region of Iraq met the
President and the Prime Minister of Turkey, Binali Yildrim, in Ankara to discuss
bilateral economic and security issues and efforts to combat ISIL. During the
meetings, Turkey indicated that it had decided to broaden its economic support and
promote its partnership in the energy sector with the Kurdistan region of Iraq.
22. During the reporting period, a lower level of military activity on the part of
Turkey, including air strikes against Kurdish Workers Party positions in the
Kurdistan region of Iraq, was reported. The strikes targeted mainly districts in
Dahuk and Erbil governorates. Although no casualties were reported, properties and
farms were damaged.
23. At the League of Arab States summit, held on 31 July in Nouakchott, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq called for the withdrawal of Turkish troops from
Iraq. In the summit communiqué, the League stressed the unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq and offered support to the country’s efforts to combat ISIL after the
then Defence Minister of Iraq had also voiced concerns over the presence of Turkish
troops in northern Iraq in the context of preparations for the liberation of Mosul and
Ninawa. The international counter-ISIL coalition subsequently clarified that, while
there were no plans for the involvement of Turkish troops in the battle for Mosul,
the coalition itself respected the sovereignty of Iraq and would obtain the approval
of the Government for the participation of any foreign troops.

16-18112

5/18

S/2016/897

24. On 18 September, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq reaffirmed in a
statement the importance of the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Iraqi territory
during a meeting with his Turkish counterpart on the margins of the Seventeen th
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held on
Margarita Island, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, from 13 to 18 September. On
22 September in New York, in his remarks at the seventy -first session of the General
Assembly, the Prime Minister of Iraq “appealed” to Turkey to withdraw its forces
from Iraqi territory, given that they were “hindering” the liberation of Ninawa. Iraq
and Turkey have engaged in consultations and bilateral dialogue to find a solution.
25. On 17 August, the President of Iraq announced that the Russian Federation had
been conditionally permitted to use Iraqi airspace for anti -ISIL air strikes in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The Prime Minister of Iraq subsequently clarified at his
regular briefing following the weekly meeting of the Council of Ministers that the
Russian air force would cross through border corridors and would not be allowed to
fly over Iraqi cities.
26. On 20 July, my Special Representative and my Deputy Special Representative
and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator attended a pledging conference in
support of Iraq held in Washington, D.C. The Minister for Foreign Affairs
represented Iraq at the conference, which was chaired by the Secretary of State of
the United States of America, John Kerry, and co-hosted by Canada, Germany,
Japan, Kuwait and the Netherlands. My Special Representative and my Deputy
Special Representative and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator also attended
the joint plenary session for ministers for foreign affairs and of defence of the
international counter-ISIL coalition, held on 21 July, in which the ministers restated
their shared determination to disrupt and defeat ISIL and sought to refine a common
approach to ISIL affiliates. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Minister of
Defence of Iraq participated.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
27. My Special Representative continued his engagement with government
officials, parliamentarians, political parties, civil society and religious and
community leaders to advance inclusive political dialogue and national
reconciliation. In meetings with Iraqi interlocutors, he emphasized that sustainable
peace and security could be achieved only through tolerance, cooperation and
national reconciliation based on equality and justice for all. He called upon all
political entities to intensify efforts to overcome divisions and work together in an
inclusive and expeditious political process to pursue substantive reforms to
strengthen governance, combat corruption and improve the standard of living of all
Iraqis. In an effort to encourage dialogue and closer cooperation between the federal
Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government, he regularly me t
representatives of both Governments to urge progress on outstanding issues,
including oil exports and revenue-sharing.

6/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

28. My Special Representative met political, ethnic and religious community
leaders to discuss their concerns about the grave impact of the current conflict
against ISIL on civilians, especially people from the country’s diverse ethnic and
religious communities. He continued to advocate with the Government and the
international community to undertake all efforts, in strict compliance with
applicable international humanitarian and human rights law, to put an end to the
widespread and systematic abuses perpetrated by ISIL, which may amount to war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, and to secure the safe release of
civilians, including women and girls from minority communities, still held captive
by ISIL. The need to provide psychosocial, medical and other forms of support was
underlined, notably for the survivors of sexual violence and sexual slavery. He also
encouraged the Government to consider national and international options to hold
ISIL accountable and to ensure the preservation of criminal evidence for future use
before a court.
29. Following reports of human rights violations perpetrated by pro -Government
forces during liberation operations, my Special Representative continued to call
upon the Government to conduct impartial and effective investigations into reported
abuses and to hold to account those found responsible for violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. He emphasized that providing and guaranteeing
law and order and security to all citizens of Iraq were the primary responsibilities of
the respective State organs and institutions and must remain their obligation.
30. In preparation for the operations to liberate the city of Mosul and Ninawa
governorate, my Special Representative met officials from the federal Government
and the Kurdistan Regional Government, parliamentarians from Ninawa,
representatives of the Turkmen and other ethnic communiti es and religious and
community leaders to underscore that the authorities and local actors needed to
accelerate political planning for the days after liberation. He stressed the importance
of protecting civilians and their property during military operatio ns and urged all
parties to the conflict to do their utmost to adhere strictly to international
humanitarian law and allow civilians to leave affected areas safely and with dignity.
31. During the joint plenary session for ministers for foreign affairs and of defence
of the international counter-ISIL coalition, held on 21 July, my Special
Representative encouraged the international community to provide adequate support
for humanitarian operations along with military assistance. He underlined that a
well-managed humanitarian, explosive hazard threat mitigation, stabilization and
rehabilitation effort could help to achieve a lasting victory over ISIL. That effort
should accord priority to the protection of civilians.
32. On 10 August, my Deputy Special Representatives addressed the Second
International Conference on Psychological and Media Operations to Counter
Da’esh, hosted by the Government of Iraq in Baghdad. My Deputy Special
Representative for Political Affairs emphasized that the global threat from ISIL was
continuing to diversify and reiterated the importance of countering the group’s
ideology and activities through a multi-pronged response and counter-narratives to
address radicalization and violent extremism. My Deputy Special Representative
and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator outlined the specific steps that security
and armed forces could take to protect civilians in upcoming military operations,
including in Mosul.

16-18112

7/18

S/2016/897

33. On 11 August, my Deputy Special Representative and Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator and the Office of the Prime Minister signed an agreement
to help to strengthen the capacity of the Government to detect, investigate and
prosecute high-profile and complex corruption cases. Progress was made in the
establishment of the two funding facilities for economic reform, which will
mobilize international donor support for reforms in the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government. On 26 September, the Kurdistan Regional
Government and the United Nations Development Program me (UNDP) signed an
agreement to activate its funding facility. At the time of writing, an agreement with
the federal Government to activate its funding facility was still to be concluded.
34. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Children’s
Fund, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO) and UNDP are working with the Government to develop specialized
programmes to help to deradicalize young people. Under the leadership of UNFPA,
agencies are developing a pilot project to train young leaders in conflict resolution
and mediation skills.
35. On 23 September, my Special Representative for Iraq delivered remarks at the
signing ceremony of a joint communiqué by the Government and the United Nations
on prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence. My Special
Representative for Sexual Violence in Conflict, Zainab Hawa Bangura, and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs were the signatories, while the United States was
represented by the Undersecretary for Civilian Security, Democracy and Human
Rights, Sarah Sewall. My Special Representative noted that the Gove rnment was
primarily responsible for eradicating sexual violence in conflict and holding
perpetrators accountable. He also highlighted the country’s responsibility to develop
a plan of action to implement the agreement and called for the creation of a high level interministerial body that could serve as a partner to the United Nations, in
particular after the abolishment of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs in 2015.
36. On 19 September, my Special Representative participated in a ministerial -level
side event entitled “The fight against impunity: bringing Da’esh to justice”,
co-hosted by the Governments of Iraq, Belgium and the United Kingdom o f Great
Britain and Northern Ireland during the high-level segment of the General
Assembly. During the meetings that he held on the sidelines of the session, my
Special Representative continued to stress that accountability for crimes committed
by ISIL in the context of Iraq would be an essential step in providing justice to the
victims and in supporting reconciliation efforts.
37. My Special Representative worked closely with the parliamentary majority
bloc, the National Alliance, and its newly elected Cha ir, Ammar al-Hakim, to
advance national reconciliation. On 2 October, the Leadership Council of the
National Alliance met and endorsed a social peace and historic national compromise
initiative document, drafted by a five-member committee, requesting the Political
Council of the National Alliance also to review it. On 5 October, my Special
Representative briefed the Political Council, at its invitation, as part of its review
process. The overall atmosphere of the meeting was positive and engaging.

8/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

B.

Electoral assistance
38. UNAMI continued to provide technical support to the Independent High
Electoral Commission on preparations for the Provincial Council elections in 2017,
including for a process to update voter registrations. The Commission establis hed
683 voter registration centres in 13 governorates for the process. During the
reporting period, it biometrically captured and updated the data of 1,237,118 voters.
Furthermore, in accordance with the Political Parties Law (No. 36 of 2015), it has
begun the process of registering political parties for the upcoming elections. As at
25 September, 100 political parties (57 that ran in the elections in 2014 and 43
established thereafter) had applied for registration.
39. Iraqi political leaders continued to discuss reform of the electoral legal
framework. They expressed opinions, both publicly and privately, on possible areas
of reform, including changes to the electoral system and the Independent High
Electoral Commission and reducing the number of seats on the provincial councils.
There was also a recommendation stemming from several gender symposiums,
including meetings and workshops, to strengthen existing constitutional provisions
for ensuring at least 25 per cent representation of women in elected bodie s,
including a proposal to enable women candidates to gain seats outright in addition
to the quota requirements. The timing of both the Provincial Council and Council of
Representatives elections were also a subject of significant debate.
40. UNAMI coordinated a meeting between the Independent High Electoral
Commission and members of the diplomatic community in Baghdad on 21 July at
the Commission’s premises. My Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs
represented UNAMI at the meeting, at which the Commission provided a briefing
on ongoing preparations for the Provincial Council elections. In turn, members of
the diplomatic community reiterated their commitment to supporting the democratic
process in Iraq.

C.

Human rights developments and activities
41. Armed conflict, acts of violence and terrorism continued to take a grave toll on
civilians in Iraq. UNAMI recorded a minimum of 3,001 civilian casualties (967
killed and 2,034 wounded), bringing the total number of civilian casualties in Ira q
since the beginning of the armed conflict in January 2014 to at least 71,123 (23,952
killed and 47,171 wounded).
42. Iraq continues to suffer from terrorist attacks and other acts of violence at a
sustained level comparable to the period covered in my pr evious report. While many
of these attacks were carried out by unknown perpetrators, ISIL claimed a number
of them. For example, an attack by a suicide bomber on 24 July killed 14
individuals and wounded 22 others in Kazimiyah, Baghdad. On 28 August,
individuals wearing explosive vests targeted a wedding in the village of Ayn Tamr,
Karbala’, killing at least 17 civilians and wounding at least 25 others. On
5 September, the Karradah area of Baghdad was struck by a suicide vehicle attack
that left 13 individuals dead and 18 others wounded.

16-18112

9/18

S/2016/897

43. UNAMI received numerous reports alleging serious violations of international
human rights and humanitarian law perpetrated against civilians, in particular by
ISIL. Members of diverse ethnic and religious communities, women, children,
persons with disabilities and older persons remain especially vulnerable.
44. UNAMI continued to receive reports of abductions, killings and persecution
by ISIL of those opposed to its ideology or rule. For example, ISIL reportedly
abducted 15 civilians from Hawijah, Kirkuk governorate, on 30 July for cooperating
with the Iraqi security forces and assisting civilians to flee from ISIL -held areas. On
31 August, ISIL allegedly beheaded nine civilians with a chainsaw in Tall Afar,
Ninawa governorate, after a self-appointed ISIL court accused them of joining the
resistance against the group. ISIL continued to target those who sought to flee from
areas under its control. For example, on 3 and 4 August, an estimated several
hundred internally displaced persons attempted to leave villages controlled by ISIL
in Hawijah district. It is estimated that at least 60 people may have been killed,
either while seeking to flee or after being caught by ISIL.
45. Further reports were received that ISIL may have used weaponized chemical
agents in attacks during the reporting period. On 22 July, ISIL mortar attacks in the
Tall Afar area reportedly resulted in three Peshmerga fighters suffering from
breathing difficulties and sore eyes, and one of them additionally from burns. On
22 and 23 August, ISIL allegedly shelled a village in Qayyarah, Ninawa
governorate. Some 20 residents reportedly experienced breathing difficulties.
UNAMI could not verify whether weaponized chemical agents had been used.
46. Reports continued to be received by UNAMI about human rights violations
perpetrated by armed groups associated with the Iraqi security forces as well as
elements of the Peshmerga and affiliated groups. For its part, the committee
established by the Prime Minister in June to investigate reports of alleged
disappearances in Fallujah has still not released any information about its work.
47. Iraqi local authorities took measures regarding forced evictions and preventing
the return of internally displaced persons to their areas of origin. For example, on
26 July, the Babil Provincial Council adopted a decision to demolish the homes of
persons convicted of being members of ISIL and forcibly evict their family
members from the governorate. On 30 August, the Salah al-Din Provincial Council
adopted a decision to forcibly evict all families of persons suspected of association
with ISIL from the governorate for 10 years and prevent those outside the
governorate from returning if a family member was involved with ISIL. UNAMI
has written to the Prime Minister to register its concern about these developments,
pointing out that Iraq is a signatory to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights and cannot act in violation of humanitarian law or peremptory
norms of international law by imposing collective punishments.
48. Air strikes and shelling continued to cause civilian casualties, but UNAMI was
unable to verify their numbers or perpetrators. On 15 August, two air strikes hit
northern Mosul. One killed 8 civilians, including a child, and wounded 12 others;
eight ISIL members were also killed. The other hit a complex, killing 5 civilians and
wounding 35 others, including 3 children. ISIL had an office in the complex, which
also housed civilian offices and stalls.

10/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

49. Iraq continued to apply the death penalty to persons convicted of a range of
capital offences. Executions were carried out at the Nasiriyah central prison, Dhi
Qar governorate. On 17 August, four convicts were reportedly executed. On
21 August, the Iraqi authorities executed 36 men convicted of participating in the
Camp Speicher mass killings in June 2014. On 31 August, seven foreigners
convicted of belonging to Al-Qaida were executed. Sources and local media
reported that three foreigners were executed at the Nasiriyah central prison on
8 September. The United Nations has repeatedly called upon the Government to
impose a moratorium on all death sentences and executions, in particular given the
weaknesses of the Iraqi criminal justice system and the risk of non-compliance with
international standards of due process and fair trial.
50. UNAMI continued to receive occasional reports on the recruitment and use of
children by armed groups. On 31 August, following the receipt of reports about the
recruitment of children in at least one displacement camp, my Deputy Special
Representative for Humanitarian Affairs reiterated in a statement that involving
children in fighting was totally unacceptable. The Task Force on Children and
Armed Conflict, co-chaired by UNAMI and the United Nations Children’s Fund,
received reports of 62 incidents of violations against children during the period
from 1 July to 25 September, affecting 151 children. The majority of the incidents
were reported to have taken place in the course of military operations in Baghdad,
Anbar and Ninawa governorates. Only 29 of those incidents, affecting 42 children,
could be verified as at the time of writing.
51. Killing and maiming/injuring continued to be the violation most reported, with
23 children confirmed killed and 15 maimed. Reports of another 89 children killed
and 18 maimed remain under verification. The majority of child casualties were a
result of bomb attacks, mainly in Baghdad, Ninawa and Salah al -Din governorates.
The Task Force also received information about an incident of attacks on schools
and four attacks on hospitals during the reporting period, while four cases of
recruitment and use of children were verified.
52. My Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict issue d a statement
on 3 August 2016 to mark the second anniversary of the Sinjar tragedy, in which
ISIL targeted civilians, many of them members of the Yazidi community as well as
members of the Shia Turkmen, Shia Shabak and Christian communities, and
subjected hundreds of women and girls to sexual violence, slavery, abduction and
trafficking in persons, which continues to this day. She called upon all religious and
community leaders in the region to use their moral authority to help families and
communities to understand that the stigma and shame of rape always rested with the
perpetrators and never with the victims.
53. UNFPA continued to support the Department of Health Centre in Dahuk
governorate to provide the necessary medical care, including mental health and
psychosocial support, to survivors of sexual violence. UNFPA reported an increase
in reported cases in locations with available services. More than 600 survivors have
thus far used the services. This is attributed to a number of factors, including saf er
services, the provision of transportation, the involvement of Yazidi community
members as part of the response and improved referral mechanisms.

16-18112

11/18

S/2016/897

54. On 20 July, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, together with the Kurdistan Regional Government,
launched a women and peace and security programme aimed at intensifying efforts
towards the implementation of the national action plan on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). Under the programme, protection services are to be
extended to survivors of sexual and gender-based violence by supporting 26 field
offices of the General Directorate for Combating Violence against Women under the
Ministry of the Interior of the Kurdistan Regional Government. On 1 September, the
federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government jointly organized a
conference in Erbil to present the plans of various ministries for the implementation
of the national action plan. It was attended by representatives of the Government of
Iraq, the Kurdistan Regional Government, civil society organizations and the
international community. Participants highlighted the lack of financial resources as
a key obstacle impeding the full implementation of the national action plan.

D.

Camp New Iraq and Camp Hurriya
55. The United Nations continued to monitor the humanitarian situation of the
residents of Camp Hurriya. On 21 September, the last residents left Iraq, marking
the completion of the relocation process of 3,072 individuals outside Iraq. The
relocation of the entire camp population was made possible following an agreement
and extension of funds to relocate all residents outside Iraq in 2016.

E.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
56. The humanitarian crisis in Iraq remains one of the largest and most complex in
the world. More than 10 million Iraqis currently require some form of assistance.
Each month, humanitarian partners are reaching on average 1 million people with
assistance throughout the country. By the end of the year, depending on the scale
and duration of the military operations in Ninawa, as many as 12 million to
13 million Iraqis are expected to require humanitarian assistance.
57. Fighting continued to cause widespread displacement and to put civilians at
grave risk. More than 100,000 civilians have been displaced since mid -June and
hundreds of thousands more are expected to leave their homes in the months ahead.
Many displaced families have been forced to trek long distances in extreme heat and
hardship to reach safety. In one of the largest movements during the reporting
period, more than 40,000 people sought shelter at the Debaga camp, Erbil
governorate. Thousands of men and boys who have been screened, howev er, are
unable to rejoin their families in the main sections of the camp because of acute
overcrowding. Families leaving ISIL-controlled areas are subject to security
screenings by the government authorities and often by affiliated forces. Credible
reports of boys and men being separated from their families and held in difficult
conditions at some sites are deeply worrying. Civilians continue to be at risk from
artillery and cross-fire. On 18 August, mortar shells hit a security screening site
north of Bayji, reportedly killing 14 people and injuring 35, including more than 20
displaced persons.

12/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

58. In a positive development, families who had been stranded between military
front lines east of Mount Sinjar, Ninawa governorate, since November 2015 were
allowed to move out of the area in July and relocated to the Debaga camp. The
return of displaced populations to their home of origin is accelerating. Nearly
900,000 of the more than 3.4 million people who have been displaced since the rise
of ISIL have now returned to their homes. Some 8,000 people have returned to
Fallujah, although the majority of the more than 85,000 people who fled from
Fallujah in May and June remain dependent on humanitarian assistance for their
survival, living in camps and sites in Amiriyah al-Fallujah, Habbaniyah Tourist City
and Khalidiyah, Anbar governorate.
59. Under the leadership of my Deputy Special Representative and Resident and
Humanitarian Coordinator and in close coordination with government authorities in
Baghdad and Erbil, humanitarian partners are preparing for the humanitarian
consequences of military operations to retake control of the city of Mosul. In a
worst-case scenario, as many as 1.2 million to 1.5 million people may be affected.
Depending on the level of destruction and the number of people displaced, the
humanitarian operation could conceivably become the single largest in the world in
2016.
60. In July, humanitarian partners launched a flash appeal for $284 million to
prepare for the operation in Mosul, only half of which had been received by the end
of September. Key components of the plan, including the construction of emergency
camps, water and sanitation and health care, are critically underfunded. The
humanitarian operation as a whole remains severely underfun ded. In January 2016,
the United Nations and its partners launched an appeal for funding in the amount of
$861 million to provide relief to 7.3 million people nationwide. To date, 54 per cent
of the required funds, or $463 million, has been received. Conse quently, more than
half of the programmes planned under the Humanitarian Response Plan in 2016
have either shut down or could not begin at all. In the coming three months, 64
additional life-saving programmes will close unless support is mobilized. At the
pledging conference in support of Iraq aimed at mobilizing funding for
humanitarian assistance, explosive hazard threat mitigation and stabilization, held
on 20 July, in excess of $2 billion was pledged.
61. More than 850,000 people displaced since the beginning of the conflict with
ISIL have returned to their homes in newly liberated areas, including 200,000 to
Ramadi, Anbar governorate, which was liberated at the end of 2015. The UNDP
Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization has been authorized to wor k in 17
liberated towns and districts and has expanded operations in the recently liberated
areas of Ramadi, Fallujah and Karmah, Anbar governorate, and Qayyarah, Ninawa
governorate. Thousands of recently returned men and young people have been
employed in brigades clearing rubble and rehabilitating public buildings and
thoroughfares. Hundreds of businesses have received grants and critical public
infrastructure, including power stations, electricity grids and water treatment plants,
has been restored. A second expanded stabilization channel has been added, focused
on medium-sized projects that generate large numbers of jobs in newly liberated
cities and stabilize the corridors between liberated districts.
62. The pace of stabilization continues to be slowed by widespread contamination
of unexploded ordnance and improvised explosive devices. Working on the basis of

16-18112

13/18

S/2016/897

priorities agreed through the government stabilization task force, the Mine Action
Service of the United Nations conducted threat assessments of and cleared critical
infrastructure, thereby accelerating stabilization efforts in Fallujah and Karmah. The
Service is also providing mine risk education to families in displacement centres,
helping to ensure their safe return to newly liberated areas. As the mine action
subcluster lead, the Service has developed a humanitarian mine action plan for
Mosul in line with the broader humanitarian response efforts.
63. On 17 July, the UNESCO Intergovernmental Committee for the Protection of
the World Cultural and Natural Heritage inscribed the Iraqi southern Mesopotamian
marshlands and the three Sumerian sites of Ur, Uruk and Tall Aridu on the World
Heritage List as a mixed natural and cultural site with outstanding universal value.
This designation, the culmination of more than a decade of effort by the
Government, assisted by UNESCO, is an important step in securing national
commitment and international assistance to balance the preservation of an
environmentally and archaeologically fragile area with economic de velopment in an
impoverished region.

F.

Security and operational issues
64. The United Nations system in Iraq continues to work in a high -risk security
environment and implement programmes and activities based on programme
criticality. As more areas are retaken from ISIL control, demands on the United
Nations for stabilization and humanitarian assistance will continue to increase. ISIL
has increasingly employed asymmetrical warfare tactics in attacks against security
forces and civilian targets throughout Iraq, and United Nations programmes and
personnel remain at a high risk of collateral damage.
65. The United Nations security management system continues to work closely
with relevant government security agencies to ensure that appropriate security
measures for humanitarians remain in place during efforts to liberate areas from
ISIL control.
66. The construction of a new and integrated compound in Baghdad for both
UNAMI and United Nations country team staff is under way. Several hundred
additional office spaces and residential accommodation are expected to be
completed by June 2017, allowing for an increased staff presence in Baghdad so as
to better address mandate requirements.

IV. Observations
67. The people of Iraq continue to articulate their demands for political and
economic reforms and an end to corruption. I support the continued efforts of the
Prime Minister and the Government in this regard. I welcome the recent ministerial
nominations and appointments aimed at improving governance and services to the
people and urge the timely filling of the remaining vacant ministerial positions. I
call for these changes to be carried out in a manner that guarantees the continuity of
government institutions and in accordance with the Constitution and p arliamentary
rules and procedures. Changes must also involve broad -based dialogue and

14/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

consultation with political partners, and have at their heart the interests and needs of
the Iraqi people.
68. The encouraging progress made notwithstanding, fragmentati on and political
disputes among and within political forces continue to adversely affect the ability of
national leaders to come together for the good of the Iraqi people. I welcome the
President’s efforts to forge unity and consensus among the Iraqi polit ical leaders and
call upon them to set aside their differences and act in the national interest.
69. I welcome the recent progress on the parliamentary legislative agenda,
including the adoption of a law to ban the Baath Party and a general amnesty law,
which are in line with the national political agreement and the Government’s
programme. This constitutes a further step towards the consolidation of State building. I encourage the passage of other key legislation, such as that on justice
and accountability.
70. I reiterate my call upon political leaders in the Kurdistan region of Iraq to
overcome their differences through dialogue and to expeditiously resolve the
political stalemate and normalize the functioning of the Kurdistan Regional
Parliament. There is also a pressing need for the federal Government and the
Kurdistan Regional Government to continue their constructive dialogue in order to
reach a durable understanding on oil exports and revenue -sharing, Peshmerga
salaries and other outstanding issues. Reaching such a mutual understanding will
enable both Governments to jointly and effectively confront the shared challenges
of today and those that will emerge after the liberation of all areas from ISIL in the
future. I further call upon both parties to jointly advance sustainable solutions with
regard to the post-ISIL period, including on the issue of disputed internal
boundaries, that benefit all Iraqi communities and respect their constitutional rights.
The United Nations remains ready to lend its assistance in that respect.
71. The Government of Iraq continues to achieve steady military victories and
retake territory from ISIL while asserting State authority. Together with planning the
military aspects, the Government and local actors need to accelerate p olitical
planning for the period after liberation from ISIL, addressing the issues of
governance, law and order and political management of the city of Mosul and the
rest of Ninawa governorate. I call upon all forces involved in the campaign to retake
control of Mosul to lead by example and to observe international human rights
standards with regard to the treatment of detainees and civilians, creating a positive
environment for the reconciliation process in the post-ISIL period.
72. I urge the leaders of all communities and groups to turn a new page in the
history of Iraq and make national reconciliation and peace a top priority. A national
political compromise remains a matter of considerable urgency. Sustainable peace
and security can be achieved only by engaging in serious dialogue, culminating in a
historic compromise among the country’s diverse components and groups in a spirit
of equality, justice, tolerance and cooperation.
73. I urge Iraqi political leaders to discuss and formulate a definitive sche dule for
the holding of upcoming electoral events and to provide clarity on the electoral legal
framework. This is essential to provide the Independent High Electoral Commission
with adequate time to prepare for the elections and provide a clear direction to the
Iraqi people. I am convinced that Iraqi leaders will abide by their national and

16-18112

15/18

S/2016/897

international commitments, specifically on the holding of credible elections that
reflect the will of the people, adherence to the principles of inclusivity and the
promotion of women’s participation and representation in politics. The United
Nations stands ready to provide the relevant technical assistance.
74. While recognizing that electoral systems and legal frameworks require
periodic review to reflect evolving realities, I urge that such initiatives not be used
for short-term gains that could render the political system unstable or marginalize
smaller political parties. Adequate discussions, reflecting the true wishes of the Iraqi
people, should be held to determine whether there is a genuine need to change the
current electoral legal framework and, if there is, the form that such changes should
take.
75. The general human rights situation in Iraq remains of concern. Civilians are
being affected by armed conflict, terrorism and other acts of violence on a daily
basis. Casualty figures remain high and civilians are continuing to bear the brunt of
the violence. I continue to deplore this unacceptable situation and the unrelenting
bloodletting in Iraq. I reiterate my call upon all parties to undertake every effort to
safeguard the lives of civilians and urge Iraqis to demonstrate their strength through
unity.
76. I am concerned about the corrosive effect that the violence is having on the
enjoyment of other rights, in particular by women, children, persons with
disabilities and members of minority ethnic and religious communities. Legislative
frameworks that provide for and protect the rights of these vulnerable groups do not
exist or are insufficient. I am deeply concerned about the safety of those who
continue to be held captive by ISIL, in particular the thousands of Yazidi women
and children, and I call upon all those engaged in efforts to combat ISIL to make
their safe release a prime objective in military operations. I also urge relevant Iraqi
authorities and host communities to provide adequate support to these women and
children once released to enable their return to lives in dignity and their full
reintegration into their communities.
77. I reiterate that the crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq, including a systematic
campaign of sexual and gender-based violence, may constitute war crimes, crimes
against humanity and even genocide. I call for those found to be involved in such
crimes to be brought to justice and upon the Government and the international
community to continue to support the survivors and to implement mechanisms of
accountability at the international and national levels that will ensure that the
perpetrators of international crimes committed in the context of the armed conflict
in Iraq are held accountable. I also urge the Government to implement policies
aimed at countering violent extremism, together with appropriate, specialized
programmes to assist, in particular, the thousands of young people who have been
exposed to ISIL radicalization, so that they can be reintegrated into their families
and communities. It is critical to continue to combat ISIL ideology even after all the
Iraqi territory has been liberated. In the short term, it is essential that no evidence be
damaged or destroyed. Steps must be taken to ensure thorough documentation and
correct handling of such evidence so that it can be used in any future judicial
proceedings. My Special Representative will continue to facilitate any international
assistance necessary for this effort.

16/18

16-18112

S/2016/897

78. I welcome the recent signing of a joint communiqué between the United
Nations and the Government of Iraq to prevent and respond to conflict-related
sexual violence. This constitutes an important step towards comprehensively
addressing such violence, in particular as committed by ISIL against minority
communities, inflicting unspeakable suffering on civili ans and causing them to flee
from their homes. I call upon the Government to promptly develop a plan of action
and to designate a specific entity to chart the way forward for the implementation of
the joint communiqué. I also call upon the Government and t he international
community to address the urgent need for services and livelihood support for
survivors and children born of pregnancy resulting from rape, as called for in the
joint communiqué.
79. Respect for the rights of freedom of expression and freedom of assembly,
which form the bedrock of a democratic State, must be guaranteed as an integral
part of the country’s evolving democracy and reform process. I urge Iraq to consider
enacting robust legislation that protects these rights in full compliance with its
international obligations and that policies be put in place to ensure that law
enforcement officials are properly trained to deal with peaceful public assemblies
and that the public are educated about their rights and responsibilities.
80. Recurring reports of the use of weaponized chemical agents by ISIL remain a
source of great concern. I condemn such acts, which are prohibited by international
law, and urge that those found to be involved in them be brought to justice.
81. I urge the Governments of Iraq and Turkey to accelerate their bilateral efforts
to find a mutually acceptable solution regarding the presence of Turkish troops in
northern Iraq that will fully respect the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity
and non-interference in the internal affairs of Iraq and ensure that all activities
conducted in Iraq are done so in coordination with and with the full agreement of
the Government of Iraq.
82. Additional focus and funding are required for civilian activities that are
critical to secure the gains of the military campaign against ISIL. The progression of
the campaign creates additional humanitarian needs. I call upon Member States to
contribute generously to humanitarian operations. I urge donors to immediately fund
the flash appeal for Mosul so that preparations can be made to assist the 1 million
people likely to flee from the city. Significant additional funding is also required for
the UNDP Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization and the Mine Action
Service to respond to the stabilization and explosive hazard threat mitigation needs
in the city. These are critical inputs to anchor the gains of the military campaign and
to reinforce the foundation of a peaceful and secure Iraq.
83. I welcome the efforts to stabilize newly liberated areas and stress the
importance of ensuring that conditions are in place for the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of displaced families to their homes. I acknowledge the major
efforts required in Mosul and communities in Anbar, Diyala, Ninawa a nd Salah
al-Din governorates to reconstruct public and private buildings and facilities,
relaunch public services and rejuvenate local economies. I urge Member States to
contribute to the UNDP Funding Facility for Immediate Stabilization.

16-18112

17/18

S/2016/897

84. I welcome the recent listing of the Iraqi southern Mesopotamian marshlands
on the World Heritage List and invite Iraq to use this to stimulate further efforts to
preserve its natural and cultural heritage.
85. I note with satisfaction the completion of the relocation o f more than 3,000
Camp Hurriya residents as requested by the Government of Iraq. I thank my Special
Adviser, Jane Holl Lute, for her good offices resulting in the successful resolution
of this humanitarian issue. I also express my gratitude to the Member S tates and
international organizations that supported these efforts.
86. Lastly, I extend my appreciation to my Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, and
all the United Nations staff in Iraq for their efforts in assisting the Government and
people. I trust that the country’s international partners, including its neighbours, will
continue to extend their support to my Special Representative in the implementation
of the mandate of UNAMI.

18/18

16-18112
