A/RES/75/290 A

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 June 2021

Seventy-fifth session
Agenda items 14 and 122
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up
to the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences
and summits in the economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 25 June 2021
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/75/L.101)]

75/290.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution
72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions
67/290 on the format and organizational aspects of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development and 70/299 on the
follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development at the global level
A
Economic and Social Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Charter of the United Nations, which provides the mandate for the
Economic and Social Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming
our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a
comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and transformative
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, is the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development and
its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions –
economic, social and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to

21-08653 (E)

020721

*2108653*

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 A

building upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals and seeking
to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that the 2030 Agenda is guided by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, including full respect for international law, is grounded
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1 and international human rights
treaties, the United Nations Millennium Declaration 2 and the 2005 World Summit
Outcome, 3 and is informed by other instruments such as the Declaration on the Right
to Development, 4
Recalling also its resolution 74/298 of 12 August 2020, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 67/290 on the high-level political
forum on sustainable development, resolution 70/299 on the follow-up and review of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level and resolution
72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council”,
Recalling further its resolutions 72/305 of 23 July 2018, entitled “Review of the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 on the strengthening of the
Economic and Social Council”, and all previous related resolutions on strengthening
the Economic and Social Council,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing for Development, which
is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, supports and complements it, helps to
contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete policies and actions
and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing
and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the
spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
1.
Reaffirms the role that the Charter of the United Nations and the General
Assembly have vested in the Economic and Social Council;
2.
Recognizes the need to strengthen the work of the Economic and Social
Council as a principal organ for coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and
recommendations on issues of economic and social development, and also recognizes
the key role of the Council in achieving a balanced integration of the three dimensions
of sustainable development;
3.
Reaffirms the commitment to reinforce the deliberative function of the
Economic and Social Council, with an emphasis on accountability, knowledge sharing and mutual learning for better results, so that it best supports the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 5 and the integrated
and coordinated follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits;
4.
Recognizes that the work of the Economic and Social Council plays an
important role in the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), helping
countries to rebuild better, reduce risks and build resilience to future shocks and
crises, by focusing on promoting a sustainable, inclusive and resilient recovery, in
support of the 2030 Agenda;
5.
Notes that the Economic and Social Council is a Charter body of the United
Nations and that the high-level political forum on sustainable development is held
under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council and the General Assembly;
__________________

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 55/1.
3
Resolution 60/1.
4
Resolution 41/128, annex.
5
Resolution 70/1.
1
2

2/9

21-08653

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 A

6.
Declares that the Economic and Social Council and the high-level political
forum on sustainable development should be closely coordinated, in accordance with
their respective roles and mandates, to ensure that their interconnected and interlinked
work is coherent and mutually reinforcing in supporting the accelerated
implementation of the 2030 Agenda throughout the decade of action and delivery for
sustainable development from now to the year 2030;
7.
Adopts the annex to the present resolution on the review of the Economic
and Social Council, and calls upon the Council, its subsidiary bodies and other
relevant bodies and platforms of the United Nations system to implement the
provisions contained therein in an expeditious manner;
8.
Decides that the arrangements contained in the present resolution and its
annex shall be reviewed at its seventy-eighth session, in conjunction with the review
of the high-level political forum on sustainable development, in order to benefit from
lessons learned from the previous cycles of the high-level political forum as well as
from relevant processes under the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council related to the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda;
9.
Reiterates its decision that the review of the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council at subsequent review cycles shall be in conjunction with the
review process of the high-level political forum on sustainable development, while
recognizing their distinct roles and mandates;
10. Recalls its decision contained in resolution 74/298, and decides to agree
at its seventy-seventh session on the annual theme of the 2024 session of the
Economic and Social Council and the 2024 high-level political forum on sustainable
development and the set of Goals to be reviewed by the high-level political forum in
2024, without prejudice to the full review of the Council and the high -level political
forum to be conducted in conjunction with each other at the seventy -eighth session;
11. Decides that all mandates contained in resolution 72/305 and all previous
related resolutions on strengthening the Economic and Social Council shall remain in
effect unless updated or replaced in the present resolution or subsequent resolutions
of the General Assembly and that the mandates contained in the present resolution
and its annex should be implemented starting with the 2021–2022 cycle of the Council
and its preparations.
87th plenary meeting
25 June 2021

Annex
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution
72/305 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council
1.
In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Economic and Social Council should continue to strengthen its leadership and
policy guidance role, and its role as the central mechanism for coordination of the
activities of the United Nations development system and its specialized agencies and
supervision of its subsidiary bodies while integrating their analysis throughout its
segments. It should also address new and emerging issues in the economic, social,
environmental and related fields and provide overall support for a balanced
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development.
2.
The Economic and Social Council and its subsidiary bodies should further
enhance their contribution to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
21-08653

3/9

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 A

Development 6 during the decade of action and delivery for sustainable development,
and to the global response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its
impacts, bearing in mind their respective specific functions and mandates. The
Council should also promote a coordinated follow-up to and implementation of the
2030 Agenda in its entirety and the outcomes of other major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social, environmental and related fields.
To that end, the Council should ensure that the agenda, work programme and
discussions in its segments and forums and its subsidiary bodies contribute to their
implementation as well as the response to major challenges to the achievement of
sustainable development such as the COVID-19 pandemic, while ensuring that
subsidiary bodies deliver on their specific mandates and functions.
3.
The General Assembly shall continue to adopt one common main theme for the
Economic and Social Council and the high-level political forum on sustainable
development under its auspices, bearing in mind the provisions of resolution 70/299
of 29 July 2016 and the provisions of paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the annex to resolution
72/305 of 23 July 2018. The themes of the segments of the Council shall focus on a
particular aspect of the one main theme, bearing in mind their respective functions.
The humanitarian affairs segment shall continue to adopt themes based on
humanitarian considerations and that are coherent with the main theme of the Council.
The subsidiary bodies of the Council shall similarly decide on their own respective
themes, aligned with the main theme, while continuing to address issues or a theme
necessary to discharge their other functions.
4.
The Economic and Social Council should provide integrated policy guidance on
the follow-up to and operationalization of the intergovernmentally negotiated
ministerial declaration of the Economic and Social Council and the high -level
political forum on sustainable development and of the findings of the high -level
political forum, notably its thematic reviews and voluntary national reviews, bearing
in mind the unique role of the Council as a Charter body entrusted with the
coordination of the United Nations system. To support this work, the Secretary General should include in his report to the Council on the main theme lessons learned
from the thematic reviews and voluntary national reviews following the conclusion
of the July high-level political forum, with recommendations for follow-up by
countries, various segments and forums of the Council, the United Nations system
and relevant stakeholders. The Council will also discuss issues on the economic,
social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development and their
implications for the theme of the Council and the high-level political forum and the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The Council should place a focus on the poorest
and most vulnerable, including those in vulnerable situations, to ensure that no one is
left behind in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
5.
The Economic and Social Council segments and its reports, work programmes
and outcomes should give adequate attention to the special challenges facing the most
vulnerable countries and, in particular, African countries, least developed co untries,
landlocked developing countries, small island developing States and countries in
conflict and post-conflict situations, as well as the specific challenges facing middleincome countries, in pursuing sustainable development. The reports of the Secr etaryGeneral should adequately address the diverse needs and specific challenges facing
these developing countries, as appropriate.
6.
The Economic and Social Council cycle will continue to run from July to July.
To promote linkages in their work and enhance the visibility and impact of the

__________________
6

4/9

Resolution 70/1.
21-08653

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 A

Council, and to encourage focus, coherence and efficiency, the Council segments and
forums shall be structured into four groups per Council cycle.
7.
The first group, to be held by early February each year, will comprise the
partnership forum and the coordination segment.
8.
The second group will comprise Economic and Social Council forums. It will
include, annually, the forum on financing for development follow-up, the
multi-stakeholder forum on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable
Development Goals, the youth forum and other related mandated meetings. The
Development Cooperation Forum will continue to be convened every two years
before the forum on financing for development follow-up, with the next forum to be
convened in 2023.
9.
The third group will comprise segments that address actions by the United
Nations development system and other actors to implement the 2030 Agenda, along
with distinct humanitarian assistance. It will include the operational activities for
development segment, the humanitarian affairs segment and the meeting on the
transition from relief to development. These will be organized independently and in
a coordinated manner.
10. The fourth group will comprise segments and forums that provide overall policy
guidance and foster progress in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, contribute to
the overall review of the 2030 Agenda at the high-level political forum and look to
the future of the advancement of sustainable development. It will include the highlevel political forum on sustainable development and the high-level segment of the
Economic and Social Council.
11. As mandated in the past, the Economic and Social Council may convene special
sessions to address urgent developments in the economic, social, environmental and
related fields that may require guidance and coordination by the Council. It should
also continue to convene ad hoc meetings on specific humanitarian emergencies at
the request of the affected country or following a recommendation of the Bureau.
Such ad hoc meetings should raise awareness and promote the engagement of all
relevant stakeholders, including the United Nations system, in support of
international relief efforts aimed at addressing those emergencies.
12. The working modalities of the Economic and Social Council should be guided
by the principles of inclusiveness, transparency and flexibility based on the
deliberative functions of its meetings. It should be a platform for discussion and the
exchange of national experiences. The Council should aim at creating synergy and
coherence as well as avoiding duplication and overlap in its work to ensure efficiency
and effectiveness.
13. In supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and delivering on its other
functions, the Economic and Social Council should work towards the eradication of
poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty, as the greatest
global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development. The
Council should also strengthen its efforts to mainstream a gender perspective across
its agenda, work programme, meetings and documentation.
14. With a view to ensuring a streamlined consideration of related agenda items and
optimal use of available time, the Bureau of the Economic and Social Council is
invited to prepare a focused programme of work, including possible joint
consideration of related items, that enhances deliberation among Member States. The
programme of work and agenda of each segment/forum should be circulated as early
as possible. The Bureau of the Council should make efforts to ensure that meetings
and informal consultations are planned during United Nations working hours to better

21-08653

5/9

A/RES/75/290 A

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

facilitate the active and constructive participation of all permanent missions in the
work of the United Nations.
15. The partnership forum of the Economic and Social Council will be convened
for one day by early February, back-to-back with the coordination segment. The
partnership forum will engage countries, the United Nations system, including
international financial institutions, as well as international organizations,
parliamentarians, local governments, non-governmental organizations, the private
sector, civil society, scientists, academia, women, youth and other stakeholders. The
partnership forum will be organized in consultation with stakeholders and allow
interactive discussions among all stakeholders on the main theme of the Council and
the high-level political forum on sustainable development. The partnership forum will
be focused on the exchange of new ideas, expectations and priorities for the work
ahead for the Council cycle and the high-level political forum held under the auspices
of the Council. The partnership forum will also discuss forward-looking actions by
countries and all relevant stakeholders as well as innovative partnerships that can
mobilize commitments and actions to advance the 2030 Agenda.
16. The way that the Economic and Social Council delivers on its coordination
function should be strengthened so as to help to ensure that the United Nations system
and subsidiary bodies of the Council contribute fully to the decade of action and
delivery for sustainable development and the global response to the COVID -19
pandemic. To this end, the coordination segment shall replace the integration segment
and the informal meeting of the Council with the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies and
will be held annually for up to two days by early February, before the first session of
a subsidiary body of the Council. Through this segment, the Council will take up
coordination matters arising from subsidiary bodies, principal organs and specialized
agencies in the economic, social, environmental and related fields. It will steer the
Council system towards an efficient and integrated workflow throughout the Council
cycle leading up to the high-level political forum on sustainable development. It will
provide forward-looking policy guidance to ensure coherence and direction in the
policies and normative work of subsidiary bodies and specialized agencies relating to
the 2030 Agenda as well as to other aspects of the work of the Council.
17. The coordination segment will formulate common action-oriented policy
guidance on all matters requiring implementation or coordination efforts (i) by the
Economic and Social Council functional and regional commissions and other
subsidiary bodies as well as (ii) by the United Nations system, notably the specialized
agencies, in the policy and normative area, including detailed guidance on the
implementation of the intergovernmentally negotiated ministerial declaration of the
previous year. In coordinating the policy and normative work of the specialized
agencies and other United Nations system entities as envisioned by Article 63 of the
Charter, the Council will avoid overlap with the operational activities for
development segment, which provides guidance on operational activities of the
United Nations development system.
18. The coordination segment will examine key policy issues, lessons learned, best
practices and recommendations emanating from the work of the Economic and Social
Council subsidiary bodies, including regional commissions, during the previous
cycle. It will allow the Council to address issues identified by subsidiary bodies as
requiring the attention of the Council at the global level and to build on the policy
conclusions of its subsidiary bodies, along with inputs of the United Nations system,
so as to promote the balanced integration of the three dimensions of sus tainable
development. It will also provide guidance and coordination to subsidiary bodies,
ensuring a clearer division of labour among them, aligning their work with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and promoting their implementation of the
intergovernmentally negotiated ministerial declaration of the previous year, bearing
6/9

21-08653

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 A

in mind the respective mandates and functions of those bodies. The coordination
segment will furthermore provide detailed guidance to the subsidiary bodies of the
Council and the United Nations system on their upcoming work on the main theme
and develop action-oriented assessment and recommendations so that those bodies
best contribute to the preparations for the thematic review of the high-level political
forum on sustainable development. It will review how subsidiary bodies and the
United Nations system work on the interlinkages among the Sustainable Development
Goals and the integrated implementation of the 2030 Agenda, guiding their work for
the rest of the Council cycle.
19. During the coordination segment, the Economic and Social Council may also
hold discussions on existing coordination-related mandated agenda items that have
been thus far considered during the management segment.
20. An informal note will be prepared by the Secretariat to inform the discussions
at the coordination segment. This note should include (i) integrated policy analysis
emanating from the work of the subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council
during the previous cycle and proposed guidance for their contributions to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the decade of action and delivery for
sustainable development; (ii) coordination issues emanating from the work of
subsidiary bodies and the policy and normative activities of specialized agencies and
other United Nations system entities and recommendations for addressing them; and
(iii) proposals related to the implementation of the intergovernmentally negotiated
ministerial declaration of the Council of the previous cycle and lessons learne d from
the thematic reviews and voluntary national reviews at the high-level political forum
on sustainable development, with recommendations for follow-up by countries,
various segments and forums of the Council, the United Nations system and relevant
stakeholders.
21. Heads of United Nations system entities, Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council and Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions
will be invited to participate. Non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Council should – and the private sector and other stakeholders involved in
the policy and normative work of the United Nations system and the subsidiary bodies
may – be engaged in the coordination segment, while retaining the intergovernmental
nature of the Council.
22. A non-negotiated factual summary will be prepared by the President of the
Economic and Social Council in consultation with the Bureau of the Council to reflect
discussions during the partnership forum and the coordination segment and the
strategic proposals made during the coordination segment.
23. The high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council will continue to
discharge the functions provided for in General Assembly resolutions 70/299 and
72/305.
24. The operational activities for development segment of the Economic and Social
Council will continue to discharge the functions provided for in General Assembly
resolutions 71/243 of 21 December 2016, 72/279 of 31 May 2018, 72/305, and 75/233
of 21 December 2020, as well as Council resolutions 2019/15 of 8 July 2019 and
2020/23 of 22 July 2020.
25. The one-day meeting on the transition from relief to development will be
convened immediately preceding the humanitarian affairs segment and will replace
the special event to discuss the transition from relief to development and alternate
between Geneva and New York. The meeting will address the linkages between
humanitarian assistance and development assistance. It may also discuss, among other
relevant issues, promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable
21-08653

7/9

A/RES/75/290 A

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

development and providing access to justice for all in accordance with the respective
mandates of the Economic and Social Council and other intergovernmental bodies. It
will aim to build resilience and preparedness and improve the efforts of the
international community to respond better to the transition from relief to
development, as well as to deliver better results for improving the situation of
countries on the ground through enhanced cooperation, collaboration and
coordination, with the ultimate goal of resuming long-term sustainable development.
The meeting will focus on countries in situations of conflict, post-conflict countries
and countries facing humanitarian emergencies. The meeting will also consider the
existing agenda items of the Council on issues related to the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti, South Sudan, the Sahel region and any country-specific item under the
sub-item on African countries emerging from conflict for in-depth discussion to guide
coordinated support at the country level. In accordance with the rules of procedure
and previous practice of the special event on the transition from relief to development,
participation by all relevant stakeholders, including organizations of the United
Nations system, international financial and trade institutions, regional organizations,
civil society and private sector representatives in the meeting will be possible. Full
participation of all relevant stakeholders, in particular the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Chair and countries members of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti, should be ensured, inter alia, through the use of videoconferencing. This
meeting will continue to be organized in the context of the humanitarian affairs
segment and the operational activities for development segment, without prejudice to
the respective mandates of those segments.
26. The humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and Social Council will
continue to discharge the functions provided for in General Assembly resolutions
52/12 B of 19 December 1997, 61/16 of 20 November 2006, 68/1 of 20 September
2013, and 72/305.
27. The management segment of the Economic and Social Council will continue to
discharge the functions provided for in General Assembly resolution 72/305.
28. During the management segment in June, the Economic and Social Council will
hold a discussion to integrate the key messages from the subsidiary bodies of the
Council and the United Nations system on the main theme, develop action-oriented
recommendations for follow-up and feed into the high-level political forum on
sustainable development. This will be informed by the existing report of the
Secretary-General synthesizing the inputs of the functional commissions of the
Council and other intergovernmental bodies and forums to the thematic review of
the high-level political forum.
29. The Secretary-General’s annual overview report of the United Nations Chief
Executives Board for Coordination will be presented by the Secretariat at the
management segment of the Economic and Social Council.
30. As envisioned in Article 65 of the Charter, the Economic and Social Council
may furnish information to the Security Council and assist the Security Council upon
its request.
31. The Economic and Social Council should strengthen its cooperation and
dialogue with the Peacebuilding Commission, in accordance with their respective
mandates. The President of the Council and the Chair of the Commission are
encouraged to explore ways to improve the annual joint meetings of the two bodies
and reinforce their impact on the situation at the country level. To ensure the flow of
information and the complementarity of the work of the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Bureau of the Council may work with a designated
member of the Commission on an ongoing basis.

8/9

21-08653

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 72/305 on the strengthening of
the Economic and Social Council
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolutions 67/290 on the format and
organizational aspects of the high-level political forum on sustainable development and 70/299
on the follow-up and review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the global level

A/RES/75/290 A

32. The Economic and Social Council should continue to strengthen its oversight,
guidance and coordination role of its subsidiary bodies as outlined in paragraphs 28
and 29 of the annex to General Assembly resolution 72/305.
33. The President and Bureau of the Economic and Social Council are invited to
work with the bureaux of its subsidiary bodies and in consultation with delegations
during the 2022 session of the Council, so as to identify possible actions to be taken
to implement the provisions of paragraphs 28 and 29 of the annex to General
Assembly resolution 72/305.
34. The engagement of civil society and relevant stakeholders in the Economic and
Social Council should continue to be arranged in accordance with paragraphs 19, 20
and 21 of the annex to General Assembly resolution 72/305.
35. While retaining its intergovernmental nature, the Economic and Social Council
should seek to promote the active participation of international and regional
organizations, members of parliaments, academia, scientists, non-governmental
organizations, local governments, the private sector, women, youth and major groups
and other stakeholders, in activities of the Council and its functional and regional
commissions and other subsidiary bodies, in accordance with the provisions of their
respective rules of procedure and the provisions of General Assembly resolutions
67/290 and 72/305.

21-08653

9/9
