United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8699th meeting

Friday, 10 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pham. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Schaetzen
Mr. Wang Nian
Ms. García Tapia
Mr. Auväärt
Mr. Michon
Ms. Bade
Mr. Soemirat
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Porter
Ms. Tshabalala
Mr. Naouali
Mr. Roberts
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding the United Nations Charter
Letter dated 31 December 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-00800 (E)
*2000800*

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was resumed at 10 a.m. on 10 January.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with longer statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): I wish to thank the
Viet Nam presidency of the Council for organizing this
debate, in which the wider membership can present its
views on upholding the Charter of the United Nations. I
also wish to thank both briefers.
Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union (see
S/PV.8699), and wishes to add few remarks in its
national capacity.
The entire legal order that regulates international
relations and its security structure is built on the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which are broad enough to cover new challenges and
are just as relevant as they were at the inception of
the Organization. Notwithstanding the discussion
around Article 103, we believe that the United Nations
Charter is the international treaty that prevails in the
case of conflicting obligations under other treaties. It
must always be respected and implemented — never
undermined. The rights and obligations arising from
the Charter are equal for all Members and we all benefit
from them. All States are obliged to ensure respect for
the Charter, and Articles 1 and 2 must be the basis for
our behaviour in the international arena.
The Security Council has been entrusted with the
primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security. So far, the Council has succeeded
in some cases, but has failed in many others. Members
of the Security Council discharge that responsibility
on behalf of the entire United Nations membership and
should therefore look beyond their national interests.
We believe there is plenty of room for the Security
Council to make better use of the Charter’s potential,
beyond Chapter VII. In our opinion, the Council should
be more active in preventing conflicts instead of only
reacting to them. We encourage it to use Chapter VI
more often and to explore ways of analysing crises and
2/35

10/01/2020

risks as early as possible in order to address them headon and, if necessary, take collective action.
The Council should address the root causes of
conflicts, keeping in mind that gross human rights
violations are an alarming indicator that a larger
conflict may be under way. When acting in response
to a crisis by establishing a mission, the Security
Council should stress the rule of law and justice and
closely cooperate with the Peacebuilding Commission.
Peace and justice reinforce each other. We also wish to
encourage the Secretary-General to make use of Article
99 of the Charter.
One of the major intersections between the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council and the rule of
law is the enforcement of those rules and decisions,
especially through the International Court of Justice.
We welcome the Security Council’s discussions and
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations.
They are essential and uniquely equipped to address
situations of risk and conflict, as well as post-conflict
situations in particular regions.
Let me recall that the Charter and the Organization
were not imposed on us, but were created by generations
that endured the worst human experiences. Upholding
the Charter is the first step towards ensuring that the
Organization and its States Members will act for the
purposes and by the principles enshrined in it.
Let me conclude by saying that, with the latest
developments in the Middle East, the need for the
United Nations to be a framework for dialogue is more
evident than ever.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting, which complements the meeting convened by
the State of Kuwait during its presidency of the Council
in February 2018 (see S/PV.8185) on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their
informative briefings.
At the outset, I want to underscore the dangerous
escalation in the Gulf region, which is a source of grave
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

concern for all of us. Its repercussions could affect the
security and stability of the region. We echo the repeated
appeal of the Secretary-General for de-escalation by
calling for restraint in order to address the situation
politically and prevent further tensions and threats.
Seventy-five years after the creation of the United
Nations, the Charter continues to be a constitution
that guides multilateral action. It is an instrument of
international law that outlines a clear framework for
governing relations among States. It also provides
measures that allow us to address threats to international
peace and security in a collective and effective way.
The purposes and principles of the Charter include
action to establish friendly relations among States
by working collectively in a unifying manner in the
face of aggression, while respecting the principles of
sovereignty and non-interference in internal affairs
of others.
The Charter, its purposes and principles represent
the first line of defence for small countries. We in the
State of Kuwait recognize that very well. The liberation
of Kuwait in 1991 clearly demonstrated what the
international community can do when it acts under the
auspices of the United Nations.
Security Council resolutions aim to champion the
rule Organizationf law, right and justice. Kuwait’s
liberation is a successful historic example of the ability
of the Security Council to put an end to aggression and
to violations of the noble purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. During our term, we were
guided by the Charter when dealing with the issues on
its agenda. We are confident that the Council could be
more effective in addressing the challenges of today’s
world by utilizing the instruments provided to it by the
Charter, including by making the best possible use of
Chapter VI, which includes the peaceful settlement of
disputes, mediation and arbitration.
We also emphasize that the Council must give
more attention to precautionary measures aimed at
preventing disputes by addressing them at an early
stage. We strongly believe in the constructive role
that could be played by regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining peace and security at
the regional and international levels in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Greater cooperation
should take place between the Security Council and
regional organizations.

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

During our term on the Council, we introduced
a presidential statement on cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States
(S/PRST/2019/5). We hope that the Council will follow
this up with a view to promoting dialogue between
the League and the Security Council, all the more
so because many of the items on the agenda of the
Security Council relate to Arab issues. We therefore
welcome Viet Nam’s intention to hold a debate this
month on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
In conclusion, the success achieved by the tools
provided by the Charter for the maintenance of
international peace and security will depend on unity
and consensus within the Council. Over the decades,
we have seen the Council unable to resolve some crises
owing to deep-rooted differences between the positions
of its members and to the use of the veto. Consequently,
we stress the importance of the Council showing unity
so that it can uphold its responsibilities under the
Charter and take firm and effective decisions to counter
the dangerous threats and challenges facing our world
in this new decade.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to welcome the new elected members of the
Security Council — Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam — and to
wish them every success in their work. I also commend
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and
Poland, with which Kazakhstan worked in the Security
Council, for their important contributions to the work
of the Council during their tenure.
I congratulate the delegation of Viet Nam on its
assumption of the presidency in the Security Council
for the month of January 2020 and, of course, on its
successful start in convening this open debate on such
an important subject.
We consider today’s debate to be very timely
and valuable, taking into consideration the upcoming
celebration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations and of the end of the Second World War.
The United Nations Charter was meant to set up rules of
work as the common endeavour of all nations in order
to maintain the fragile peace and security following the
Second World War.

20-008003/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

It is important to remember that the Charter was
written in the blood of the millions of victims of world
wars and armed conflicts. Any violation of its Articles,
especially with respect to ensuring the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, could result in the tragic
mistakes of the past being made once again.
Unfortunately, the current world situation shows
that the United Nations Charter as well as the principles
of international law are being seriously tested, leaving
the world on the verge of full-scale military stand-offs.
In this regard, it is urgent to ensure a strict commitment
by all Member States to the generally recognized norms
and principles of international law.
In order to uphold the United Nations Charter,
my first President, Nursultan Nazarbayev, during his
address to the General Assembly in 2015, proposed the
convening of a United Nations conference at the highest
level with the aim of reaffirming the basic principles
of international law. We believe that that initiative,
especially in this jubilee year for the Organization,
continues to be relevant and can give fresh impetus to
restoring dialogue, mutual understanding and trust in
international relations among States. We call upon the
Secretary-General and all Member States to consider
convening such a high-level event during the General
Assembly’s session in September 2020.
Let us be frank: the United Nations Charter and
other norms and principles of international law were
not imposed on us against our will. We all collectively
and independently accepted and acceded to them on
a voluntary basis. That is why it is the obligation of
each and every Member State to comply with their
provisions, even if at times it does not seem to align
with its interests. We should avoid situations in which
international law and the United Nations Charter are
used selectively.
The most efficient tool that the Security Council
has in its possession to maintain international peace and
security is the use of the potential of regional bodies.
Strengthening cooperation with regional organizations,
including mechanisms of preventive diplomacy, is very
important for upholding the United Nations Charter.
In that regard, I would like to recall another initiative
of Kazakhstan’s — the creation of the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia
(CICA), which has been successfully functioning for
more than a quarter century.
4/35

10/01/2020

In the current environment, which is characterized
by a trust deficit, the confidence-building mechanism
that CICA provides in the area of international relations
has become the most potent instrument for the peaceful
prevention of conflicts. Focusing on actions rather
than on words, we are working to transform CICA into
a full-fledged regional organization for security and
development so as to stem conflicts and find ways to
collectively prevent them altogether. Kazakhstan, as
the next Chair of CICA, in 2020, will deploy every
effort to that end.
In conclusion, the erosion of international law and
global institutions, including the United Nations, poses
a great danger for all of us. It is our strong belief that the
Security Council, especially the permanent members,
should be at the forefront of upholding the United
Nations Charter and the principles of international
law, and we all must show the collective will to abide
by them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the friendly delegation of Vietnam on joining the
Council and presiding over it this month. I wish you
all the best. I also thank you for having convened this
open debate on the topic “Maintenance of international
peace and security: upholding the Charter of the United
Nations”, which coincides with the commemoration of
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter.
I would like also to welcome the new non-permanent
members of the Council, and I wish them all the best.
I thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,
and Chair of The Elders Mrs. Mary Robinson for
their briefings.
The Republic of Yemen was among the first
countries to sign the Charter of the United Nations. We,
along with other peoples of the United Nations, have
committed ourselves to the Charter’s provisions and
to the maintenance of international peace and security
as a basis for prosperity and well-being. Through
special political missions, peacekeeping operations and
other entities, the United Nations supports consensual
solutions and the settlement of conflicts through
peaceful means, including by preventive measures,
mediation and multilateral diplomacy, as a means to
tackle threats to international peace and security.
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

In that regard, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy to Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for their efforts to reach a comprehensive
political settlement in Yemen, which has suffered for
more than five years from an unfair war waged by
the armed Houthi militias, supported by the Iranian
regime. Those militias continue to show intransigence
and refuse to fulfil their commitments under the
relevant Security Council resolutions, most recently
regarding the Stockholm Agreement. However, the
Yemeni Government has always shown a sincere desire
to achieve a comprehensive and just peace based on
the three agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Initiative and its implementation mechanism, the
outcomes of the National Dialogue and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2216 (2015).
We have always given priority to the interests of
Yemen and Yemenis to achieve our dream of building
a new, federal Yemen that would meet our aspirations
and support our brothers and friends in the region.
Because of our belief in the principles and purposes of
the Charter, we have always engaged positively with
the efforts of the Special Envoy to end the conflict
by peaceful means and to maintain regional and
international peace and security.
Our world has seen the emergence of non-State
armed militias and groups as well as of extremist and
terrorist groups, which have exacerbated crises and
human suffering and threatened peoples along with
regional and international peace and security. The
Yemeni Government calls once again on the Security
Council, which has the primary responsibility under
the Charter of maintaining international peace and
security, to exert further pressure on Houthi militias
and to implement its relevant resolutions on Yemen. The
goal is to reach a comprehensive political settlement of
the conflict in Yemen that would meet the aspirations
of the Yemeni people to a lasting peace built on the
agreed terms of reference, achieve socioeconomic
development and allow Yemen with its long history and
civilization to move forward towards a better future for
its people and contribute actively to building a world in
which peace, stability and well-being prevail.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Ms. Rodríguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered by

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

the delegation of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.
We congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month and the five new non-permanent Council
members for the 2020-2021 term. We wish them every
success in discharging their responsibilities. We also
acknowledge the work done by the delegations of
Equatorial Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire, Kuwait, Peru and
Poland as non-permanent members of the Council in
2018 and 2019.
We welcome the holding of this open debate
at the ministerial level, which is both timely and
necessary. The United Nations and the Charter of the
United Nations were born of the imperative need to
save the world from another world war and with the
perennial goal of ensuring peace, security, dignity
and development for all the peoples of the world. As
this year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of its
adoption, we reiterate Cuba’s firm commitment to
defending the purposes and principles of the Charter,
which are the cornerstone of multilateralism, one of the
main sources of international law and a guide for the
conduct of States in their international relations.
However, continued violations of the Charter
and breaches of international law, including the use
or threat of use of force against sovereign States,
acts of aggression against the sovereignty of other
nations and interference in the internal affairs of
States, continue to occur on a daily basis. We reject
the prosecution of unconventional wars for purposes
of hegemonic domination, attempts to reimpose a
unipolar order, targeted assassinations of foreign
leaders, the plundering and theft of natural resources,
the imposition of unilateral coercive measures, policies
of extraterritoriality, unilateral sanctions, all forms
of pressure and all other such acts of aggression that
undermine multilateralism, jeopardize peace and
stability and disrespect the provisions of the Charter.
The Security Council must carry out its functions
in accordance with the powers conferred upon it by
the Charter itself to safeguard international peace and
security, but it must do so without double standards or
discrimination, and always in accordance with justice
and principles. It is therefore the duty of all to work
towards reaching peaceful solutions and to firmly,
effectively and resolutely avoid war. In particular, this
main organ of the Organization must exhaust all avenues

20-008005/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

to safeguard peace and life, and prevent the promotion
and actualization of the philosophy of dispossession,
agendas involving regime change and attempts to
violate the right of peoples to self-determination.
It must promote a just, democratic and equitable
international order that responds to the demand for
peace, development and justice of peoples throughout
the world and contributes to the full implementation
of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It must
defend multilateralism and reject any proposal that
would constitute interference by the Council in matters
falling within the purview of the other principal organs
of the Organization, especially the General Assembly.
A truly strong and participatory United Nations
is required, with a transparent and duly democratized
Security Council and a revitalized General Assembly
that supports States in consolidating their sovereignty
for the future which should be determined by every
nation without any kind of interference.
In Cuba, we have fought for peace; we have
cooperated with many other peoples in the search for
a better life; and we have stopped at nothing to defend
our independence and sovereignty. We have never
been intimidated or bowed down — nor will we be
bowed down — by the illegal and criminal economic,
commercial and financial blockade that the United
States Government has imposed on our small island for
almost six decades, which has now been intensified by a
brutal economic war and the comprehensive application
of the Helms-Burton Act, while disregarding the appeal
of the international community, which has rejected that
policy and demanded that it end 28 consecutive times in
the General Assembly.
As the President of Cuba, Miguel Díaz Canel
Bermúdez, has said,
“Cuba will take all measures needed to stop
the interventionist efforts of the United States,
safeguard the tranquillity and welfare of the
population, safeguard national unity and defend,
at any cost, the sovereignty and independence of
the country.”
Our country will continue to contribute, with its
limited resources, all its energy and unwavering will, to
the well-being of other peoples, especially those most
in need, through inclusive international cooperation
for sustainable development. Cuba will remain
committed to defending the Charter for the promotion
of international peace and security.
6/35

10/01/2020

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
As a country committed to multilateralism, international
law and the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes, Peru welcomes the timely initiative of Viet
Nam to convene this important open debate in a year
marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding
of the United Nations.
Since the end of the Second World War, humankind
has evolved and made significant progress. The
Organization has been instrumental in building a better
world. In many cases, however, progress has been
uneven and the international order has shown limitations
in responding effectively to new and changing realities.
We view with concern the spread of conflicts and the
emergence of new threats to international peace and
security that, in many cases, are caused by geopolitical
tensions and global phenomena, such as growing
inequality, the effects of climate change, the arms
race and transnational organized crime. In such an
environment, neither ramping up violence nor resorting
to war is a viable or acceptable alternative for the
international community.
This sensitive situation is exacerbated by
current and frequent violations of international law,
including Security Council resolutions and especially
international humanitarian law. We cannot maintain
international peace and security without respecting the
rule of law and ensuring more inclusive societies. For
example, one of the cornerstones of the international
order is the prohibition of the use of force in any way
that is inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard, we are concerned
that some countries are positing arguments and
interpretations that are ultimately alien to international
law and undermine the collective security architecture.
The limitations of the international community in
addressing these realities should lead us to strengthen
the dialogue, preventive efforts and international
cooperation that are so necessary to implement the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter. We
emphasize the validity of those purposes and principles
and those of the Organization in order to resolve the
serious problems facing us and to sustain and develop
the collective security architecture and a rules-based
international order so that we can thwart the emergence
of major threats to peace and security.
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Specifically, we deem it necessary for the United
Nations, and especially the Security Council, to
promote dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
VI of the Charter. We believe that this is vital to
reaching peaceful solutions to major conflicts, such as
those that are considered by the Council and which pose
an ongoing challenge for it. Our task is to step up our
efforts to ensure that the United Nations stands more
robust in complying with the purposes and principles
enshrined in its Charter, and that it becomes a catalyst
for cooperation and partnership at all levels, with a
view to making peace, social inclusion and prosperity
available to all.
I would like to conclude by recalling that former
Secretary-General and compatriot Javier Pérez de
Cuéllar noted that the role of a political institution, such
as the United Nations, is to draw a line between efforts
to build a better future and conflict and making it
possible for nations to stay on the right side of that line.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by extending the condolences of
the people and the Government of Spain to the families
and countries affected by the plane crash of Ukraine
International Airlines Flight 752.
The Charter of the United Nations was the founding
document of new international relations based on the
shared purpose of preserving succeeding generations
from the scourge of war and promoting fundamental
human rights. In 2020, as we celebrate the seventyfifth anniversary of our Organization, it is time for
us to recall the obligations to which Member States
voluntarily agree, without exception, under the Charter
and before the rest of the international community. The
exercise of those responsibilities requires a steadfast
collective commitment to multilateralism.
That is why I am grateful to Viet Nam for this
opportunity to share ideas on the future we want and
the United Nations we need. This debate is all the more
important in the light of the escalation of tensions and
dangerous situation in the Middle East and the Gulf in
recent days, which we hope will be addressed through
diplomatic means to prevent the further loss of life.
For Spain, peace and security mean giving priority
to political action, improving the effectiveness and

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

consistency of peacekeeping operations, boosting
preventive diplomacy and reinforcing a comprehensive
approach to the three pillars of the United Nations.
In that regard, Spain would like to pay tribute to and
endorse the words of Secretary-General Guterres at the
beginning of this meeting, as well as to thank Mary
Robinson for her wise briefing (see S/PV.8699).
To make further progress, we must continue to
strengthen three areas: the working methods, mandates
and partnerships of the Security Council.
First, with regard to the working methods of the
Council, I would like to thank Kuwait for the impetus
that it gave in that area. I would also like to express
our support to Ambassador Inga Rhonda King of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. It is a positive step
to further institutionalize the monthly stocktaking
meetings of the outgoing presidency, known as the
Toledo format, which Spain promoted during its recent
term in the Council.
We attach great importance to the equitable
distribution of the workload in the allocation of
penholders between the elected and permanent
members of the Council. We should seek synergies by
giving priority to the appointment of co-penholders,
which would bring together the Chairs of the sanctions
committee and those responsible for the dossier on the
country concerned.
Secondly, the mandates of the Security Council
should be a genuine road map — realistic, substantial
and flexible. They have a direct impact on people,
especially on the victims of conflict. They must include
and prioritize key aspects, such as the protection of
civilians, the women and peace and security dimension
and attention to children in armed conflict. That
approach must focus on defining the mandate of
the Council, ensuring its adequate financing in the
Fifth Committee, integrating the critical work of the
Peacebuilding Commission into the stabilization phases
and, lastly, implementing a coherent and articulated
exit strategy.
Thirdly and lastly, on partnerships, Spain recognizes
the progress made and the great potential that lies
ahead for cooperation among the United Nations, the
European Union (EU) and the African Union in the
areas of cooperative security and crisis management.
Deeper and more effective triangular cooperation
requires a continued framework of strategic partnership
that, we hope, extends to all regional organizations to

20-008007/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

address all areas of common interest and fosters close
relations between the Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the EU Political and
Security Committee.
I will conclude my statement by recalling that the
intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Council will resume in January. Spain, a member of
Uniting for Consensus, supports a flexible and balanced
approach that takes into account proposals from other
groups. We support a more democratic, representative
and transparent Council. We are confident that the
international system will thereby succeed in adapting
to the challenges and changes of the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like at the outset to congratulate the Republic
of Viet Nam on taking its seat on the Security Council
and on presiding over it this month. I wish Viet Nam
and its friendly people further progress and prosperity.
Since its foundation, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
has sought to maintain international peace and security
and to enhance collective action under the United
Nations, due to our strong belief in the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and our desire to
promote peace, prevent wars and destructive conflicts
while maintaining international peace and security.
We meet today at a time when the world is more than
ever in dire need of maintaining peace and security and
upholding the Charter of the United Nations, especially
as we witness frequent and accelerated conflicts
and tensions, more so than we have seen in decades,
especially in our region, the Middle East and the Arab
Gulf region. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia urges all
countries to commit to the Charter. We also urge the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities,
particularly for the need to end the Israeli occupation,
including the occupation of Palestinian territory
and other Arab territories, which runs counter to the
principles of the United Nations and its Charter.
The Council must compel Iran to respect the
sovereignty of the States of the Middle East States
and to abide by international law and treaties, while
ceasing its attempts to destabilize the region and the
entire world. We condemn Iran’s violation of Iraq’s
sovereignty by attacking two Iraqi military bases. We
stress the ongoing efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi
8/35

10/01/2020

Arabia to protect brotherly Iraq from conflicts and
wars so that the people of that country can live in
security and prosperity. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
will always stand by Iraq in order to thwart any attempt
to destabilize its security and stability and its place in
the Arab world.
In order to solve the problems of the world today,
we must promote reason and peace over war and
destruction. We must together seek to save the world
from further conflict, spread the message of peace,
strengthen the role of multilateral diplomacy and
enhance mediation to resolve crises. That has always
been our approach in our foreign policy. We have
launched many initiatives, including the signing of the
Riyadh agreement between the legitimate Government
of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council and of
the peace agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia. The
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has taken other initiatives
over the past few years. Thanks to our policies, we have
spared the region many conflicts and played a great role
in maintaining international peace and security.
While emphasizing our efforts to maintain
international peace and security, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia this week announced the founding of the
Council of Arab and African States bordering the Red
Sea and the Gulf of Aden. We believe in the importance
of that Council for enhancing cooperation, investment
and development among the States of the region and
helping to maintain security and address challenges
and threats.
Committing to the purposes and principles of the
Charter requires that we review the Charter and amend
it in a manner that would take into consideration the
aspirations and challenges of the twenty-first century.
That is why the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia fully supports
the efforts to reform the Security Council, and reform
the United Nations in general. We also call on all parties
to commit to world multilateral structures and preserve
and maintain international treaties.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will spare no
effort in cooperating with the United Nations, and
specifically with the Security Council, as well as with
other countries, as we believe in collective work to
ensure humankind’s prosperity. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia will continue to play a responsible diplomatic
role and promote international law and its precepts,
which have always been the basis for international
action. We need to make decisive policies and decisions
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

in order to counter challenges with all firmness and
determination. We also need to work seriously and
swiftly to maintain global security and stability, while
defusing tensions everywhere.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mrs. Senewiratne (Sri Lanka): At the outset, I
wish to join other delegations in congratulating the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its presidency of the
Security Council and for organizing today’s important
open debate at the very beginning of the year marking
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations.
The participation of His Excellency the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam
and similar high-level representation by other Member
States in today’s debate is a demonstration of the
importance of the subject matter.
Sri Lanka aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Today’s debate takes place at a crucial time,
when the global landscape is facing a number of
challenges and threats, requiring concerted efforts to
adhere to multilateralism, diplomacy and the further
strengthening of our collective measures for the
maintenance of international peace and security, in
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. More than seven and a half decades
ago, 50 representatives signed the United Nations
Charter, which created the Organization. In the name
of we the peoples of the United Nations, they pledged
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Those words remain etched in our collective memory to
ensure adherence.
The Charter of the United Nations has been deemed
a living document because its core principles are
those we hold dear and to which we adhere, including
human rights, the dignity of the human person, the
equality of gender and of nations, large and small, the
principles of non-intervention and non-violence, the
peaceful resolution of disputes and building consensus
and peaceful coexistence. Those principles are the
bedrock of the Organization, reflected in its Charter,
and have been central to global values, norms and
principles for decades. As we entered this milestone
year for the United Nations, it is timely to rededicate
our collective commitment to the Charter and reflect on

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

our past successes and challenges in the maintenance of
international peace and security.
Today the world is confronted by numerous
challenges, which include terrorism and the rise
of extremism, giving way to radicalization, grave
environmental degradation, social upheaval, postconflict situations, refugees and mass migration,
financial crises, growing inequality and poverty.
No country is immune to those challenges, and they
therefore need to be addressed collectively, with the
United Nations providing the framework to that end.
The efficacy of the Organization is determined by we
the Member States and will be shaped by our ability to
work together to support multilateralism and confront
global issues with determination and cooperation to
forge global consensus in achieving peace and security,
development and human rights.
At the same time, we must ensure that the solutions
also mirror the hopes and aspirations of all States and
their peoples equally, not just those of a select few.
Therefore, the looming threat to multilateralism must
be arrested forthwith by adherence to the rules-based
international order, based on the United Nations Charter.
I am pleased to note that, this year, Sri Lanka
also commemorates the sixty-fifth anniversary of its
admission to the United Nations in 1955. Since then,
Sri Lanka has continued to contribute to the collective
work of the United Nations, including by having been
a member of this organ from 1960 to 1961. Sri Lanka
has engaged significantly in the area of United Nations
peacekeeping operations as a troop-contributing
country since 1956, thereby demonstrating the country’s
commitment to global peace and security.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Sri Lanka’s
commitment to a rules-based global order, firmly
supported by its full respect for the United Nations
Charter and the primacy of multilateralism and
cooperation. At this important juncture, let us all
rededicate ourselves to United Nations processes with
renewed vigour and commitment. I am confident that
our deliberations today will inspire us to search for
collective, constructive and cooperative ways to work
with greater purpose for the betterment of all and our
future generations, to leave no one behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.

20-008009/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Amorín (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank Viet Nam, current President
of the Security Council, for convening today’s timely
debate to consider the role of the Charter of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. I would also like to thank Mrs. Robinson
and the Secretary-General for their briefings. The
Secretary-General, through his reform initiatives,
works actively to achieve the objectives of the Charter.
Nearly 75 years ago, the United Nations was
established with the aim of achieving global peace
and unity among States, which were to resolve their
conflicts by peaceful means and through cooperation
and friendly relations. The Charter entrusts the Security
Council with the task of maintaining international
peace and security. Article 24 of the Charter states
that, in order to ensure prompt and effective action by
the United Nations, its Members confer on the Security
Council the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, and agree that the
Council acts on their behalf in carrying out its duties
under that responsibility.
The Charter confers upon the Council responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, and such
responsibility must be fulfilled under international law,
while respecting the principles set out therein. The most
fundamental principle of the system we created is the
promise to refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State and to settle disputes by peaceful means. To that
end, the Security Council has a central role to play and
must, at all times, work in cooperation with the General
Assembly. In that regard, relations must be strengthened
with the International Court of Justice, the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations tasked with dispute
settlement. In that context, the Security Council must
encourage the settlement of disputes, in particular legal
ones, when other means, such as negotiation, mediation,
conciliation, have not been effective. It is also crucial
to prioritize preventive diplomacy, which SecretaryGeneral Guterres fervently advocates to prevent the
outbreak of major conflict.
As a member of the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group, Uruguay has advocated
for transparency in the work of the Security Council
during the period in which we had the honour of being
a non-permanent member of the Council. At that time,
we ensured that we always worked to uphold legality
and transparency.
10/35

10/01/2020

International law — an essential component of
modern international relations, whose main source,
within the Organization, is the Charter — spawns
stability and predictability. More important, compliance
with international law protects us from abuses by the
most powerful and facilitates the peaceful changes
required by the international community. In compliance
with the responsibility conferred upon it, the Security
Council must ensure respect for human life in conflicts,
when they could not be avoided. It must promote respect
for humanitarian law in its relevant resolutions and,
consequently, impose the necessary sanctions with a
view to observance of humanitarian law.
One aspect that is not unrelated to the maintenance
of international peace and security is the promotion
of international criminal justice. Our guide should be
strict respect for human rights, and when violations
are flagrant, the Security Council should assume a
more active role in prosecuting such violations and
their perpetrators. Pursuant to the Rome Statute, the
Council must, where appropriate, refer complaints of
atrocity crimes to the International Criminal Court
and promote the corresponding investigations, thereby
pursuing the punishment of perpetrators and the fight
against impunity.
On that point in particular, there is unfortunately
much talk of assigning criminal responsibility
to the perpetrators — in other words of ensuring
accountability — but we should do more to take concrete
action. The deterrent effect that a properly functioning
international criminal justice system would have on
potential perpetrators and warlords is unquestionable.
The international community can remain at peace
through a balance that depends on each of the States that
comprise it and on respect for the law emanating from
this Organization, which is a common law that differs
from domestic law and is made up of international
norms or generated through the repetition of behaviour
that is accepted and followed by all.
At present, we are witnessing with concern a
dangerous trend — the failure of many Member States
to comply with the resolutions adopted by the Security
Council, which shows no or very little attachment to
the law emanating from that organ and the system as
a whole. In complying with those rules, account must
be taken of the scope and functions of the Security
Council, which must not exceed its remit.
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

We must not lose sight of the principles of
non-intervention and self-determination when dealing
with internal conflicts. The Council must act in keeping
with the means and scope provided for in the Charter
and when the conditions and situation so require, and it
must give special consideration to proportionality when
adopting its measures. As has already been said, the
Council’s resolutions must be inspired by and focused
on the protection of individuals and on the unrestricted
observance of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The use of the veto to protect purely national
interests when international law has been violated does
not contribute in any way to the transparency of the
Organization, while it weakens the Council and leaves
those most affected in any conflict — the civilian
population — without legal protection.
At times like these, when we are trying by various
means to strengthen preventive action, the Security
Council must use all the tools available to it, within the
limits of the law, for the maintenance of peace. Perhaps
we should seek new and imaginative ways of doing
so and promote additional forums for dialogue that
would start from the Council and engage the General
Assembly in a permanent dialogue. Such innovation
is especially urgent given the emerging challenges to
international peace and security, such as migration and
climate change.
Uruguay believes that it is time for a necessary
change of pace in the Security Council so that, through
its collective action — within the framework of the law
and without exceeding its mandate — it can achieve
greater unity of action and increase its effectiveness,
while continuing to respect all the guiding principles of
the Charter that gave rise to the Organization, the pillar
of multilateralism.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I thank the President
for dedicating this first open debate of the decade to
marking the history of the Charter of the United Nations.
Much has already been said, so if you will permit
me, Mr. President, I would like to share the story of
my grandmother, whose life coincided with that of the
Charter. My grandmother was a remarkable woman.
She was strong, assertive, determined and unflappable.
She belonged to the extraordinary generation of men,

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

women and children born between the First and Second
World Wars, many of whom did not survive to see the
Charter come into being.
My grandmother was born in Łódź, Poland, in
1921, the seventh of eight children. Her parents named
her Bru’cha — which means prayer in Hebrew. She was
18 years old when the Second World War broke out
and Poland was partitioned. With the help of an older
brother, she managed to make it to the somewhat safer
Soviet Union. Authorities there tried to compel her to
take Soviet citizenship. Steel-willed from birth, she
refused and was arrested and sent to a forced labour
camp. She and my grandfather, Sam, met at the camp,
were secretly married there and escaped after three
years of hard labour.
While the United Nations Charter was being
negotiated, Bru’cha was living in a displaced persons
camp in Austria, now with a young son – my father – and
a newborn daughter, searching for remaining relatives.
Bru’cha, Sam and their children eventually travelled by
boat, as so many refugees and migrants still do, landing
in Quebec City on the SS Samaria on 28 September
1948. My grandfather became a laundry presser and my
grandmother worked the night shift at a bakery in the
heart of Montreal, where they eventually settled.
(spoke in French)
In 1956, a few short years after becoming a
Canadian citizen, Bru’cha would learn how Lester B.
Pearson developed the idea for the first fully-fledged
United Nations peacekeeping force. She heard of the
leadership of Canadian Major General Burns who led
the force. Bru’cha may have felt that the international
community had turned a corner. States would help when
needed, with force if necessary. A new multilateral path
was being forged.
In 1960, my grandmother learned of the biggest
membership growth in the United Nations’ short history,
with 17 new States admitted, 16 of them African, 15 of
which had just won their independence. Like many
others, she would reflect on how the international
community was getting stronger, richer, more open
to diversity.
The major United Nations milestones reached in the
1960s and 1970s reinforced the essence of the United
Nations, namely, leveraging cooperation to solve global
challenges. In a relatively short period, the United
Nations Development Programme was established, the

20-0080011/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
came into force and the first ever world conferences
on the environment, food and women were convened.
The Charter was continuing to drive the international
community to work together, while at the same time
reinforcing the limits of State behaviour.
In 1977, with Canada serving as an elected
member, the Security Council imposed a mandatory
arms embargo on South Africa. A decade later, in 1987,
the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the
Ozone Layer was adopted in Bru’cha’s home town.
The most successful treaty ever, the Protocol gave her
a sense, at age 66, that an organization established
four decades prior was capable of evolving to address
unforeseen issues.
(spoke in English)
In the year 2000, at the age of 79, my grandmother
witnessed the unanimous adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). Canada was an elected member of the Security
Council at that time, and her grandson — that was
me — was about to join the Canadian foreign service.
In 2014, before her death at the age of 92, Bru’cha
would learn that there were more refugees, displaced
persons and asylum seekers than at any other point
in history. She saw much of her early life replayed on
small screens, in real time, from different places.
My grandmother escaped persecution in Poland,
survived the holocaust in present-day Russia, was a
displaced stateless person in Austria, arrived penniless
in Canada, worked hard, raised a family, saved, prayed,
loved, lived and died. Her story is special to me, but it is
not unique, nor is it limited to time and place.
In an era of resurgent authoritarianism, growing
antisemitism and hatred of all kinds, it is not difficult to
see parallels. However, a major difference is the advent
of the United Nations Charter and the global safety net
it sought to usher in. The Charter’s values are timeless
and universal. It outlines tenets of decency, State
behaviour, rights and obligations. The Charter tells us
what should happen in Syria, for the Rohingya and for
the world as a whole.
I would like to think that the best homage we can
pay to it and to people like Bru’cha is to respect the
Charter, to see it as it is — a living document that
directs and anchors us but allows the United Nations to
evolve to address emerging issues.
12/35

10/01/2020

That is not necessarily about reopening the Charter
but rather revitalizing some of its provisions. There
is nothing hindering creative use of Article 99 to
support conflict prevention. More can be undertaken to
enhance regional arrangements, which Canada hopes
will figure prominently in the briefing Viet Nam has
convened on cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, including the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, later this month.
It is also worth noting that the measures contemplated
in Article 41 are by no means comprehensive. Instead,
the form and scope of potential non-military measures
are left to the Security Council to determine.
Canada sees that as both a strength and an
obligation. To us, upholding the Charter means seeing
it as supple enough to respond to the challenges of
today. This week in particular, that means heeding
the Secretary-General’s recently issued statement to
“stop escalation, exercise maximum restraint, re-start
dialogue and renew international cooperation.” As
always, Canada stands ready to do its part.
Prime Minister Trudeau has been in close contact
with his counterparts in the region and around the world,
delivering very much the same messages. Canada has
consistently called for safeguarding the rules-based
international system. As reflected in the Charter, the
Council has a critical role to play. We all do.
Finally, as the Secretary-General noted and my
grandmother personally experienced, civilians pay the
highest price for conflict.
In the latest example, Canadian hearts are heavy
following the tragedy involving Flight PS752 in
Tehran. We mourn the death of 176 people, including
63 Canadians and many Iranian, Ukrainian, Swedish,
Afghan, German and British nationals. While we
are many nations united in our loss, the connecting
flight from Kyiv arrived in Toronto yesterday with
138 empty seats. That represents the depth of the loss
for Canada — citizens, residents, extended family
members, international students, mothers, fathers, sons,
daughters, sons, colleagues, friends and neighbours.
We joined the statement made yesterday in the
Council (see S/PV.8699) by the representative of Ukraine
on this tragedy. We are committed to diplomacy with
Iran. We have requested Iranian cooperation to allow
Canadian experts to assist with the identification and
recovery of victims. Prime Minister Trudeau has also
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

requested a credible, complete investigation into Flight
PS752, including with the participation of Canadian
experts. This is an international tragedy affecting
numerous Member States. Together, guided by the
Charter and with the assistance of the United Nations
system, we can act to investigate, provide answers to
victims’ families and prevent another tragedy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): First of all, we offer
our deepest condolences to the families of the victims
of the Ukrainian airliner that crashed in Iran. We
understand their pain and my Government expects that
the crash will be fully investigated.
On behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, let
me express my sincere thanks to the delegation of Viet
Nam for convening this open debate.
Seventy-five years ago, the Charter established
the multilateral system based on international law,
multilateral cooperation and the rule of law. Back
then, few people could have believed possible the
many achievements that this has brought to us all. We
commend all the hard work of the men and women
worldwide who have contributed to global peace and
security, justice and economic and social development.
However, despite those successes, the multilateral
system is under pressure. Like others, we are deeply
concerned about the recent events in the Middle East
and it is of the utmost importance that we stop the use of
weapons and give space to dialogue and de-escalation.
It is the responsibility of all Member States to maintain
and strengthen the multilateral system.
In that light, allow me to focus on two key areas
where the Kingdom of the Netherlands is assuming its
responsibility to maintain and strengthen the current
multilateral system — preventing conflicts and
ensuring accountability.
The first area concerns conflict prevention. As
noted only days ago by my Foreign Minister, Stef Blok:
“Democracy, fundamental rights and the rule of law
are crucial for any healthy resilient society.” In the
most fragile regions of the world, we are contributing
to establishing an early warning/early action system
and addressing the root causes of conflicts. We do so
by contributing to the establishment of peacebuilding
programmes and transitional justice mechanisms,

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

building the capacity of security and rule-of-law
institutions and monitoring mechanisms by civil society.
In particular, the ability of women to participate
in, and influence the outcome of, political, peace and
security processes helps to address the root causes
of conflict and results in more durable and stable
peace. That is why we empower women to participate
in those processes in various countries, such as in
Yemen, Libya, Afghanistan and Colombia, and support
women’s participation in United Nations peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions.
Upholding the Charter also means ensuring that
those responsible for gross human rights violations and
abuses are held accountable for their crimes. That is the
second area where the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
assuming its responsibility. The Hague is the proud host
of the International Court of Justice, the International
Criminal Court, the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and many other
international organizations that play a key role in the
international legal order.
We support investigative mechanisms, such as the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian
Arab Republic since 2011 and the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant. We also support the adoption by the
International Law Commission of the Draft Articles
on Crimes Against Humanity and the recommendation
to elaborate a convention on the basis of those draft
articles. Such a convention would fill an important gap
in the current legal framework.
In addition, together with others, we are leading
efforts to conclude a convention on international
cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of
the crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes — also known as the MLA initiative. We
urge the States that have not yet done so to join this
important initiative.
In conclusion, when the multilateral system is
under pressure, when upholding agreed international
rules and norms is no longer a given, when multilateral
institutions have difficulties in addressing contemporary
challenges, all Member States bear the responsibility

20-0080013/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

to address those weaknesses. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands is committed to maintaining and
strengthening the current multilateral system and we
stand ready to engage with all Member States to achieve
that in order to ensure that the United Nations is fit for
purpose and ready for the next 75 years.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Mardini.
Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important and timely discussion.
When the Nobel Peace Prize was first awarded in
1901 it was given to two joint winners — Frédéric Passy,
who advocated against war; and Henry Dunant, who
campaigned for better protections in war. The Charter
of the United Nations and international humanitarian
law are much like those two prizewinners. The United
Nations Charter includes rules on going to war in the
first place — jus ad bellum — while international
humanitarian law applies in war — jus in bello. Those
two distinct bodies of law complement each other to
prevent wars on the one hand, and to better protect
people in the case of war on the other.
Today, in these times of heightened tensions and
uncertainty, I will focus on two key points.
First and most critically, under international
humanitarian law, civilians must be protected
against attacks. Parties have a responsibility to take
precautions in their attacks and to consider the effects
of their attacks so as to spare the civilian population
and civilian objects. Indeed, certain objects, such as
medical units and transports, cultural property and
objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian
population have specific protections.
Under international humanitarian law, an attack
must be cancelled if it becomes apparent that it is
prohibited. Parties must refrain from carrying out an
attack when the expected harm to civilians and civilian
objects outweighs the military advantage sought.
It thereby becomes a disproportionate, unlawful
attack under international humanitarian law. Where
circumstances permit, advance warning must be given
for attacks that may affect the civilian population. If
there is a choice between military objectives offering a
similar military advantage, the option posing the least
risk to civilians and civilian objects must be selected.
Secondly, one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as set out in Article 1(3) of the United
Nations Charter, is to solve international problems of
14/35

10/01/2020

a humanitarian character. To that end, the Security
Council addresses humanitarian concerns in armed
conflict. It has an important role to play in both
maintaining international peace and security and in
addressing humanitarian concerns.
As one of the oldest and largest humanitarian
organizations, the International Committee of the
Red Cross knows all too well the suffering that takes
place when armed conflict occurs. In today’s world
of heightened tensions and protracted conflicts, the
Security Council and the international community,
more broadly, must redouble their efforts to prevent wars
from happening in the first place. Equally important,
when wars do happen, they must do their utmost so that
parties and those that support them respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law because,
in practice, that is what reduces human suffering and
preserves human dignity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica wishes you every success during your presidency
of the Council. On behalf of my country, we invite
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to adhere to the
code of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group, to which several of the delegations
that have spoken have referred. We also acknowledge
the valuable contributions made to this debate by the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and the
Chair of The Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson.
The contemporary world is witness to the increasing
impact of complex factors that are contributing to global
destabilization and sparking, worsening and prolonging
conflicts. These factors, including inequality, the
climate crisis and the emergence of cross-border armed
militias and extremist groups, have become increasingly
complex, regionalized and internationalized. These are
the new challenges to international peace and security,
which the United Nations must confront and resolve
on the basis of its Charter, 75 years after its entry into
force. Member States must therefore fight to uphold the
Charter of the United Nations, and that is why today’s
debate is so timely and urgent.
Costa Rica believes that this anniversary must be
a call to action to fulfil the mandates enshrined in the
Charter. It is also time to redouble efforts to promote the
reforms that will ensure that the United Nations system
as a whole, and the Security Council specifically,
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

become more responsible, consistent and transparent.
This must be the anniversary that consolidates the
leadership of the United Nations as the epicentre of
global governance, at a time when multilateralism is
floundering and unilateral actions are jeopardizing
global stability.
In order for the United Nations to take up the
reins of global governance, the Security Council must
shoulder the responsibilities incumbent upon it in the
maintenance of international peace and security, bearing
in mind human rights considerations in its actions
and enhancing its conflict-prevention efforts. When
Governments fail to comply with their responsibility
to protect their citizens, the international community,
particularly the Security Council, must use means such
as preventive diplomacy, good offices and mediation.
We must aspire to ensuring that the Security
Council acts in a timely manner, not when it is too late
or, worse still, does not act at all. So that the United
Nations can be consolidated as the epicentre of global
governance, we must be very cautious about the use of
instruments such as the veto — tacit or express — that
distort the purposes for which they were designed and
prevent the United Nations from addressing global
challenges. When a permanent member resorts to the
veto or the threat of the veto, it publicly turns its back on
the right of victims to justice and peace and undermines
international efforts to combat impunity. If a Security
Council is to discharge its crucial role of upholding
respect for the Charter, it must be borne in mind that
the use of the veto, principally when atrocity crimes are
involved, betrays the trust of millions of people in the
United Nations as their last source of hope.
For that reason, Costa Rica supports Liechtenstein’s
proposal that when that occurs, the General Assembly
should be convened and informed and express its views
on the issue. Placing the United Nations at the epicentre
of global governance is not only limited to enhancing the
work of the Security Council and its role in preventing
conflicts and maintaining international peace and
security but also implies further strengthening the
General Assembly and the Organization as a whole.
Our efforts must therefore be focused towards that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for having organized this important debate.
Ireland congratulates Viet Nam on its election to the

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

Council and for successfully meeting the challenge
of chairing the Council during its first month. I also
congratulate the other new members of the Council and
wish them well.
Ireland also expresses its gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral and the Chair of The Elders for their valuable
briefings yesterday. We strongly echo their support for
multilateral approaches to current challenges, and we
in particular commend Mary Robinson’s highlighting
of the dangers posed to international peace and security
by climate change and nuclear proliferation.
Mr. President, your Deputy Prime Minister,
who presided over the Council yesterday, said in the
General Assembly last September (see A/74/PV.11)
that given today’s daunting challenges, it is critical
that we all work together to revitalize multilateralism
and strengthen the United Nations and that we must all
reaffirm the fundamental importance of international
law and the United Nations Charter.
In very similar terms, the President of Ireland,
Michael D. Higgins, in his General Assembly address
(see A/74/PV.6), said that we, the Members, must ask
ourselves whether we are being true to the values
and principles of the United Nations Charter. He
noted that the United Nations and its agencies are
under attack through underfunding, withdrawal of
support and the promotion of narrow self-interest.
Even more fundamentally, he observed, the very idea
of a rules-based order is being called into question
and undermined.
In such circumstances, President Higgins called
on all of us to recognize our collective responsibilities
and to advocate for multilateralism. He stated that
partnership, cooperation, mutual trust and respect are
at the heart of multilateralism. They are embedded in
the rule of law and in values that aim to protect all
individuals on this planet and their rights, aspirations
and dignity.
Indeed, at this current time of heightened global
tension, Ireland urges all to heed the SecretaryGeneral’s call for de-escalation, and we reiterate the
importance of the United Nations and the primary role
of the Council in preventing and resolving conflict.
The promise of the Charter of the United Nations,
when it was agreed 75 years ago as the world emerged
from the devastation of the Second World War, was
precisely to save humankind from the scourge of war.

20-0080015/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

10/01/2020

We have made significant progress in this regard,
including due to the establishment of peacekeeping
operations in 1948. Ireland has been proud to participate
in these operations for more than 60 years, and we pay
tribute here today to the more than 3,000 uniformed
personnel from 120 countries, including Ireland, who
have lost their lives in this service.

We know that common challenges call for common
responses so that the United Nations can best serve the
peoples in the enduring spirit of the Charter. In this,
the seventy-fifth year of the Charter, we should spare
nothing in the quest to achieve those goals.

The Security Council has also responded to
the greater complexity of conflicts and crises by
adapting its response, not only through the evolution
of peacekeeping but also through the development
of peacebuilding mandates and the establishment of
political missions, with humanitarian actions and
through the good offices of the Secretary-General and
his representatives.

Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its presidency
of the Security Council this month. I also wish to
commend you, Mr. President, for rightly choosing the
topic of this open debate on how to strengthen respect
for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
especially in the context of maintaining international
peace and security.

We have also seen the United Nations take important
steps to uphold the values and advance the vision set
out in the Charter. The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change showed the capacity of the international
community to put its faith in multilateralism and chart
a course towards the common good.
It is clearer to us today than ever before that peace
and security, development and human rights — the
pillars of the United Nations — are intrinsically linked.
Mary Robinson has repeatedly pointed out how climate
change affects security, as she did again so powerfully
here in this Chamber yesterday. Hunger, the issue of
access to natural resources and the denial of human
rights are also major factors.
The Security Council at present is, frankly, failing
to meet its responsibilities. It is divided on many
issues, with some permanent members repeatedly
vetoing draft resolutions. The situation with regard
to the provision of cross-border humanitarian relief
in Syria is just the latest example. Ireland expresses
its support in particular for the efforts of the elected
members to overcome these divisions and pledges to
work towards this if we are elected to the Council for
the 2021-2022 term.
Multilateralism is based on the principle of
compromise, of shared vision, of finding the capacity
to put ourselves in the language, thoughts, culture and
concerns of each other. It allows the large and small,
the powerful and weak, to coexist in shared concern
and joint prospect for the betterment of a shared world.
16/35

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.

Our meeting comes at a time when the Middle
East is at a critical juncture of heightened tensions
whose severity needs to be reduced, with diplomatic
means used to spare the region further escalation. The
signing of the United Nations Charter, approximately
seventy-five years ago, was a critical point for the
world’s transition from war to peace. The provisions
of the Charter were drafted amid the effects of the
Second World War, with its first sentence underscoring
the determination to save future generations from the
scourge of war.
However, the ratification of the Charter alone
is not enough to achieve its purposes and principles;
continuous commitment and efforts by all States are
required in order to achieve its noble goals. Increasing
instances of non-compliance with the provisions of the
Charter over the past decades have led to more instability
and chaos, particularly in the light of the ongoing
violations in our region by State and non-State actors
of the principles of sovereignty and non-interference
enshrined in the Charter. It is therefore necessary that,
at this important stage, Member States strengthen their
commitment to the Charter and to international law,
which are the main guarantors of international peace
and security, especially for small States that rely on the
power of international law to protect their sovereignty
and security.
The United Arab Emirates believes that the peaceful
settlement of disputes is one of the main pillars upon
which the United Nations was founded. That is evident
when it comes to addressing the issue of the three
Emirati islands of Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Musa. My country also supports the United Nationsled political processes for the peaceful settlement of
disputes in the region.
In that regard, the United Arab Emirates supports
the call made by the Secretary-General to halt escalation
in the region and revitalize international cooperation
with the participation of the States of the region. The
United Arab Emirates reaffirms its commitment to
seeking political solutions and plays a mediation role
and spreads the values of tolerance throughout our
region, which continues to suffer from violence and
extremism. We note in that regard the importance of
benefiting from the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral and activating the powers conferred upon him
by Article 99 of the Charter, as an essential element in
addressing potential threats to international peace and
security at an early stage.
The United Arab Emirates would like to make
some recommendations to enhance the implementation
of the provisions of the Charter within the framework
of our individual and collective responsibility to protect
future generations from the scourge of war.
First, the Security Council must consult and
coordinate with the States concerned in order to be able
to deal with the cases on its agenda more effectively,
provided that consultations and coordination extend
beyond the scope of countries experiencing conflicts to
include neighbouring countries affected by instability,
as they are most capable of understanding the nature
and complexities of the conflict.
Secondly, regional and subregional organizations
can play a greater role in addressing regional tensions
and achieving security and stability. The Council
should strengthen coordination with the League of
Arab States and the African Union to address the
sensitive security situation in the region. Chapter
VIII of the Charter includes a framework to build on
the comparative advantages that exist at the regional,
subregional and international levels in dealing with
today’s complex crises.
Thirdly, the humanitarian cost of conflict,
exacerbated by inconsistencies in the implementation
of the Charter, must not be overlooked. In that regard,
my country wishes to underscore that it will continue to
play a leading role in supporting humanitarian projects
in the region and beyond. The United Arab Emirates
is among the small number of countries worldwide
to have consistently exceeded the United Nations

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

targets by contributing more than 0.7 per cent of our
gross national income for development assistance. In
that regard, my country supports the suggestion in
the concept note circulated ahead of this open debate
(see S/2020/1, annex) regarding the need to build
the capacity of States in order to abide by their legal
obligations arising from Council resolutions.
Given the belief of the United Arab Emirates in
the importance of friendly relations between countries,
which is one of the Charter’s goals, my country will host
later this year the Dubai Expo 2020 under the theme
“Connecting Minds, Creating the Future”. The objective
is to build partnerships and present innovative ideas
that will forge the world of tomorrow. We are confident
of States’ ability to create a world full of opportunities,
security and sustainability through their commitment
to multilateral mechanisms, cooperation and abiding by
the purposes and principles of the Charter. We invite all
States to join us in such efforts.
In conclusion, I would like to wish Viet Nam
every success in its presidency of the Security Council
this month.
The President: I once again wish to remind all
speakers to keep to the allocated time limit.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, allow me
to commend the Government of Viet Nam for convening
today’s open debate on upholding the Charter of the
United Nations to maintain international peace and
security, which is indeed a very important and timely
event given the various complex processes currently
taking place across the globe.
This year we will commemorate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
It is an important milestone where we can look
back to critically assess accomplishments, identify
shortcomings and address new challenges in order to
effectively uphold our Organization’s Charter. Such
a thorough analysis takes on special significance
today, as we witness an unprecedented process of the
formation of a new alignment of power at the global and
regional levels. The world is becoming less predictable
and more unstable. The strength and effectiveness of
the multilateral institutions and mechanisms designed
to ensure international security have been put to the
test. In that regard, it is now critical to strengthen

20-0080017/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

the central role of the United Nations in international
relations, especially by supporting the core pillars of
the Organization.
One of the imperatives to that end is upholding
the Charter in the maintenance of international peace
and security, which is the first purpose inscribed in
the Charter ahead of other priorities. Article 1 of the
Charter states that the purposes of the United Nations
are to maintain international peace and security and to
take effective collective measures for the prevention
and removal of threats to peace and for the suppression
of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace.
Therefore, Article 1 not only emphasizes the importance
of ensuring international peace and security, but also
clearly calls for undertaking collective measures in
order to achieve that goal. In other words, it underlines
the importance of multilateralism as an essential
prerequisite for safeguarding international peace
and stability.
The aggravation of terrorist threats in the world
poses serious challenges for international peace and
security. Uzbekistan believes that, along with other
factors, ignorance and intolerance are at the heart of
international terrorism and extremism. Given those
circumstances, our most important task nowadays is to
fight for the hearts and minds of people — especially
young people, who now constitute the largest generation
in the history of humankind, totalling 2 billion people
upon whom the planet’s future and well-being will
depend. Our urgent task should therefore be to provide
the conditions for young people’s self-realization,
creating a barrier against the spread of the virus that is
the ideology of violence.
In that regard, I would like once again to highlight
the initiative of the President of Uzbekistan to develop
a United Nations convention on the rights of youth,
aimed at stepping up efforts at the global, regional and
national levels to meet the needs of our youth, build
capacity, expand rights and freedoms and serve the best
interests of young people in all their diversity around the
world. That initiative fully complies with the purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations and also echoes
the Secretary-General’s recent New Year’s message, in
which he named young people as our greatest source of
hope and reaffirmed his support for their aspiration to
play a greater role in shaping the future. We believe that
now is the perfect time to define the rights and role of
young people in our contemporary world.
18/35

10/01/2020

In conclusion, I would like to underline that
Uzbekistan remains firmly committed to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
an international order based on the rule of law, which
are indispensable foundations for a more peaceful,
prosperous and just world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, we would like to congratulate the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its assumption of
the Security Council presidency and pay our respects
to His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam.
We should also like to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Viet Nam for having organized this open
debate to mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Charter of the United Nations and for submitting the
concept note on the topic contained (S/2020/1, annex).
We welcome all of the new elected members of the
Security Council — Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam — and wish
them and their delegations success. We are also grateful
to Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and
Poland for their important contributions to the work of
the Council during their tenure.
Armed conflicts, aggressive expansionist policies,
terrorism, separatism, transnational organized crime
and extremism, coupled with human rights abuses,
financial crises and environmental degradation,
continue to affect millions of people around the world.
The Movement is committed to supporting
multilateralism with the United Nations at its
core. Preserving and strengthening the values of
multilateralism and international cooperation, which
underpin the Charter of the United Nations and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, is fundamental in
promoting and supporting the three pillars of the United
Nations, namely, peace and security, development and
human rights.
At its eighteenth Summit, held in Baku on 25 and
26 October under the theme “Upholding the Bandung
Principles to ensure a concerted and adequate response
to the challenges of the contemporary world”, the Heads
of State and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement
reaffirmed the validity of the purposes and principles
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles
and norms of international law as indispensable in
preserving and promoting peace and security, the rule
of law, economic development and social progress
and all human rights for all. The strict observance of
the principles of international law and the fulfilment
in good faith of the obligations assumed by States, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
are of the greatest importance for the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its continued
concern over the current difficult and complex situation
in the field of disarmament and international security.
In that regard, the Movement calls for renewed efforts
to resolve the current impasse in achieving nuclear
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation in all its
aspects. The Movement expresses its deep concern at
the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any
use of nuclear weapons and, in that context, reaffirms
the need for all States to comply with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian
law, at all times. Every State has the duty to refrain,
in its international relations, from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations.
Such a threat or use of force constitutes a violation of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
and shall never be recognized as a lawful means of
settling international issues.
The Non-Aligned Movement is committed
to supporting and promoting the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles and norms of international law, including
those related to the territorial integrity of States and
the inviolability of their international borders; the
inadmissibility of the use of force; and non-interference
in the internal affairs of States. That also extends to
the right to self-determination of peoples under foreign
occupation and colonial or alien domination, as well
as to denounce, and demand the repeal of, unilateral
coercive measures against Member States that are not
authorized by relevant organs of the United Nations,
or are inconsistent with the principles of international
law or the Charter of the United Nations — given their
extraterritorial implications and illegal character — or
violate human rights and prevent the full economic and
social development of the peoples subjected to them.

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

The Movement reaffirms and underscores its
principled position and commitment with regard to
the promotion of the pacific settlement of disputes in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant resolutions, including
those adopted by the Security Council. In that context,
we also emphasize the significant role played by the
International Court of Justice, the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations, in promoting and
encouraging the settlement of international disputes
by peaceful means in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Statute of the Court. The Movement urges the Security
Council, the General Assembly and other organs of
the United Nations and its specialized agencies duly
authorized to make greater use of the International
Court of Justice as a source of advisory opinions and
interpretation of international law within the scope of
their activities.
The Movement, faithful to its commitment to
strengthening its role as an anti-war and peace-loving
force, reaffirms its determination to work for the
establishment of a peaceful and prosperous world and
a just and equitable world order. We also renew our
determination to work for a multipolar world through
the strengthening of the United Nations and multilateral
processes, which are indispensable to our efforts to
promote the interests of our nations and humankind as
a whole.
Allow me to conclude with several remarks in my
national capacity.
The Charter of the United Nations rests on the
goal of developing friendly relationships among
nations based on respect for one other’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, without pursuing any policy
of expansionism, aggression, occupation or ethnic
cleansing. Yesterday we witnessed Armenia’s renewed
attempt to mislead the Security Council. Armenia’s
speculations and claims with regard to the right of
self-determination have nothing in common with that
principle as it is set forth in the United Nations Charter,
the 1975 Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) Helsinki Final Act and other
international documents. Armenia’s misstatement is
particularly unacceptable, as it was delivered in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8699), which adopted
four resolutions on the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict,
namely, resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993)
and 884 (1993). The mandate of the ongoing peace

20-0080019/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

10/01/2020

process, mediated by the OSCE Minsk Group, is based
on those Security Council resolutions.

United Nations guiding the global community in the
achievement of those aspirations.

The immediate, complete and unconditional
withdrawal of Armenian forces from the Nagorno
Karabakh region and the other seven adjacent occupied
territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the
restoration of the territorial integrity of my country
within its internationally recognized borders represent
a basic premise for the settlement of the conflict. That
is what Armenia must fulfil entirely.

As is highlighted in the concept note (S/2020/1,
annex), the Charter of the United Nations has helped
Member States record significant achievements and
progress in fostering peace, security and international
cooperation, while its purposes and principles have
become the foundation of international law. As such,
the Charter is the central pillar upon which peace,
security and global development must stand. In that
light, the Royal Government of Cambodia would like to
reiterate its unyielding commitment to the purposes and
principles of the Charter. Cambodia strongly believes
that the principles of respect for the sovereign equality,
independence and territorial integrity of States, as well
as non-interference in the domestic affairs of States,
play an important part in building long-lasting peace
and prosperity for all. In seeking to promote respect
for the Charter with a view to safeguarding the three
pillars of the United Nations, my delegation would like
to focus on the following points.

In that connection, I would like to quote the
Secretary-General, who yesterday stated the following:
“While the Charter and its purposes and
principles remain as relevant as ever, our tools
must adapt to new realities. We must use them with
greater determination and creativity. That includes
ensuring the implementation of the Security
Council’s decisions by Member States pursuant to
Article 25 of the Charter.” (S/PV.8699. p. 3)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, my delegation
would like to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
wish to thank Viet Nam for convening this important
debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and the Chair of The Elders,
Mrs. Mary Robinson, for their informative briefings
yesterday (see S/PV.8699).
Cambodia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the Philippines on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As we enter the new decade, it is important to
reflect on the difficulties and successes the global
community has faced since the turn of the twentyfirst century. Despite tremendous achievements in the
sciences and technologies, with the Internet bringing
people closer together, it is unfortunate that conflicts,
crises and power politics have left a lasting negative
imprint on the world. The year 2020 marks the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations and calls for
concerted, collaborative action. The United Nations
was established to maintain international peace
and security, safeguard human rights and promote
international development, with the Charter of the
20/35

First, our collective whole must ensure that the
United Nations is a more responsive, transparent and
accountable institution for the future. The changing
realities of the twenty-first century require the Council
to act decisively in a cooperative and transparent
approach. One way for the Security Council to
promote effective peace and security action, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter, is by
strengthening its peacekeeping engagement, including
through the provision of clear, focused mandates for
missions. Since 2006, Cambodia has deployed thousands
of its peacekeepers to some of the most demanding
missions across the world. Experience shows that clear
peacekeeping mandates, together with political support
and sufficient resources, as well as adequate financing
and logistical support, are key elements necessary
for the United Nations to effectively safeguard and
protect the most vulnerable civilian populations in
conflict situations.
Secondly, the international community must focus
its efforts on the peaceful settlement of disputes, which
is a central tenet of the Charter. The prevention of
conflict must be at the core of our work, with early
and decisive action taken to curtail any unnecessary
escalation of disputes. Moreover, greater political
will must be exercised by all parties. The promotion
of socioeconomic development should be increasingly
focused, with purposeful cooperation among all
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations Members. That will further reinforce
respect for the Charter while promoting peace and
security globally.
Furthermore, States should make every effort to
resolve their disputes peacefully through negotiation,
mediation and dialogue. Indeed, in upholding the
Charter of the United Nations, respect for international
law should be promoted, while double standards in
the application of such law and the use of economic
coercive measures against States must be avoided.
As I conclude, allow me to note that regional
organizations such as ASEAN, of which my country
is a member, have taken it upon themselves to further
promote the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter and have closely collaborated with the United
Nations in that respect. The Royal Government of
Cambodia will continue its active work to uphold
the three pillars of the United Nations, namely, the
maintenance of international peace and security,
respect for human rights and development, in order to
strengthen and promote the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations for the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our deepest condolences to the victims of the
Ukrainian passenger aeroplane crash in Tehran this
week. Our thoughts and prayers are with the families of
the victims. We believe it is of the utmost importance
to ensure a swift and comprehensive investigation of
the crash.
Almost 75 years since the founding of the United
Nations, we still live in a world where the main
principles of international law enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations — the principles of the sovereign
equality, the non-use of threat or force against the
territorial integrity of States and non-interference in
their internal affairs — are violated on a daily basis.
Multilateralism and the rules-based order are under
attack. Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
gives the Security Council the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security
on behalf of Member States. That is why it is so
important that today, in this Chamber, we discuss how
international law and the Charter are being respected
and the implications of this issue around the world.

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

Let me share the worrisome experience of my own
region where, due to the destructive role of one of the
Security Council members, the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of two of its neighbouring States are being
violated. This year marks the twelfth anniversary of
Georgia experiencing a full-scale military aggression
by Russia, which resulted in the illegal occupation of
20 per cent of my country’s territory. A few years later,
Ukraine fell victim to the same aggressor.
In the aftermath of the August 2008 war, the
mandate of United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia was brazenly terminated by the veto cast by
the Russian Federation, a permanent member of the
Security Council and a party to the conflict, thereby
creating a total vacuum of the international security
presence in the occupied territories of Georgia when
it was most needed. Those blatant violations of the
fundamental norms and principles of international
law and disregard for the territorial integrity of the
sovereign States is a massive blow to European security
and the entire international order.
Despite Georgia’s continued commitment to
peaceful conflict resolution, which implies the
de-occupation of our territories and reconciliation
and confidence-building between the war-torn
communities, all our efforts are met with resistance
from the occupying Power. Russia is not fulfilling its
international commitments and continues to violate
the European Union-mediated ceasefire agreement of
12 August 2008.
Let me also underline that, to this very day, even
international human rights mechanisms are not allowed
to enter the occupied regions. Both regions remain
heavily militarized with Russia’s full-fledged military
bases, regular military drills remaining the source of
the destabilization of the already extremely fragile
security environment in the wider region. Russia’s
ongoing steps towards de facto annexation of these
Georgian regions by gradually dragging them into its
military, political, economic, social and legal system
further aggravate the situation.
This illegal process also results in the extreme
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and
violations of human rights on the ground, including the
rights of ethnic Georgians to life, health, education in
their native language, residence and property, as well as
restrictions on the freedom of movement. The practice
of installing barbwire fences and multiple artificial

20-0080021/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

obstacles on Georgian territory, as well as regular
closures of the so-called crossing points, greatly
exacerbate security and humanitarian conditions on the
ground, even resulting in fatalities.
In conclusion, I wish again to reiterate that we
strongly believe that it is only by upholding the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
through respect for international law that we can
deliver on our pledge to maintain peace and security
and pave the way for the protection of human rights
and sustainable development. We therefore once again
reaffirm our strong commitment to multilateralism and
rules-based order.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago.
Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Trinidad and
Tobago is pleased to contribute to this open debate on
upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security. We commend the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, as current President of
the Security Council, for this welcome and appropriate
open debate. We thank the Secretary-General and
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, for their
comprehensive presentations, which set the platform
for a meaningful discussion.
I also wish to congratulate the Government of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. With a population
of 110,000 people, it is the smallest nation ever to be
elected to the Security Council.
It is indeed regrettable that as we approach the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, our discussion on this topic comes amid
escalating tensions and threats to peace and security
in many parts of the world. As a family of nations,
we face challenges that require us more than ever to
place emphasis on multilateral, rather than unilateral
approaches. Trinidad and Tobago remains convinced
that, by strengthening partnerships through mutual
respect and cooperation, we can transform our global
circumstances to the benefit of humankind.
It is evident that the challenge before us is to make
the world peaceful and secure, and this should be a
priority for all States. Trinidad and Tobago therefore
submits that, to achieve that objective, all States must
conform to the principles of the international rule of
law and observe the principles and purposes laid down
in the Charter of the United Nations.
22/35

10/01/2020

The Charter has as its main purposes to maintain
international peace and security, to promote and protect
human rights and to effectively address pressing
international economic and social issues, such as
development, through international cooperation. All
of the possible principles, methods and procedures for
the maintenance of international peace and security
are laid down in the Charter of the Organization,
delineated in Chapters VI and VII, on the pacific
settlement of disputes and on action with respect to the
peace, breaches of the peace and acts of aggression,
respectively.
Trinidad and Tobago is of the view that global
adherence to the Charter significantly contributes to the
maintenance of international peace and security. As a
result, Trinidad and Tobago fully subscribes to the rule
of law, in keeping with our legally binding obligations
flowing from the Charter.
The vulnerability of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict and armed violence continue to
engage our attention. We hold firmly that women
and girls must be equal partners in our collaborative
efforts to build peaceful and sustainable societies and
to promote and protect human rights. The promotion of
gender equity and equality is essential in this regard. It
is equally important to consolidate an integrated social
protection system that improves living conditions and
creates opportunities for women and girls to achieve
their full potential.
Trinidad and Tobago remains a strong proponent of
the Arms Trade Treaty, which we submit represents a
significant achievement in the global fight to eliminate
the diversion of conventional arms to the illicit market,
which could contribute to the reduction of untold
suffering, particularly that of women and girls.
The quest for international peace and security
cannot be divorced from the fervent desire of all peoples
to live in freedom and without fear for their lives. The
lack of religious and ethnic tolerance and respect for
human rights have fuelled horrific crimes of genocide,
crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of
aggression. The Security Council has a key role to play
in responding to acts of aggression, as stipulated in
Article 39 of the Charter.
The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) takes account of this key role and preserves
the primary role of the Security Council in determining
an act of aggression. The international community
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

should therefore seek to strengthen the foundations of
the ICC, of which Trinidad and Tobago is one of the
founding architects, as the tribunal for bringing to
justice those accused of committing the most serious
crimes of concern to the international community. The
embrace of the ICC by all members of the international
community would greatly assist in ensuring the peace
and security of Member States and in promoting and
protecting the human rights of peoples.
Trinidad and Tobago will continue to join
multilateral efforts that contribute to peaceful and
secure societies. On a national level, the Government
of Trinidad and Tobago remains committed to ensuring
the safety and security of its citizens and has adopted
a whole-of-Government approach to national security,
where all ministries and national agencies share
responsibility and are accountable for the safety of
the State.
In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago affirms that
the maintenance of international peace and security,
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations, is in
accordance with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and, if implemented fully, will promote
and encourage peaceful and inclusive societies for
sustainable development and enhance the lives of all
peoples around the globe.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Moncada (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela)
(spoke in Spanish): We congratulate Viet Nam on
having recently joined the Security Council for the
term 2020-2021 and on assuming the presidency of the
Council. We also express our best wishes to the rest of
the non-permanent members.
Our country associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Republic of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Almost 75 years ago, as a result of the vast
devastation inflicted by the Second World War, the
international community decided to join forces to forge
a tool to prohibit war in the conduct of foreign policy.
The outcome was the Charter of the United Nations, a
treaty that is today legally binding on 193 States and
enshrines the basic principles and norms governing
international relations.
The Charter is an act of faith in the best of humankind
and a code of conduct for all States Members of the

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

United Nations. The principle of the legal equality of
States obliges all of us — without distinction between
large and small, or weak and powerful — to respect
it in letter and spirit alike. There is no scope for any
State to proclaim itself to be exceptional or to decide
when to comply with the Charter or to ignore it when
convenient. Likewise, we are obliged to abide by the
Charter in its entirety; we may not decide to accept
some sections and reject others. All of us accept, for
example, that the principles of political independence
and the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention
in the internal affairs of States, the peaceful resolution
of disputes and the right to the self-determination of
peoples, among other things, are essential for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Today we are witnessing the resurgence of
supremacist ideologies that deny the equality and
diversity of humankind, driving the world to the brink
of war with unpredictable consequences — an armed
conflict with which one State, believing itself to be
above international law, threatens the very existence
of an entire civilization; a State that trumpets its
military power and its exceptionalist ideology to
impose its national sovereignty over the sovereignty
of all the peoples of the world. This is a return to the
darkest moments of the last century, when domestic
national objectives combined with ambitions of
global domination to fuel the use of armed force out
no international legal controls. This is endless war as
a method of oppression and expansion of power — a
world with no Charter of the United Nations!
We ask by what authority a Government may
systematically violate, with impunity, the Charter
of the United Nations by conducting indiscriminate
bombings and extrajudicial executions; by violating the
territorial integrity of or invading sovereign countries;
by imposing coercive measures against more than
one-third of humankind; by violating the principle
of non-interference in internal affairs; by imposing
collective punishment against civilian populations; by
defending torture as a State practice; by threatening
entire nations with naval blockades; by threatening to
destroy the cultural heritage of a people; by violating the
immunity of diplomatic headquarters; by conducting
economic terrorism; or by preventing diplomats from
States that do not obey its orders from exercising
their rights in the United Nations? The answer is very
simply — no Government has any such authority. No
such authority exists.

20-0080023/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Our 193 States and, more specifically, the members
of the Security Council, tasked with taking measures
to maintain or restore international peace and security,
must prevent the catastrophe that is war and uphold
the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout human
history there has never been a better alternative to
the Charter. Ignoring its value and binding character
is not only a betrayal of the past generations who
bequeathed us this tool for peace but also a betrayal
of future generations who deserve to live free from
the unspeakable suffering of war. We cannot allow the
United Nations to perish on our watch or for it to suffer
the same fate as the defunct League of Nations. That
failure led to the Second World War II, and it is our
duty to prevent a third.
In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
as a responsible member of the international community,
today reaffirms its commitment to the Charter and to
the norms of international law. We put into practice the
peaceful coexistence among nations, based on mutual
respect. We are therefore announcing today our support
for the establishment of a group of friends in defence
of the Charter of the United Nations, with the purpose
of safeguarding for all the peoples of the world the
effective application of the most important legal, moral
and intellectual instrument devised by humankind,
which has succeeded since 1945 in preventing a third
world war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Mahmadaminov (Tajikistan): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate Viet Nam on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I also express
my appreciation for the convening of today’s open
debate on such an important topic as upholding the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the Chair of The Elders for their constructive briefings.
Maintaining peace and security is an issue of top
priority for the entire international community. For
this reason, in order to stop wars and settle conflicts
the international community must shoulder its
responsibility to undertake urgent collective measures.
The norms and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations retain their fundamental significance
in international relations. We fully subscribe to what
the Secretary-General has said: “Peace, justice, human
24/35

10/01/2020

dignity, tolerance and solidarity are enshrined in the
Charter and bind us together”. Indeed, we can succeed
only if we work together.
During the existence of the United Nations, the
world has made considerable progress in technological,
information, economic and social development, which
through globalization is spreading across the world.
However, the negative aspects of such phenomena
as international terrorism, extremism, transnational
organized crime, drug trafficking and the exacerbation
of environmental issues pose a serious threat to the
international community. The current situation requires
all countries to take more robust action and make firm
commitments by facilitating region cooperation and
partnerships based on fair, effective and mutually
beneficial economic relations.
My country, Tajikistan, therefore calls on all those
concerned to maximize their efforts towards a speedy
and full settlement to the long-standing and current
conflicts in different parts of parts of the world, and
especially in the Middle East. The United Nations plays
a key role in coordinating Member States’ efforts in
order to effectively meet the challenges of our time and
attain the Sustainable Development Goals.
The notion of war and peace is not alien to
Tajikistan. From their own experience, the Tajik people
are well aware what death, devastation and pain war
can cause. My country had to face such challenges in
the initial stages of establishing itself as a sovereign
State. The consequences were deplorable. The five
years of imposed civil war claimed extensive human
casualties, displaced a million people and caused
enormous economic devastation. But as a result of
successful progress in peacebuilding, we managed to
deal with those difficulties.
Over the past two decades, under the leadership of
President Emomali Rahmon, the country has come a
long way and, despite many challenges, succeeded in
achieving peace, stability and sustainable development.
We are proud of these accomplishments. One of the
main lessons that can be drawn from our experience
is that it is only through cooperation and joint actions
that we will win the fight against the forces of evil and
global threats.
The United Nations, regional organizations and
other partners — such as the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and others — played a
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

successful and important role in achieving a peace
process in Tajikistan. Upon the successful completion
of the mission of the United Nations Tajikistan Office of
Peacebuilding, the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia was established
in Ashgabat. Today it promotes dialogue between the
Governments of the countries of the region on finding
solutions on how to address emerging problems and
eliminate potential threats to peace and security.

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

become protracted, women and children suffer the most
and many lives are lost — it is that simple.

The upcoming commemoration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the founding of the United Nation, in
September, will provide an opportunity to reaffirm our
collective commitment to multilateralism and to the
United Nations. In this regard, we are looking forward
to adopting a unifying declaration that captures Member
States shared vision for a common future.

There is a wide range of issues that demand the
Council’s attention — the heightened tensions in the
Middle East; international terrorism; risks arising
from new technologies; nuclear proliferation; and the
13 existing peace operations. The Secretary-General,
in his briefings this week, spoke about geopolitical
fractures and the growing tide of nationalism that is
harming multilateralism. He spoke about growing
mistrust in the United Nations. I could not agree
with him more. All these challenges mean we need a
Council that is decisive; that demonstrates purpose and
urgency; and that exercises flexibility and creativity
but ultimately acts within the spirit of the Charter of
the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that as
an advocate of broad-based cooperation, Tajikistan
believes that only collective and coordinated efforts
and effective regional and international cooperation
can serve as a foundation of our common success
in maintaining peace and security. The mutual
understanding and cooperation that have prevailed
in this Organization since its establishment remain
the only path towards a bright and clear future and
universal peace and prosperity.

Regional organizations play an increasingly
critical role in assisting the Security Council in its
peace and security responsibilities. They understand
local dynamics. They have connections and a growing
capacity to play a critical role in the prevention of
conflicts and building peace. The Pacific has provided
an excellent demonstration of that role in assisting a
fellow member of the Pacific Islands Forum — Solomon
Islands — to transition out of conflict. Going forward,
that link needs to be strengthened.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.

At the time the Charter was agreed, Fiji was not
a free country; we acquired our independence twentyfive years later. We are proud to share the fiftieth
anniversary of our independence with the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations this year; both are
equally important to us.

Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I wish to congratulate Viet
Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and for having convened this debate, as
well as to congratulate all the new members of the
Security Council.
The United Nations is commemorating 75 years
since its founding. The United Nations was founded, as
per the opening sentence of the Charter, with a vision
to “save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war”. That responsibility ultimately lies with the
Security Council. The Security Council sits with that
burden. That burden could not be clearer in relation to
developments in the Middle East over the past few days.
The Security Council has since its founding
influenced international peace and security. When
it acts with speed, it always prevents conflict. When
its members act in concert, it saves many thousands
of lives. When the Council fails to agree, conflicts

Not all the current challenges could have been
imagined by the framers of our Charter. Today the
world faces a new war of a type that the drafters of
the Charter could not have imagined 75 years ago. The
Pacific Island Forum leaders have declared climate
crisis as the gravest security threat facing the Pacific
islands. We started 2020 with the tragic expression of
that grave challenge: the bushfires across Australia tell
us we are at war with the planet.
The majority of United Nations peace operations are
today in regions that face some type of climate-induced
stress: water stress, food insecurity, destroyed
livelihoods — all are consequences of climate change
that fuel intra- and inter-State conflicts. It does not take
a rocket scientist to tell us that stresses that are caused

20-0080025/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

10/01/2020

by the climate crisis, whether on land or sea, are fuel
for international terrorism and extremists.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and all
the other briefers for their valuable statements.

Our biodiversity, oceans, forests and lands are
threatened by global warming. There are no front
lines. There are no safe areas. The melting glaciers in
the North, the dying coral reefs of blue Pacific in the
South, the charred biodiversity across Australia are all
frontlines in the climate crisis. Yet the gravest threat to
peace and security comes from the slow-onset impacts
of the climate crisis — one impact after another,
repeated year in, year out, can transform stable States
into unstable and fragile States. Nowhere is that felt
more intensely than in small States.

Commitment to the Charter of the United Nations
and to the rules of international law has always been
the mainstay of our foreign policy. Jordan has always
been committed to respecting international and
bilateral treaties and conventions, while implementing
all international resolutions. We have rejected double
standards and selective approaches, especially when
it comes to resolutions on the Palestinian question,
based on our belief in the role of the United Nations
as the authoritative standard for international relations
and the diplomatic settlement of disputes and for the
establishment of international law.

The founders of the United Nations, opening
the Charter with their vision “to save successive
generations from the scourge of war”, showed great
foresight. They did not limit or constrain the meaning
of war in a definition based on guns and weapons. The
climate crisis has all the intrinsic features of war — it
kills human beings; water, food and insecurities are
weaponized in climate-induced conflicts; and as in all
wars, women and children bear the brunt of suffering
and pain — and we are losing this war. To win the
climate war may seem like an impossible proposition,
but at the General Assembly, Nelson Mandela reminds
us every day that it always seems impossible until it
is done.
As we mark our seventy-fifth anniversary, it is time
to recommit ourselves to our Charter. It is time to raise
our climate ambition, to rekindle our multilateral spirit
and apply ourselves collectively to tackle what Fiji’s
Prime Minister describes as the battle of our lives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to commend your initiative,
Mr. President, to convene this meeting on the theme
“Maintenance of international peace and security:
Upholding the United Nations Charter”, which coincides
with the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of
the United Nations.
I would also like to congratulate Viet Nam on
joining the Council for the period 2020-2021. I wish
you, Sir, all the best at the helm of the Council this
month. We look forward to working with you and with
the incoming members of the Council: Estonia, the
Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia.
26/35

Jordan, which joined the United Nations in 1955,
fully believes that this international Organization cannot
succeed in carrying out its responsibilities unless it is
committed to implementing its resolutions and related
operations in compliance with the values of justice and
international law. The international community, at all
levels, must implement all the commitments resulting
from those resolutions.
In its foreign policy, Jordan is also committed to
upholding international norms and the diplomatic
principles governing bilateral and multilateral relations,
while maintaining the principle of non-interference
in the internal affairs of others. We are committed to
moderation and believe that regional and international
disputes can only be resolved through peaceful
means, diplomacy and dialogue, while refraining from
resorting to force or the threat of using it.
The United Nations and responsible countries
renounce the escalation of violence in order to spare
the world further wars and human suffering as a result
of military confrontation.
In the context of the rapid pace of change in
international political and strategic relations, the recent
international crises, especially those in the Middle
East, have shown the importance of the principles and
purposes on which the United Nations was founded
and its central role in establishing and maintaining
international peace and security. They have also
demonstrated the need to increase the effectiveness of
the Organization by providing it with all the necessary
resources and mechanisms to empower it and to address
the root causes of its deficiencies.
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

My country therefore supports the wide-ranging
reform programme launched by Secretary-General
António Guterres to enhance the effectiveness and
transparency of the Organization and its capacities to
counter crises. In that regard, the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan presided in 2019 over the Conference on the
Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction,
pursuant to General Assembly decision 73/546, which
called on the Secretary-General to convene annual
sessions of this Conference. Jordan’s leadership has
garnered the support of the countries of the region and
other countries concerned as it demonstrates Jordan’s
full commitment to supporting the initiatives of the
Secretary-General based on our belief in achieving
regional and international peace and security.
Our region urgently needs to build trust, strengthen
cooperation and achieve peace rather than suffer
conflicts so that our people can live in peace and
security in order to realize the future they want. The
significant changes, challenges and priorities of the
international community, as well as addressing them,
are adequate proof of the need for the Organization to
adapt, develop and improve so that it can carry out its
work in an effective and tangible manner, especially
to deal with transnational challenges, particularly
terrorism, violent extremism, xenophobia, climate
change, migration and refugee issues. The nature of
such challenges requires comprehensive international
action to address the root causes through a deeper
understanding of the interconnected socioeconomic
and existential dimensions of those phenomena, the
solutions to which must be equally comprehensive and
far-reaching.
That also applies to international peace and
security. The international community must do its
utmost to uphold justice and ensure the implementation
of international resolutions by providing the necessary
political environment founded on respect for human
rights and tolerance, as well as creating opportunities
for inclusive development and finding fundamental
solutions to unemployment and social imbalance. That
would contribute directly to building stability, trust and
universal justice that would exclude no one. Throughout
the world we must uphold the values that are the
foundation for our harmony and mutual coexistence.
In line with our commitment to the Charter, the
promotion of peace, the protection of humanity and
the alleviation of the impact of wars and conflicts on

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

vulnerable groups worldwide, Jordan has participated
for decades in United Nations peacekeeping operations
across the world. In fact, we have contributed more
than 100,000 Jordanians to peacekeeping operations
that help to protect civilians in difficult and complex
situations. The Kingdom will continue to support the
United Nations approach and efforts for peacebuilding
and peacekeeping at all levels.
Given the important role of young people in
building and maintaining peace and security, during
its membership of the Security Council for the period
from 2014 to 2015 Jordan proposed the historic
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security,
to help integrate young people as an essential partner
and to promote their positive role and representation
in decision-making in order to empower them and
enable them to achieve sustainable peace and counter
extremism. That initiative by His Royal Highness
Crown Prince Al-Hussein Bin Abdullah helped to
introduce a new phase of United Nations engagement
on youth, mobilizing the necessary international
support to give young people the attention that they
deserve while ensuring a better future for them and
protecting them from the negative effects of conflict
and from being recruited by evil, violent and extremist
forces. We also stress the important role of women in
establishing security and stability in their communities
as well as their fundamental role in spreading the
principles of harmony, tolerance and peace. In order
to ensure the effectiveness of the Organization and its
Charter in the twenty-first century, we must prioritize
young people in the international community.
During the general debate of the seventy-fourth
session of the General Assembly, His Majesty King
Abdullah II Ibn Al-Hussein emphasized that
“[t]olerance, compassion and the equality of
all human beings are the values that make global
harmony and collective action possible. Those
are the values that permeate the Charter of the
United Nations — to live together in peace as good
neighbours, to honour the rights and equality of all
and to combine our efforts and unite our strengths,
not only in order to maintain peace and security
but also to improve human life through justice,
prosperity and greater hope for humankind.
“Those are the moral obligations that the
United Nations founders set forth. Now they are

20-0080027/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

our responsibility. We must not fail.” (A/74/PV.3,
pp. 39-40)
The President: As there are still more than 20
names on the list of speakers, I once again remind all
speakers to keep to the allocated time limit.
I now give the floor to the representative of Oman.
Mr. Al Hassan (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): Seventyfive years ago, the peoples of the world reached
consensus on a noble objective — saving humankind
from the scourge of war. To that end, they adopted a
number of values, principles and codes of conduct
aimed at maintaining peace and promoting the values
of tolerance and cooperation among all countries
and peoples.
My delegation agrees with what was said by the
Secretary-General, namely, that peace is humankind’s
most precious value and that the Charter of the United
Nations is the foundation of international relations,
which must be based on mutual respect, non-interference
in the internal affairs of States, good-neighbourliness
and cooperation towards common interests as well as
the mutual sharing of benefits among countries. From
this rostrum, we call on all Member States to commit
to the purposes and principles of the Charter, which are
at the core of peace. Disregarding those purposes and
principles, their non-implementation or their selective
implementation would lead to chaos and instability and
would threaten international peace and security.
We also stress respect for all the Articles of the
Charter, in particular those set out in Chapter VI, which
establish peace diplomacy, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the non-use of force and coercive sanctions.
That would save lives and reduce losses.
Given the tensions and conflicts facing the world,
we see an increasing responsibility to be shouldered
by the United Nations. It is therefore important to
underline the need for a more balanced and more
cooperative relationship between the Security Council
and the General Assembly. In order for Security
Council resolutions to be more credible, they should be
in line with the provisions of the Charter, in particular
the principle of respect for the national sovereignty
of States.
In conclusion, I would like to note that in the
Sultanate of Oman we value the importance of the
Organization and this Council. We highly value its
work and that of its Secretaries-General. We hope for
28/35

10/01/2020

concerted international efforts in the upcoming period
so as to reach international consensus in order to put an
end to many conflicts around the world, in particular
the Palestinian question, since its settlement is long
overdue and it has an impact on the peace and security
of the Middle East region and the world. We also
emphasize the need to provide further assistance to our
brothers in Yemen so that differences can be resolved
and humanitarian assistance can be increased in order
to alleviate the human suffering of the Yemeni people.
The President: I congratulate the representative of
Oman on delivering the shortest statement this morning
and I encourage all speakers to follow his example.
I now give the floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Robinson
for their valuable inputs. Croatia aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union (see S/PV.8699). I will add several points in my
national capacity.
The adoption of the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights were
decisive moments in human history. In order to prevent
the horrors of the Second World War from reoccurring,
Member States decided to establish a powerful
global organization to protect peace and to promote
development and human rights. However, because of
the Cold War, the promises envisaged by the Charter
remained unfulfilled.
The end of the Cold War finally created a political
climate that enabled more effective action in safeguarding
peace and preventing mass atrocities. In addition to
the better functioning of the institutions provided by
the Charter, United Nations peacekeeping and special
political missions, as well international accountability
mechanisms, were introduced. For years, the number of
conflicts and atrocity crimes were steadily decreasing.
That is no longer the case. In recent years, the number
of conflicts, as well as atrocity crimes, has been once
again on the rise. Impunity is running rampant. The
lack of decisive multilateral responses undermine the
rules-based international order. Effective prevention is
too often blocked by divisions in the Council and the
use of veto by its permanent members.
The Charter gives the Security Council the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

international peace and security. Within the Council,
special trust is given to its five permanent members,
vested with special powers. However, such special
powers, including a permanent seat on the Council,
as well as the right to veto, are accorded to permanent
members in the understanding that they would use
them responsibly, benefitting all peoples and all United
Nations Member States.

things that could and should be done before the point
of no return is reached and atrocities are committed.
In preventing mass atrocities, peace and security,
development and human rights aspects are closely
interlinked. Therefore, the Security Council, the rest
of the United Nations, regional organizations, Member
States and civil society should be coordinating and
acting together.

Croatia has always been a strong and vocal
advocate of multilateralism, while at the same time
calling for the necessary reforms that would enhance
the effectiveness and relevance of the Organization,
especially the Security Council. Who sits on it is
not the only issue; we would like to see the Council
more engaged in preventing crises and dedicated to its
Charter duties rather than any particular interest. In
order to maintain the Council’s authority and relevance
in maintaining global peace and security, we need more
cooperation and global responsibility in its work.

In conclusion, we must uphold the United Nations
Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. They are humankind’s survival guide, but they
should also be complemented by additional multilateral
responses to newly emerging threats. The seventy-fifth
anniversary of the Charter, the twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, and the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption
of R2P create plenty of opportunities for discussion,
hopefully leading to more effective action on the
prevention of conflicts and atrocity crimes.

Therefore, Croatia welcomes and supports the
initiative to establish a code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, as well as the
French-Mexican initiative whereby the five permanent
members of the Council would commit to refraining
from the use of veto in cases in which the commission
of mass atrocities has been proven. Both initiatives
reflect the spirit of the Charter and its intention to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war. In a
practical sense, it is crucial that those initiatives do
not require an amendment to the Charter, which is, as
we all know, extremely difficult because of procedural
requirements, as well as vested interests.

We must reverse the negative trends. We the peoples
demand it from us here and now.

Croatia also supports and is a part of the
multilateralism initiative. Current challenges, such
as weapons of mass destruction, as well as cyber and
environmental threats, can be successfully addressed
only through joint, well-coordinated efforts. Croatia
also upholds the responsibility to protect (R2P), as
consensually adopted in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome document (General Assembly resolution
60/1). It is not legally binding like the provisions of
the Charter, but, in addition to being morally binding,
it is also politically binding on all Member States,
especially the members of the Security Council, which
have special responsibilities under R2P.
However, the primary aim of R2P is the prevention
of atrocity crimes, not reaction to them. There are many

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Viet Nam’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I also congratulate
the new members of the Council and express our
deep appreciation to the outgoing members for their
commendable work.
Our Constitution mirrors the Charter of the United
Nations in its unwavering commitment to international
peace and security, based on the principles of respect
for national sovereignty and equality, non-interference
in the internal affairs of other countries, the peaceful
settlement of international disputes and respect for
international law. In the words of the father of our
nation in his maiden address to the United Nations,
“The noble ideals enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations are the very ideals for which
millions of our people have made the supreme
sacrifice” (A/PV.2243, para. 2).
It is on the basis that steadfast commitment that
Bangladesh continues to be a leading contributor
to United Nations peacekeeping. The humanity and
courageous leadership shown by Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina in hosting more than a million
persecuted Rohingyas, which saved the region from

20-0080029/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

potential destabilization, also emanates from that
abiding commitment.
Rising from the devastation of the Second World
War, the United Nations, guided by its Charter, was
at the forefront of multilateral efforts to leverage
global socioeconomic development and the promotion
of human rights for achieving sustainable peace and
addressing conflicts and violence. We have since
moved on to a more complex world with new and
unprecedented challenges endangering international
peace and security. The nature of conflicts and their
consequences are far more unpredictable and colossal,
compounded by asymmetric security threats coming
from non-State actors and a new generation of threats
in cyberspace. Other emerging challenges, such as
climate change, poverty, inequality, terrorism, violent
extremism and human displacement have also added
new dimensions to traditional global threats.
Yet the Charter has withstood the test of time and
shaped the rules-based international order in which we
live today. It remains the most powerful and the only
universally acceptable instrument before us. There is
an urgent need, however, to move from words to an era
of action. The ongoing system-wide United Nations
reforms can be catalytic in ensuring more effective and
results-driven actions. The greater involvement of the
wider membership, especially the developing countries,
can also provide the much-need impetus.
To that end, Bangladesh supports the United Nations
renewed focus on prevention for ending and resolving
conflicts. A culture of peace and non-violence can be
an all-embracing driver. We must also leverage the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development in addressing the
drivers of conflict. The International Court of Justice
and other international legal bodies and tribunals can
certainly play a more pivotal role in ensuring justice
and ending the culture of impunity. There is also an
urgent need to end crimes against humanity, genocide
and war crimes. We call on the Security Council to
provide a more decisive approach in that regard.
As the women and peace and security agenda turns
20 this year, we must ensure justice and gender equality
through its implementation. In order to tap into the
enormous strength of our young generation, the youth,
peace and security agenda has to be pursued in a more
effective manner. We also need to build on the regional
models of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
30/35

10/01/2020

We are passing through a critical time when the very
notion of multilateralism is in question. It is imperative
now — perhaps, more than ever — for the entire United
Nations membership to unite and engage to use the
Charter in its true spirit and address global realities and
the aspirations of current and future generations. We
must work towards a more innovative application of the
principles of the Charter, and the Security Council has
the primary responsibility in that regard, safeguarding
the interests of greater humankind for peace and
security. Bangladesh stands ready to do its part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. Let me
congratulate you on assuming the presidency. I would
also like to welcome all the other new members of the
Security Council as they start their mandates.
Portugal is strongly committed to a reinforced
multilateral system with the United Nations at its
centre. We view peace as a broad concept, promoting
both human rights and sustainable development. We
therefore support the comprehensive ongoing reform
of the United Nations system to fully uphold our
collective vision of international peace and security,
including through conflict prevention, as enshrined in
Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations. Only
political solutions and preventive diplomacy allow the
international community to act with responsibility in
order to avoid escalation and spillover risks.
The Security Council plays a central role in
promoting the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Negotiation,
inquiry,
mediation,
conciliation,
arbitration and resort to regional mechanisms are some
of its best tools. Moreover, we think that the working
methods of the Security Council should be adapted to
enhance transparency and efficiency.
Peacekeeping operations are a privileged
instrument of the Security Council in maintaining
peace and security. Supporting those operations has
been and will remain a priority for my country. That
commitment is translated in our presence in eight of
the United Nations current missions. The Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the joint Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations are further evidence of positive steps.
Furthermore, we need to focus on the peace continuum
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the paramount role of peacebuilding, namely in
transition scenarios.
In that vein, we support stronger and more regular
coordination between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, as well as additional focus
on climate challenges and other potential sources
of conflict. The critical importance of reinforced
participation by women and youth has been proved in
recent and ongoing missions.
Let me conclude by expressing our firm belief
that this year’s commemoration of the United Nations
seventy-fifth anniversary will be an opportunity to
reaffirm our collective commitment to multilateralism,
grounded on the primacy of international law and on the
principles and values of the United Nations Charter. We
owe it to the past to prevent the same tragic mistakes.
We owe it to the present, to those still mired in conflict
and poverty. We also owe it to the future, as caretakers
of this irreplaceable and essential Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I would also
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
very relevant and timely high-level debate.
Greece aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union (see S/PV.8699) and
wishes to contribute the following additional remarks.
Greece was one of the initial signatories of the
Charter of the United Nations and a founding member
of the United Nations almost 75 years ago. For us,
international law constitutes the cornerstone of our
policies in our wider region and beyond, as well as the
fundamental basis of our relations with all our partners.
Our historical experience has convinced us of
the high value of multilateralism, as embodied in
our participation in the European Union. It has also
made us a staunch supporter of the peremptory rule
of the United Nations Charter that prohibits the use
or the threat of use of force and acts of aggression in
international relations — a rule that underpins our
collective security system embedded in the Charter. It
is the collective responsibility of all States Members of
the United Nations to settle their disputes by peaceful
means, as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter, which
provides several methods for their prevention and
settlement based on the primacy of international law
in international relations. At the same time, we believe

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

that preventive diplomacy and early warning can also
avert the emergence and escalation of conflicts, and,
in that respect, we recognize the crucial role of the
Security Council in addressing international disputes
at an early stage and without delay.
In that context, allow me to point out the
fundamental significance of respect for the rule of law
and the public order of the oceans as reflected in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. With
its universal and unified character, the Convention
contributes to the strengthening of peace and security,
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations among
all nations and is a factor of stability and security in a
challenging international context. We therefore stress
the need to abide by its provisions, which have long been
recognized by jurisprudence as reflecting customary
international law, and therefore refrain from actions
that are in violation of Article 2 of the United Nations
Charter, which prohibits the threat or use of force.
Greece deems it important that we all comply
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, fully implement Security Council resolutions
and safeguard the fundamental indisputable norms
governing international relations, such as respect
for the principles of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of nations, non-aggression and goodneighbourly relations — that is our common duty and
obligation. It is equally important to resolve disputes
through peaceful means, but always on the basis of
international law — that is our common responsibility.
Transforming those doctrines into practice constitutes
the quintessence of our approach to international
relations and the future we want.
In that regard, Greece’s bid for election as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2025 to 2026 is guided by its strong aspiration
to uphold the United Nations Charter and our clear
dedication to work tirelessly to maintain international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): At the outset,
Rwanda extends its congratulations to you and your
team, Mr. President, for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month and thank you
for organizing this important debate, ahead of the
celebrating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations. We also welcome the new members of the

20-0080031/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council and wish them success. We appreciate
the contributions made by the outgoing members of
the Council.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The list of speakers, from yesterday to today,
testament to how important this topic is. We appreciate,
Sir, that you have extended this meeting until today to
give Member States a chance to take the floor. Most
points have been mentioned, but allow us to stress a
few points.
The authors of the Charter of the United Nations
were not mistaken when they began this great document
by recalling the horrors and pains of the scourge of war,
which we unfortunately forget from time to time. They
did not envisage how much the international system
would evolve, but their bitter experience convinced
them that multilateral cooperation was the only way
to save humankind from destruction. They were right.
That is the true spirit of this Organization. The purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter enhance
that vision and practice of multilateral cooperation by
engaging and encouraging States to pursue cooperation
over isolation, peaceful settlement of disputes over war
and the pursuit of a common vision in which Member
States can relate as equals. Indeed, the formation of the
United Nations and its evolution over the years have
shown us that multilateral cooperation is central to
peace and security in the world.
The role of the United Nations is being questioned
and international treaties are being challenged. That
means that, at times, multilateral cooperation is at a
crossroads, perhaps at a time when we need it most,
with contemporary challenges, including climate
change, terrorism, poverty and inequalities, which all
require a multilateral system to move them forward.
No one doubts that no country can address those
challenges alone. A stronger United Nations, reflecting
the realities of the contemporary world, will allow it
and its Member States to meet those challenges today
and in the years ahead.
There are many achievements of which we can be
proud as we look back on the past 75 years. The world
is a better place in many ways. We see progress in the
areas of peace and security, economic development,
human rights, social development, health and many
32/35

10/01/2020

other sectors. Indeed, if it was not for multilateral
cooperation, we may not have recorded as much success.
But there is still a long way to go. The world is
a dynamic place and history is always evolving. New
challenges have emerged over the years and require us
to adapt to them. To that end, allow Rwanda to make a
few points.
First, while we all pursue our national interests, at
the core of it all we need to build on the fact that the
people we serve have common aspirations. They want
to live in a peaceful, sustainable and dignified world.
Let us build on the mutual aspirations of our peoples,
rather than focus on small goals. Therefore, there is
a need to strengthen international relations, based on
international law, and the United Nations remains the
best forum in which to discuss those issues.
Secondly, there is a need for all Member States to
uphold the Charter in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We must also strengthen multilateral
cooperation. Most contemporary challenges — be they
terrorism, climate change, transnational organized
crimes and many others — will be effectively addressed
if we work together.
Thirdly, our world has been integrated and
globalized far too deeply for us to dismember ourselves
and try to fix things alone. In that regard, the United
Nations will become even more relevant in the years to
come. We all therefore need to renew our commitment
to the rules-based multilateral system.
Fourthly, the primary body responsible for
maintenance of international peace and security is
the Security Council. It also needs to make wider and
more effective use of the procedures and frameworks
available to settle disputes.
Finally, Rwanda reaffirms its commitment to the
principles of the Charter, and we will continue to play
our part to enhance multilateral cooperation in the
pursuit of a just, peaceful and prosperous world for
us all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): I would like to congratulate
Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and for organizing today’s important debate on
upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security. The debate is most
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

timely and pertinent under the present circumstances of
growing global security challenges and the increasing
threat to multilateralism.
Myanmar joined the United Nations in 1948 as a
newly independent country, believing in the purposes
and principles of the Charter, with high hopes and
the determination to build a new nation of peace and
security, prosperity and equality in the family of
nations, out of the ravages of war. Throughout the
years, Myanmar has always fulfilled its international
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security, as
a responsible member of the Organization.
Seventy-five years after its adoption, the Charter
remains valid, as the most important and universally
accepted international legal instrument to guide,
promote and maintain international peace and security
and to protect humankind from another catastrophic
world war. Today, the world continues to face serious
traditional and non-traditional security challenges
that demand concerted global efforts. Present and
emerging global issues, such as growing geopolitical
contentions, international terrorism, transboundary
crimes, localized armed conflicts associated with
ethno-nationalism and the massive outflow of refugees,
are the new security challenges we are encountering
today at an unprecedented scale.
Against that backdrop, the rise of unilateralism,
nationalism and protectionism have compounded
serious threats to international law and multilateralism.
At this critical time more than ever before, the world
needs a stronger United Nations to harmonize our
collective efforts in strengthening multilateralism and
maintaining international peace and security.
The strict observance of the principles of
international law and adherence to their obligations
under the Charter of the United Nations by all Member
States are essential for the maintenance of peace and
security. Every State has the responsibility to abide by
the principles of respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, political independence and non-interference
in matters that are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of States.
All disputes and conflicts must be resolved
by peaceful means, through political dialogue and
negotiations, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter and international law. The threat or use of
force and unilateral coercive measures against other

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

States are against the principles of the United Nations
Charter and international law. In that regard, it is most
important that the United Nations and the international
community support the chosen ways and initiatives
of the countries concerned in settling their disputes
or conflicts.
As the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, the principles of objectivity, impartiality and
non-selectivity should be applied to all Member States,
large or small, when carrying out the Council’s mandate.
The application of double standards and politicization
of issues must be avoided. The confidence, trust and full
cooperation of all United Nations Member States must
be nurtured for the successful implementation of the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter.
The United Nations is at the heart of multilateralism,
on which we place our hopes and aspirations. Myanmar
has always abided by the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter and strongly supports the role of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. We hope that the United Nations
will continue to be a beacon of fairness and justice and
play a leading and exemplary role in maintaining peace
and stability and promoting development and human
rights for all, so that we will be able to achieve the
goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
to build a better and safer world for all mankind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to hail with love and pride every martyr who
has made the ultimate sacrifice in order to preserve
the homeland.
At the outset, Iraq would like to congratulate
the delegation of the Republic of Viet Nam on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to wish it every success. We also
congratulate the other new members of the Security
Council — Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Tunisia. We wish them all the best
during their membership. We wish to thank also the
delegations of the outgoing non-permanent members,
Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, the sisterly State of
Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their efforts during their
terms in the Security Council.

20-0080033/35

S/PV.8699 (Resumption 1)

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me begin by quoting the first lines of the
Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations,
“We the peoples of the United Nations
determined to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind, and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights
of men and women and of nations large and small.”
From this Chamber, my delegation would like
to note that Iraq was one of the very first founding
countries of the United Nations. We were among the
50 countries that signed the Charter on 26 June 1945.
Today, I recall once again that important event as I
express our strong commitment to the fundamental
rules that govern international relations. We stress our
strong belief in the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter, foremost among which are respect for
the independence, territorial integrity and sovereign
equality of countries, as well as non-interference in
internal affairs, good-neighbourliness and the peaceful
settlement of conflicts. We also believe in refraining
from the use or threat of use of force and in eradicating
security threats through cooperation in service to the
basic interests of all peoples.
Iraq’s struggle against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant — terrorist Da’esh — from 2014 until our
victory in 2017 was one of the positive developments
in the region. It reflected the practical application of
an important principle of the Charter, namely, the
importance of international cooperation in tackling
threats to international peace and security. That victory
was achieved thanks to the sacrifice and blood of all
the components of our security forces, with the support
of our people and the international coalition, as well as
our friends, brothers and neighbours. Iraq became the
focus of everyone’s interest in eradicating the danger
posed by Da’esh, which threatens international peace
and security. All our friends and brothers agreed to
commit to implementing the fundamental purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter and to
supporting Iraq’s fight against terrorism, restoring
peace and stability and rebuilding the country after the
destruction wrought by the terrorist Da’esh gangs.
Nevertheless, we must note the fact that some
countries have not fully abided by the principles
and purposes of the United Nations Charter and
have chosen conflict over cooperation to fulfil their
34/35

10/01/2020

interests. They have resorted to force, thereby violating
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States and
leading to catastrophic consequences that threaten
international peace and security. If they had abided
by the United Nations Charter, things would not have
escalated to such an extent or reached such dangerous
levels as is the case today. The regrettable events
witnessed by Iraq over the past few days and weeks
represent clear provocative acts against the Iraqi State,
Government and people. They endanger Iraq’s security,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and social security
and have brought it to the verge of a great danger, not
only within the country but in the region and the entire
world as well.
Accordingly, here in this Chamber we have stressed
time and again the need to spare Iraq from involvement
in external conflicts among friendly and ally States.
Our territories should not be opened for such conflicts.
That would undermine the victories achieved against
terrorism and stability in Iraq as well as the universal
campaign of solidarity to reconstruct the destruction
caused by terrorism in Iraq. It would also undermine
fighting the remnants of Da’esh and give the forces of
evil and terrorism the chance to destabilize Iraq and the
region, which would open the door once again for the
terrorist group Da’esh to threaten international peace
and security.
Iraq is currently busy rebuilding itself and moving
towards a better future. The last of those steps was
taken on 1 October 2019, when Iraqis exercised their
constitutional right by protesting, in line with the
relevant human rights and fundamental freedoms
contained in Article 1, paragraph 3, of the United
Nations Charter, with a view to drawing a new, bright
future for Iraq in which the people would enjoy security
and prosperity and the country would disassociate itself
from regional and international conflicts. Over the past
three months, we have achieved that which had not
been achieved in an entire decade. We have responded
to the demands of the protesters, the Iraqi Parliament
has enacted a new election law and the membership of
the Independent High Electoral Commission has been
renewed, under the supervision of the United Nations
through the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI).
In addition, measures have been taken to achieve
legislative and executive reform. The recent violations
of our sovereignty and territorial integrity have
strengthened the will of the Iraqi people to disassociate
20-00800

10/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

themselves from all conflicts, crises and tensions in the
region. That would dash the dreams of the Iraqi people
to live in safety and stability. We have had enough
war and destruction; we cannot bear any new wars in
Iraq. The only thing we want is peace and stability. We
are the enemy of no one; rather, we are friends to all.
We hope that all parties will use wisdom and reason
in their decision-making and resort to political and
diplomatic channels, for those are the primary options
for confronting current problems in line with the
foundational principles of the United Nations, leading
to respect for the Iraqi people and their sovereignty.
We condemn attacks and aggressions that violate
the sovereignty of Iraq, the United Nations Charter and
the relevant provisions of international law. We call
on the Security Council to also condemn them and to

S/PV. 8699 (Resumption 1)

continue shouldering its responsibilities to guarantee
the stability of Iraq and ensure that it will not be
involved in any regional tension or crisis. The Council
should call all for calm, self-restraint, the alleviation
of tension and the avoidance of any unilateral action
that would weaken joint the international efforts
against terrorism. Such action could be exploited by
terrorists to carry out criminal acts targeting our Iraqi
people, which would dangerously undermine national,
regional and international security.
The President: There are still a number of speakers
on my list for this meeting. With the concurrence of
the members of the Council, I intend to suspend this
meeting until 3 p.m. on Monday, 13 January.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

20-0080035/35
