A /67/PV.61

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

61st plenary meeting
Friday, 21 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.
Reports of the Second Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider the reports of the Second Committee on
agenda items 17 to 26, 61, 116 and 131.
I request the Rapporteur of the Second Committee,
Ms. Aida Hodžić of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
introduce the reports of the Second Committee in one
intervention.
Ms. Hodžić (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Rapporteur
of the Second Committee (spoke in French): It is a
privilege and honour for me to introduce to the General
Assembly the reports of the Second Committee on the
agenda items allocated to it by the General Assembly at
its sixty-seventh session. The texts of draft resolutions
and decisions recommended to the General Assembly
for adoption are contained in documents A/67/434 to
A/67/446. For the convenience of delegations, the
Secretariat has included a checklist of actions taken in
the Second Committee in document A/C.2/67/INF/1.
During this main part of the sixty-seventh session
of the General Assembly, the Second Committee held
38 formal meetings and five special events. In addition,
the Committee held one joint formal meeting with the
Economic and Social Council and one joint informal
meeting with the Third Committee. The Second
Committee adopted a total of 36 draft resolutions,

five of which were adopted by vote, and three draft
decisions.
Under agenda item 17, entitled “Information
and communications technologies for development”,
the Second Committee recommends, in paragraph
20 of document A/67/434, the adoption of two draft
resolutions, and, in paragraph 21, the adoption of one
draft decision.
Under agenda item 18, entitled “Macroeconomic
policy questions”, the report of the Committee is issued
in four parts. The report under the chapeau is contained
in document A/67/435, and the recommendations are
contained in the following addenda.
Under sub-item 18 (a), entitled “International trade
and development”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 9 of document A/67/435/Add.1, the
adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 18 (b), entitled “International
financial system and development”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 12 of document
A/67/435/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 18 (c), entitled “External debt
sustainability and development”, the Committee
recommends, in paragraph 9 of document
A/67/435/Add.3, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 19, entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the outcome of the 2002 International
Conference on Financing for Development and the 2008
Review Conference”, the Committee recommends, in

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-66126 (E)

*1266126*

A/67/PV.61

paragraph 13 of document A/67/436, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 20, entitled “Sustainable
development”, the report of the Committee is issued
in 10 parts. The report under the chapeau is contained
in document A/67/437 and the recommendations are
contained in the chapeau and in the various addenda.
Under the chapeau of item 20, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 28 of document
A/67/437, the adoption of three draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 20 (a), entitled “Implementation
of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of
the World Summit on Sustainable Development and
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 14 of document A/67/437/Add.1, the adoption
of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 20 (b), entitled “Follow-up to and
implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing
States”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 21 of document A/67/437/Add.2, the adoption
of three draft resolutions, and in paragraph 22, the
adoption of one draft decision.
Under sub-item 20 (c), entitled “International
Strategy for Disaster Reduction”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 12 of document
A/67/437/Add.3, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 20 (d), entitled “Protection of
global climate for present and future generations of
humankind”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 8 of document A/67/437/Add.4, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 20 (e), entitled “Implementation
of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing
Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly
in Africa”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 11 of document A/67/437/Add.5, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 20 (f), entitled “Convention
on Biological Diversity”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 9 of document
A/67/437/Add.6, the adoption of one draft resolution.

2

Under sub-item 20 (g), entitled “Report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme on its twelfth special session”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of document
A/67/437/Add.7, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 20 (h), entitled “Harmony with
Nature”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 7 of document A/67/437/Add.8, the adoption
of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 20 (i), entitled “Promotion of
new and renewable sources of energy”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/67/437/Add.9, the adoption of one draft resolution.
With regard to agenda item 20 and its sub-item (a),
the Second Committee would like to kindly request
that the General Assembly keep these items open for
the resumed part of the sixty-seventh session of the
Assembly.
Under agenda item 21, entitled “Implementation
of the outcome of the United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of
the United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat)”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 13 of document A/67/438, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 22, entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the report of the Committee is issued
in three parts. The report under the chapeau is contained
in document A/67/439, and the recommendations are
contained in the following two addenda.
Under sub-item 22 (a), entitled “Globalization and
interdependence”, the Second Committee recommends,
in paragraph 10 of document A/67/439/Add.1, the
adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 22 (b), entitled “International
migration and development”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 10 of document
A/67/439/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 23, entitled “Groups of
countries in special situations”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/67/440, and
the recommendations are contained in the following
addenda.
Under sub-item 23 (a), entitled “Follow-up to
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

Developed Countries”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 14 of document
A/67/440/Add.1, the adoption of two draft resolutions.
Under sub-item 23 (b), entitled “Specific actions
related to the particular needs and problems of
landlocked developing countries: outcome of the
International Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and
Transit Developing Countries and Donor Countries and
International Financial and Development Institutions
on Transit Transport Cooperation”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of document
A/67/440/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 24, entitled “Eradication of
poverty and other development issues”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/67/441, and the
recommendations are contained in the chapeau and in
the two addenda.
Under the chapeau of item 24, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 11 of document
A/67/441, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 24 (a), entitled “Implementation
of the Second United Nations Decade for the
Eradication of Poverty (2008-2017)”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 6 of document
A/67/441/Add.1, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under sub-item 24 (b), entitled “Industrial
development cooperation”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 8 of document
A/67/441/Add.2, the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 25, entitled “Operational
activities for development”, the report of the
Committee is issued in three parts. The report under
the chapeau is contained in document A/67/442, and the
recommendations are contained in two addenda.
Under sub-item 25 (a), entitled “Quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities
for development of the United Nations system”, the
Second Committee recommends, in paragraph 9 of
document A/67/442/Add.1, the adoption of one draft
resolution.
Under sub-item 25 (b), entitled “South-South
cooperation”, the Second Committee recommends, in
paragraph 9 of document A/67/442/Add.2, the adoption
of one draft resolution.

12-66126

Under agenda item 26, entitled “Agriculture
development and food security”, the Second Committee
recommends, in paragraph 13 of document A/67/443,
the adoption of one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 61, entitled “Permanent
sovereignty of the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and of
the Arab population in the occupied Syrian Golan over
their natural resources”, the Committee recommends,
in paragraph 12 of document A/67/444, the adoption of
one draft resolution.
Under agenda item 116, entitled “Revitalization
of the work of the General Assembly”, the Second
Committee recommends, in paragraph 5 of document
A/67/445, the adoption of one draft decision.
Under agenda item 131, entitled “Programme
planning”, as indicated in paragraph 3 of document
A/67/446, no action was taken by the Second Committee
on the item.
I should like to recall the high level of cooperation
prevailing in the Second Committee. Although the
Committee had to extend its work for two weeks in
order to reach a successful conclusion, the Committee
was able to fulfil the mandate entrusted to it by the
Assembly and complete its work effectively and
constructively. I should like to express, on behalf of
the Bureau of the Second Committee, our profound
appreciation to all the coordinators, facilitators and
negotiators who persevered in the negotiation of our
resolutions. I would also like to thank all delegations
for their constructive participation and cooperation
in reaching consensus on many draft resolutions and
decisions.
Allow me to also take this opportunity to express
our warmest gratitude to our Chairperson, Mr. George
Wilfred Talbot of Guyana, and Vice-Chairs Mr. Tauhedul
Islam of Bangladesh, Mr. Stefano Stefanile of Italy and
Mr. Modest Jonathan Mero of the United Republic of
Tanzania for their extraordinary collaboration and
partnership during this challenging and successful
session of the Second Committee. I would also like to
thank the secretariat of the Second Committee for its
outstanding assistance and support to me and to all the
members of the Bureau.
Before I conclude, I should like to request
delegations having any queries about corrections to
the text of draft resolutions that were adopted by the

3

A/67/PV.61

Second Committee to communicate them as soon as
possible to the secretariat of the Second Committee
in order for those these corrections to be registered
prior to the final issuance of texts as resolutions of the
General Assembly.
Finally, and on a more personal note, I would like
to take this opportunity to offer my very best wishes to
all for a wonderful holiday season and a well-deserved
break from our work. Last, but not least, I wish you all
peace and prosperity in the new year.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur
of the Second Committee for her introduction of the
reports of the Second Committee.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Second
Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions
of delegations regarding the recommendations of
the Second Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats. When
a report contains more than one draft resolution,
delegations will have an opportunity to explain their
positions before and after the General Assembly takes
action on all of the draft resolutions.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Second Committee, unless

4

the Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I should
therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt without a
vote those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Committee.
Before proceeding further, I would like to draw
the attention of members to a note by the Secretariat,
entitled “List of proposals contained in the reports of
the Second Committee”, which has been circulated
as document A/C.2/67/INF/1. This note has been
distributed desk to desk in the General Assembly Hall
as a reference guide for action on draft resolutions and
decisions recommended by the Second Committee in
its reports. In this connection, members will find, in the
third column of the note, the order and numbers of the
draft resolutions or decisions for action in the plenary
meeting, with their corresponding titles and symbols
assigned in the Second Committee in the fourth column
of the same note.
The Assembly is reminded that we will now
be taking action on draft resolutions and decisions
recommended for adoption by the Second Committee
and, as such, those draft resolutions and decisions can
no longer be additionally sponsored in the plenary
meeting by Member States. Any clarification about
sponsorship should be addressed to the Secretary of the
Committee.
Agenda item 17
Information and communications technologies
for development
Report of the Second Committee (А/67/434)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 20 of its report and a draft
decision recommended in paragraph 21 of the same
report. The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolutions I and II and on the draft decision, one by
one.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Building
connectivity through the Trans-Eurasian Information
Super Highway”. The Second Committee adopted it.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/194).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Information and communications technologies for

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

development.”The Second Committee adopted it. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/195).
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision entitled “Note by the Secretary-General
on communication for development programmes in
the United Nations system”. The Second Committee
adopted the draft decision. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 18
Macroeconomic policy questions
Report of the Second Committee (А/67/435)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
18.
Agenda item 18 (continued)
Macroeconomic policy questions
(a) International trade and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/435/Аdd.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/196).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.

12-66126

(b) International financial system and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/435/Аdd.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/197).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 18?
It was so decided.
(c) External debt sustainability and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/435/Аdd.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/198).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (c) of agenda item 18 and of agenda item 18 as
a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19
Follow-up to and implementation of the outcome of
the 2002 International Conference on Financing for
Development and the 2008 Review Conference
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/436)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Follow-up to the International Conference on
Financing for Development”. The Second Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

5

A/67/PV.61

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/199).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 20
Sustainable development
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 28 of its report. The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolutions I to III one by
one.
The Second Committee adopted draft resolution I,
entitled “International Day of Forests”. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/200).
The Acting President: We now turn to draft
resolution II, entitled “Oi1 Slick on Lebanese Shores”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,

6

Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Palau,
South Sudan, United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Colombia, Panama, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution II was adopted by 172 votes to 9,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 67/201).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution III, entitled “Entrepreneurship for
development”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, Colombia,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal,
Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South
Sudan, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad
and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, United States of
America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Zambia
Against:
Algeria, Bahrain, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Comoros, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Egypt, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey,
United Arab Emirates, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Yemen
Abstaining:
Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Brunei Darussalam,
China, Ecuador, Mali, Mauritius, Namibia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Zimbabwe
Draft resolution III was adopted by 141 votes to 31,
with 11 abstentions (resolution 67/202).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Israel in explanation of vote or
position on the resolutions just adopted.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I want to sincerely thank all
141 countries that supported the landmark resolution
67/202, just adopted. The resolution is very dear
to my mission, my nation and my tradition. Jewish
teachings emphasize self-empowerment. Psalm 128

12-66126

says that by the fruit of your own labour you shall be
happy. Israel’s history demonstrates this principle. The
entrepreneurial spirit is at the heart of our experience.
Entrepreneurs have been a driving force behind Israel’s
transformation from a developing country into a
powerhouse of innovation.
As Israel’s President Shimon Peres says, in a land
lacking in natural resources, Israelis have learned to
appreciate our greatest national advantage — our minds.
With creativity and innovation, we have transformed
barren deserts into flourishing fields and pioneered
new frontiers in science and technology. This is the
essence of entrepreneurship — seeing opportunities in
challenges, seeing possibilities in the impossible, and
realizing dreams in places where hope has been absent
for too long. Together, as a global community, we can
harness the remarkable power of entrepreneurship and
create a ripple effect of change.
Israel and the nearly 100 sponsors of this resolution
had hoped to achieve consensus. Every country benefits
from empowering its entrepreneurs.
Let me be clear. Few places in the world could
benefit from entrepreneurship more than the Arab
world. From Syria to the Sudan and Saudi Arabia, people
are demanding better lives, better economies and better
governance. Like any other people, they want to live in
countries without rampant corruption, discrimination
against women and economic stagnation. The Arab
delegations here today, like their Governments, have
chosen to ignore those calls. Today they have not only
turned their backs on their own people, they are also
trying to turn back the clock on the important work of
the Organization.
Today is just the beginning. We must take the
words of this resolution off the page and breathe life
into them on the ground. We must create a platform for
the visionaries, the dreamers and the risk-takers around
the world. Israel will continue to do its part to advance
this goal. MASHAV, our Agency for International
Development Cooperation, is leading Israel’s effort to
promote entrepreneurship around the world.
Make no mistake —the stakes before us are high.
The people whom we empower today will become the
next Einstein, the next Picasso and the next Mother
Teresa tomorrow. Talent is everywhere, but opportunity
is not. Today, we are sending a clear message that we
must harness this talent, we must create opportunity
and we must propel the global agenda forward. The

7

A/67/PV.61

French thinker Alexis de Tocqueville, a great enthusiast
of entrepreneurship, said that “history is a gallery of
pictures in which there are few originals and many
copies”. Entrepreneurs are the originals. They are the
ones who are making history. Let us pledge to support
them and, together, let us make history.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 20.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
(a) Implementation of Agenda 21, the
Programme for the Further Implementation
of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on Sustainable Development and
of the United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Implementation
of Agenda 21, the Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21 and the outcomes of
the World Summit on Sustainable Development and
of the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development”. The Second Committee adopted it. May
I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/203).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Implementation of the International Year of
Water Cooperation, 2013”. The Second Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/204).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 20.

(b) Follow-up to and implementation of
the Mauritius Strategy for the Further
Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small
Island Developing States
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 21 of its report, and a draft
decision recommended in paragraph 22 of the same
report. The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolutions I to III and on the draft decision, one by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Towards
the sustainable development of the Caribbean Sea for
present and future generations”.
The Second Committee adopted it. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/205).
The Acting President: The Second Committee
adopted draft resolution II, entitled “International Year
of Small Island Developing States”. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/206).
The Acting President: The Second Committee
adopted draft resolution III, entitled “Follow-up to
and implementation of the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of Small Island
Developing States”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
67/207).
The Acting President: We now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Report of the Secretary-General
entitled “Towards the sustainable development of the
Caribbean Sea for present and future generations”. The
Second Committee adopted the draft decision. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.

8

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

(c) International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.3)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolutions I and II, one
by one.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled
“International Cooperation to reduce the impact of the
El Niño phenomenon”. The Second Committee adopted
it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/208).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“International Strategy for Disaster Reduction”. The
Second Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/209).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
(d) Protection of global climate for present and
future generations of humankind
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.4)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/210).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda item 20? It is
so decided.
It was so decided.

12-66126

(e) Implementation of the United Nations
Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, Particularly in Africa
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.5)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/211).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (e) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
(f) Convention on Biological Diversity
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.6)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it a
draft resolution recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution, entitled “Implementation of the
Convention on Biological Diversity and its contribution
to sustainable development”. The Second Committee
adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/212).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
(g) Report of the Governing Council of the
United Nations Environment Programme on its
twelfth special session
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.7)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Committee
in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Report of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment

9

A/67/PV.61

Programme on its twelfth special session and on the
implementation of section IV.C, entitled ‘Environmental
pillar in the context of sustainable development’, of the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development”. The Second Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/213).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
(h) Harmony with Nature
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.8)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/214).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (h)
of agenda item 20.
(i) Promotion of new and renewable sources
of energy
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/437/Add.9)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/215).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the
right of reply.
Mr. Jawhara (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to respond to the

10

naïve fabrications promoted by the representative of
the Israeli occupying Power. It is truly strange that
such statements should be made at a time when we are
adopting resolutions condemning Israel and calling
upon it to respect human rights in areas under its
occupation by ending its occupation and by granting
the people under occupation the right to development
on an equal footing with other peoples of the world.
Those who have read United Nations statements,
reports and resolutions over the years are well aware
that such resolutions and reports expose Israel’s
systematic policies of occupation of the Arab population
in the occupied territories. I would cite, among others,
the acts of aggression, displacements, killings, settler
colonialism, forceful usurpation of the territory of
others, plundering of resources, cutting down of trees,
destruction of infrastructure, damage to the natural
environment and refusal to allow the population under
occupation to enjoy their sacred right to development.
Indeed, we have just adopted resolution 67/201,
condemning Israeli acts of aggression. We will also be
adopting another draft resolution calling upon Israel to
put an end to its plundering of the natural resources
of the Arab territories under its occupation (A/67/444,
paragraph 12). That resolution and draft resolution
call upon Israel to respect resolutions of international
legitimacy, to cease forthwith its continued, decadeslong violations and to put an end to its confiscation of
agricultural land and plundering of natural and energy
resources. Those violations have brought the process of
development in the occupied Arab territories, whether
in the Arab State of Palestine or in the occupied Syrian
Arab Golan, to a complete halt.
Despite repeated international calls, the Israeli
occupying authorities have yet to heed these appeals.
Israel is a State that was built on violating international
law and on non-respect for the principles of human
rights.
The representative of the occupying Power said that
Israel was changed from a barren desert into a paradise
thanks to Israeli brainpower. It was not because of
Israeli brainpower, but because of Israel’s violations
and its exploitation of the occupied Arab lands and
because it continues to receive unlimited support for its
crimes from its allies. Therefore, what is really called
for is an end to the usurpation of the rights of others and
an end to the destruction and abuse of natural resources
in the occupied Arab territories.

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

Human rights are indivisible. Those who respect
the right to development should submit draft resolutions
in the context of sustainable development, which is
of extreme importance to all countries of the world.
We believe that it behoves the sponsors of such draft
resolutions to grant people under occupation their
rights to development and to enjoy its benefits on a par
with other countries of the world.
Israel must end the long occupation and its
systematic violations, which have been documented
by our Organization. Then and only then, when the
occupation ends, can we talk about entrepreneurship
and draft resolutions on other such issues. Therefore,
the priority must be for Israel to put an end to its policy
of double standards and respect the resolutions we are
adopting today. Israel and its supporters must examine
these resolutions and the report of the Economic and
Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA).
I call on all countries, particularly those that support
Israel, to read the ESCWA report, which clearly affirms
that occupation is the sole obstacle preventing the
people under occupation from achieving development.
The Israeli occupation is the sole and last impediment
to the development of the people of the area. The recent
report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development on assistance to the Palestinian people
(TD/B/59/2) makes it very clear to all those concerned
that Israel thinks only of its own interests and of ways
to exploit the Palestinian people and the people of the
Golan and to end any hope of achieving development.
Mr. Al Otaibi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I have asked to make a statement in exercise of the
right of reply in order to condemn Israel’s hypocritical
claims and lies of being sincerely engaged in offering
its resources for the benefit and development of the
world. Israel is lying, and its representatives know very
well that they are lying.
The adoption of resolution 67/202 is not a high
point on the record of the Second Committee. All
the Arab countries, including the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, voted against it. The resolution does not
deserve the respect of the international community, but
certain parties are compromised and certain parties do
not truly appreciate either honesty or the successful
undertakings, be they in the diplomatic field or in
contributing to the resolution of many world issues, of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia at the international level.

12-66126

The Kingdom has provided solutions to many of
the issues plaguing the international community. The
positive contributions and internal stability of the
Kingdom are broadly recognized, as reflected in its
friendly relations and respect with the countries of the
world. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s sincere relations
are rooted in its peace-loving and respectful nature and
therefore cannot be compromised by false statements
made by a country that violates human rights, including
those of Palestinians.
Ms. Elsayed (Sudan): As the name of my country
was raised in the context of our deliberations, I would
like to explain why my country voted against resolution
67/202. It is not that we turn our backs on our people. It
is that we turn our hearts and our faces to our people in
the occupied lands and territories, where we have seen
and learned about the entrepreneurship of the Israeli
population through their smart bombs, creative walls
and such. That is why we cannot stand for that type of
entrepreneurship.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (i) of agenda item 20?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 21
Implementation of the outcome of the
United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II) and strengthening of
the United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-Habitat)
Report of the Second Committee (А/67/438)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/216).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 21?
It was so decided.

11

A/67/PV.61

Agenda item 22
Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (А/67/439)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
22.
Agenda item 22 (continued)
Globalization and interdependence
(a) Globalization and interdependence
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/439/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. The Assembly
will now take action on draft resolutions I and II.
We first turn to draft resolution I, entitled “Towards
a New International Economic Order”. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States

12

of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Palau, Republic of Korea, Turkey,
Ukraine
Draft resolution I was adopted by 132 votes to 47,
with 5 abstentions (resolution 67/217).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Promoting transparency, participation
and accountability in fiscal policies”. The Second
Committee adopted it. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/218).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 22?
It was so decided.

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

(b) International migration and development
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/439/Аdd.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State
of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia,
Ghana, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, United States of America

12-66126

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Palau, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The draft resolution was adopted by 129 votes to 3,
with 49 abstentions (resolution 67/219).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Madagascar and
the Sudan informed the Secretariat that they had
intended to vote in favour; the delegation of Estonia
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to
abstain.]
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to those representatives who have requested to speak in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Jónasson (Iceland): I speak on behalf of my
country, Iceland, and of Australia, Liechtenstein,
New Zealand, Norway and Switzerland, all of which
abstained in the voting on resolution 67/219 on
international migration and development.
Our countries regret that the resolution on
the important topic of international migration and
development has not been able to enjoy consensus.
We value multiculturalism. Migration has brought
significant benefits to our societies. We recognize the
importance of dialogue on migration and development
among Member States and between Member States
and a wide variety of stakeholders who make a
vital contribution to the lives of migrants and their
communities.
Notwithstanding the importance we attach to the
success of the 2013 high-level dialogue on international
migration and development, our countries had no choice
but to abstain. This is due to the very problematic
wording of paragraph 12 of the resolution. The United
Nations represents inclusion and openness. The United
Nations needs to listen to the relevant and valuable
perspectives of a wide range of organizations in this

13

A/67/PV.61

and other dialogues. Many such organizations, due to
their size, are not able to attain Economic and Social
Council consultative status, but still need to be given
the opportunity to engage in this important discussion.

Agenda item 23

We share the view that, had there been a solution that
ensured appropriate process criteria and transparency
in the non-objection mechanism for the selection of
non-accredited civil society organizations, we would
have been able to achieve consensus on this resolution.
We regret that this was not possible. We remain deeply
concerned over the language of operational paragraph
12, and it is primarily for that reason that we have
abstained.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?

Mrs. Davidovich (Israel): The topic of international
migration is extremely important to my delegation. Israel
has absorbed immigrants from around the world since
its establishment. As we transition from a developing
country to a developed one, we support the convening
of a high-level dialogue on international migration, as
called for in resolution 67/219, just adopted.
From our experience with migration, we have
witnessed the value, and recognized the contribution
of, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil
society in that area. We are therefore disappointed that
certain delegations insisted on language that limited the
participation of NGOs in the high-level dialogue. The
non-objection basis for NGO participation, according
to which NGOs can be blocked from participation if
a single State anonymously objects, is unacceptable to
my delegation. That procedure contravenes the basic
principles of transparency and accountability. Although
we do not deny that Member States are entitled to voice
their concerns about a given NGO, we strongly believe
that any objection should be made publicly and openly
for all Member States to consider.
For those reasons, my delegation voted against the
resolution.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.

Groups of countries in special situations
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/440)

It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 23.
(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/440/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 14 of its report. We will now
take action on draft resolutions I and II, one by one.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Follow-up to the
Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries”. The Second Committee adopted
draft resolution I. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 67/220).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Smooth transition for countries graduating
from the list of least developed countries”. The Second
Committee adopted draft resolution II. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 67/221).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 23?
It was so decided.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 22 and of agenda item 22 as a whole?
It was so decided.

14

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

(b) Specific actions related to the particular
needs and problems of landlocked developing
countries: outcome of the International
Ministerial Conference of Landlocked and
Transit Developing Countries and Donor
Countries and International Financial
and Development Institutions on Transit
Transport Cooperation
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/440/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. The Assembly
will now take a decision on the draft resolution. The
Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/222).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 23 and of
agenda item 23 as a whole?
It was so decided.

(a) Implementation of the Second United Nations
Decade for the Eradication of Poverty
(2008-2017)
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/441/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.
The draft resolution is entitled “Second United
Nations Decade for the Eradication of Poverty (20082017)”. The Second Committee adopted the draft
resolution. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/224).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 24?
It was so decided.
(b) Industrial development cooperation
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/441/Add.2)

Agenda item 24
Eradication of poverty and other development issues
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/441)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Promotion of ecotourism for poverty eradication
and environment protection”. The Second Committee
adopted the draft resolution. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/223).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
24.

The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 225).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 24 and of
agenda item 24 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 25
Operational activities for development
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/442)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.

12-66126

15

A/67/PV.61

The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
25.
(a) Quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the
United Nations system
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/442/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will
now take a decision on the draft resolution, entitled
“Quadrennial comprehensive policy review”. The
Second Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/226).
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote on the resolution just adopted.
Ms. Robl (United States of America): The United
States is very pleased to join consensus on resolution
67/226, entitled “Quadrennial comprehensive policy
review”. We applaud the efforts of the Swiss facilitator
and thank him, his excellent support team and the many
members of the Secretariat who provided exceptional
support during the long weeks of complex and often
difficult negotiations. We also thank all our colleagues
who worked tirelessly to reach consensus.
We believe that the resolution gives clear and
constructive guidance to the United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies on ways to
increase efficiency, transparency, cost-effectiveness
and productivity as they pursue their important work.
The United States is a strong supporter of, and a major
financial contributor to, United Nations operational
activities for development. My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to express our views on several
issues that arose in the course of the negotiations
on which we would like to clarify the United States
position.
On resources and performance results, we support
the notion that adequate, timely, predictable and flexible
resources are important to the programme planning
and delivery of the organizations. The resolution states
that the fundamental characteristics of the operational
activities for the development of the United Nations

16

system include their voluntary and grant nature and
their ability to respond to the development needs of
programme countries in a flexible manner.
The United States intends to continue to provide
voluntary contributions to United Nations operational
activities for development. We are especially gratified
that the resolution calls for a greater focus on results,
better data and more rigorous evaluation. The resolution
stresses results-based management principles and
sets out specific guidelines for the simplification and
harmonization of business practices to encourage
agencies to reduce waste, increase efficiency and direct
any savings to the people who need it most. In our
view, the concept of critical-mass for funding does not
properly reflect results-based management principles
because it shifts the focus of funding decisions from
meeting people’s needs to meeting those of United
Nations bureaucracies.
On the work of resident coordinators and United
Nations country teams, we believe that the resident
coordinator plays a critical role in how the United
Nations carries out its work in the field. We are pleased
that the resolution strengthens the resident coordinators
and ensures that they will have the background, training,
support and resources that they need to be effective.
The resident coordinator is the representative of the
United Nations in a host country and represents the
values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
The United States expects resident coordinators, among
their many other tasks, to draw on such values to guide
the work of United Nations country teams and to be
accountable for upholding and promoting those values.
On technology transfer, the United States believes
that science and technology are important ingredients
for development and that a political and legal
environment that respects and protects intellectual
property must exist for countries to benefit from their
own innovations and technology transfer from abroad.
Insofar as such technology resides in the private domain
and has ownership, its transfer must be voluntary and
on mutually agreed terms and conditions between the
transferer and the recipient.
My delegation would also like to note that we
joined the consensus on the resolution today on the
express understanding that, to the extent that it is
implied in the resolution, the United States does not
recognize the creation of any new rights that we have
not previously recognized, the expansion of the content

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

or coverage of existing rights or any other change in
the current state of treaty or customary international
law. In particular, the United States would like to recall
its previous positions on economic, social and cultural
rights and on the topic of the right to development.
We also note that, as we have stated in the past, the
discussion of the right to development needs to focus
on aspects of development that relate to human rights.
Those are universal rights that are held and enjoyed by
individuals and that every individual may demand from
his or her own Government.
Finally, we would like to reiterate our concern that
the Secretariat’s oral statement indicating a substantial
need for resources came after the negotiations on the
text of the resolution had concluded. That did not allow
the Second Committee to give due consideration to the
resource implications of the numerous provisions in
the resolution. The adoption of the resolution does not
denote endorsement of the amount of resources to be
made available by Member States or the expansion of
any mandates indicated in the oral statement.
Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): I will
read the following statement on behalf of Mr. Pius
Wennubst, representative of Switzerland and facilitator
of resolution 67/226, who could not be here today.
“In the name of the Swiss Mission, I would like
to thank the Bureau and the Second Committee,
as well as Member States, for having once again
entrusted Switzerland with facilitating the
negotiations on the quadrennial comprehensive
policy review. As facilitator, I did my best to keep
the promise that Switzerland made and to ensure
a transparent process to provide all elements for
an informed negotiation, to keep a conducive and
fair working environment, to conclude the work on
schedule and to promote a spirit of collegiality in
order to allow Member States to take their decisions
within the best possible setting.
“Through their strong engagement and fair
requests, delegations enabled me to introduce the
necessary flexibility needed for such a complex
endeavour. I must underline that I received all the
support needed from my Ambassador and my team,
and I wish to thank them. Special recognition goes
to the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
for its extremely accurate preparatory work. I know
that I should not single out anyone, but I cannot
help emphasizing the commitment of Mr. Liu

12-66126

Huan Yu, who performed an incredible task under
extreme time pressure. I would also like to thank
the Vice-Chair of the Bureau, Mr. Modest Mero,
for his strong support.
“I believe that we all should be proud of the
result achieved. The resolution on the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review is pragmatic and
consensus-based and provides clear and robust
guidance to the United Nations operational system,
for the moment, in all its pertinent areas, from the
harmonization of best practices to cost recovery
and from the resident coordinator system to gender
mainstreaming. Even in areas where consensus
could not be achieved, the dialogue was frank
and sustained and prepared the ground for future
debates in extremely important areas, ranging from
governance to norm-related questions.
“I would like to believe that, by implementing
the measures taken, we will all be winners,
since the resolution is strongly oriented to the
increased coherence, efficiency and effectiveness
of United Nations operations in support of country
programmes in the field and of the leadership of
national authorities. It also focuses on helping
people to live better lives as well as on what they
deserve.
“May I also take this opportunity to thank, and
express my appreciation to, everyone who worked
tirelessly to make the adoption of the resolution
possible. I can only assure the Assembly that its
work was not in vain and that, after all their hard
work and long and sleepless nights, we can retire
for Christmas. I wish everyone happy holidays.”
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
(b) South-South cooperation
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/442/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

17

A/67/PV.61

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/227).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 25 and of
agenda item 25 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 26
Agriculture development and food security
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/443)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 13 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Second
Committee adopted the draft resolution. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
67/228).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 26?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 61
Permanent sovereignty of the Palestinian people
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including
East Jerusalem, and of the Arab population in the
occupied Syrian Golan over their natural resources
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/444)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Second
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. A recorded vote
has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,

18

Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, GuineaBissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, El Salvador, Honduras,
Malawi, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Tonga,
Vanuatu
The draft resolution was adopted by 170 to 7, with
9 abstentions (resolution 67/229).

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 61?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/445)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft decision recommended by the Second Committee
in paragraph 5 of its report. We will now take action on
the draft decision.
The draft decision, entitled “Programme of work
of the Second Committee for the sixty-eighth session
of the General Assembly”, was adopted by the Second
Committee. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 116.
Agenda item 131 (continued)
Programme planning
Report of the Second Committee (A/67/446)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Second Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 131.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would like to
thank Mr. George Talbot, Permanent Representative of
Guyana to the United Nations and Chair of the Second
Committee, as well as the members of the Bureau, the
Secretary of the Committee and delegations for a job
well done.
The General Assembly has thus concluded
consideration of all the reports of the Second Committee
before it today.

12-66126

Agenda item 16
The role of the United Nations in promoting a new
global human order
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/394)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.49)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guyana to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.49.
Mr. Talbot (Guyana): In this season of peace and
goodwill, I extend my fervent prayers and best wishes
for peace to the President, members of the Assembly
and all peoples and nations. It is my honour to introduce,
on behalf of the sponsors, draft resolution A/67/L.49,
entitled “The role of the United Nations in promoting
a new global human order”. In addition to the sponsors
listed in document A/67/L.49, the following countries
have also joined as sponsors: Algeria, Angola, Bolivia,
China, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Ethiopia, GuineaBissau, Honduras, India, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Tajikistan and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Two years ago, when the General Assembly last
considered this item, the Assembly recognized, through
resolution 65/120, that inequality within and among
countries was a concern for all countries, regardless of
their level of development, that required the constructive
engagement of the international community. Since then,
the issue of inequality has been brought into greater
relief in the context of the ongoing work towards the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
the Rio+20 outcome, “The future we want” (resolution
66/288, annex), and the preparations for the post-2015
development agenda. I wish to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report contained in document A/67/394,
which sheds further light on the challenge of inequality,
emphasizes its varying dimensions and provides an
opportunity for a frontal approach to dealing with the
issue and its effects.
The concept of the new global human order is one
of people-centred development. In that connection, it
calls upon the international community to focus on
bridging the increasing disparity in human development
through a multilateral approach. The SecretaryGeneral’s report succinctly places in perspective the
current realities as they relate to the role of the United
Nations in promoting a new global human order and
analyses the implications of inequality for global

19

A/67/PV.61

human development, as mandated by resolution 65/120.
It provides for the evaluation of the trends and causes
of inequality and their implications for economic and
social development, while also addressing the subject
within the United Nations framework and making
recommendations that highlight the responsibilities of
all parties at the different levels.
The report highlights several key issues that are
relevant to the process of promoting human development
and to alleviating the challenges of inequality. It points
to evidence that indicates that financial globalization
has contributed, in part, to growing income inequality
owing to the rising incidence of crises resulting from
increased risk. The report informs us that the lack of
social protection has also contributed to rising economic
insecurity and inequality. It underscores the need for
education, technology, capacity-building and decent
work to bridge the gap in income generation, which
ultimately impacts poverty. The report recognizes that
universal social services can play a contributory role in
promoting social cohesion and peace by creating buy-in
among disenfranchised segments of the population and
by reducing inequality.
In reference to the Millennium Development
Goals Report 2012, the Secretary-General notes that,
despite impressive gains in many areas, inequality
has detracted from progress and contributed to a
slowing of advances in key areas. Acknowledging the
important work undertaken through several United
Nations agencies and processes, including the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
the report underlines that sustainable development
must be inclusive and people-centred and that broad
participation is essential to promoting sustainable
development goals and ensuring that those goals
benefit all people, including youth and children,
indigenous peoples, women, older persons and persons
with disabilities. The Secretary-General’s report also
introduces several recommendations, ranging from
creating employment opportunities and implementing
a social protection floor, to the regulation and reform of
the existing international financial architecture.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
remains consistent with the general thrust of the
advancement of human development. It is premised
on the agreed text of the previous resolution, 65/120
of December 2010, and was updated and revised in the
context of the current realities. The draft resolution
takes into account the Secretary-General’s report and

20

emphasizes the continued and growing importance
of the need to address inequalities at the multilateral
level. In that sense, it provides a platform for focused
intergovernmental consideration of the question
of inequality. In that context, inter alia, the draft
resolution highlights the following elements: first, the
significance of inequality in the global development
agenda; secondly, the progress of the United Nations
system and other actors in addressing inequality; and,
thirdly, the need for mainstreaming inequality in the
activities of United Nations agencies and programmes.
It recognizes the progress in efforts on the part of
many Member States to address inequality. Among its
operative provisions is the request to the President of
the General Assembly to convene an informal thematic
debate of the Assembly in 2013 to address the issue
of inequality, and the encouragement of appropriate
consideration of the need to reduce inequality in the
elaboration of the post-2015 development agenda.
It is against that backdrop that I am honoured
to introduce the draft resolution to the General
Assembly for its adoption by consensus. In doing so,
I wish to recognize the constructive engagement of the
delegations that participated in the negotiation of the
draft resolution in the course of the several consultations
convened for that purpose. I especially thank the
sponsors for their commitment and support. Finally, I
take this opportunity to commend the fruitful efforts
of the members of my delegation who spearheaded the
informal consultations on the present draft resolution. I
now commend the draft resolution to the Assembly for
its consideration.
Ms. Maimela (South Africa): Today humankind
is confronted by myriad challenges that are all linked.
Among others, they include the continued development
challenges faced by many countries, peace and security
and human rights. The nexus between the three
imperatives, namely, development, peace and security
and human rights, dictates that the international
community needs to continue to pay focused attention
to extricate humankind from the doldrums of insecurity
in all its dimensions. That is all the more important in
the current context of slow global economic growth.
With regard to my own country, the most pressing
problems confronting South Africa today are poverty,
inequality and unemployment. We must acknowledge
that those challenges are not unique to South Africa or
Africa, but to a number of regions in the global South.
However, we are working hard to overcome those

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

challenges. In South Africa we have seen progress
throughout the past 18 years, despite facing some
common challenges that continue to afflict humankind
across regions, such as infrastructure development
backlogs, the unsustainable use of natural resources,
the spatial divides that exclude the poor from economic
advancement and the uneven quality of our public
services.
The link between poverty and inequality is well
known. Poverty continues to engender inequality
in communities, countries, regions and around the
world. In turn, inequality continues to be a scourge
with the potential to frustrate the very efforts aimed
at eradicating poverty. For instance, the lack of road
infrastructure in rural areas and poor access to health
facilities, schools and other social centres can easily
threaten the national programmes that are aimed at
addressing the very conditions of poverty and bettering
the lives of people. The question of spatial differences
in our societies remains a major challenge to the
implementation of our development programmes.
South Africa’s current efforts at reconstruction
and development stem from its historical experience
of segregation and are aimed at tackling the triple
challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequality.
Our poverty-eradication efforts are anchored in the
national Constitution, whose preamble states that
the democratic State is under the obligation to heal
the division of the past and establish a society based
on democratic values, social justice and fundamental
human rights; lay the foundation for a democratic and
open society in which the Government is based on the
will of the people and every citizen is equally protected
by law; and improve the quality of life of all citizens
and free the potential of each person.
For that reason, the Government has chosen to
build a development State shaped by the history and
socioeconomic dynamics of South African society.
In that approach we are guided by the conviction that
the State must intervene decisively in the economy,
with the aim of promoting growth and development.
Furthermore, it is our conviction that it is the State
that should drive the correct policies to ensure the
delivery of social justice and cohesion to the people of
our country. To overcome those disabilities we have,
in the past few years, developed the New Growth Path,
the Industrial Development Policy Action Plan and the
National Development Plan.

12-66126

My delegation must hasten to add that no national
Government can succeed in its endeavours to eradicate
poverty and bridge inequality gaps while acting
alone. We acknowledge that each country has unique
characteristics that make it more or less difficult to
successfully address those challenges. Globalization
enjoins us to work together as nations, and sometimes
to make uncomfortable choices to ensure that we fit in
the global network of economies.
South Africa fundamentally believes in the
purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the
United Nations. The United Nations enjoys universal
membership and is positioned at the centre of global
governance and multilateralism. Indeed, the United
Nations remains the foremost multilateral forum, one
that is entrusted by Member States with bringing about
hope, peace and order in the world. The United Nations
is therefore central to the evolution of a new global
order. We need a global partnership that is based on
clear commitments and actions by each Member State.
Our common response to the challenges of poverty
and worsening inequality should be seen in the form
of sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth
in developing countries. Social-protection systems that
address and reduce inequality and social exclusion are
essential for the eradication of poverty. In that context,
we need to acknowledge the importance of development
assistance and cooperation, as well as partnership.
South Africa will continue to call for the national
efforts of developing countries to be reinforced by
an enabling environment aimed at expanding the
development horizon in the global South. We are pleased
that the Secretary-General has prioritized sustainable
development in his second term. This debate could not
have come at a better time to help focus the attention of
the international community on issues of sustainability
and sustainable development.
The United Nations should work tirelessly to ensure
that we consolidate the development gains as we join
hands to develop further effective responses capable
of addressing the new and emerging challenges that
threaten to widen inequality gaps around the world. In
that connection, the remaining three years before we
reach the Millennium Development Goals target date
will be crucial to making a difference in the lives of
many around the world. May we also add that the post2015 development framework should accord poverty the
highest priority, for it to earn relevance and credibility

21

A/67/PV.61

in the eyes of the millions of the people that the United
Nations serves.
Mr. Tham (Singapore): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of my colleague Mr. William Lim,
who could not be here today.
Singapore expresses its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report to the General
Assembly on the role of the United Nations in promoting
a new global human order and on an assessment of the
implications of inequality for development (A/67/394).
We are happy to note that there has been significant
progress in reducing absolute income poverty in the
past 30 years. However, we share the concern of the
Secretary-General that, despite the significant progress
made, income inequality in fact been growing in many
countries.
As the Secretary-General’s report notes, rising
income inequality is a global phenomenon driven by
the forces of technological progress and globalization.
Singapore, as a city-State with a small, open economy, is
susceptible to the impact of international market forces
and competition, which drive income differences.
The issue of income inequality is therefore a special
challenge for us. Singapore’s strategy in tackling that
challenge entails ensuring that all Singaporeans benefit
from growth, with a special focus on the lower-income
groups. We do so by equipping them with the skills to
take on better-paying jobs and through targeted benefits
and subsidies, redistributing incomes in a fair and
sustainable manner. At the same time, we are mindful
not to create a sense of entitlement or an environment
that is stifling to innovation and enterprise, which are
counterproductive to growth.
Allow me to share some of the key principles
underlying Singapore’s approach in addressing the
challenges posed by inequality.
A competent workforce is especially important
to Singapore, a country with no natural resources.
Although we firmly believe that we must be able to
catch those who fall through the cracks, any safety
net should not discourage the incentive to work.
Accordingly, we are strong advocates of the self-help
approach. For example, the Central Provident Fund, an
individual-based retirement savings system that requires
co-contributions from employers and employees, is a
cornerstone of social protection in Singapore. Besides
retirement, Singaporeans can use those savings for

22

fundamental needs such as housing and health care.
Singapore has also introduced the Workfare Income
Supplement Scheme, which supplements the wages of
low-wage employees.
In addition, we practice the “many helping
hands” approach, whereby strong participation from
community partners, such as community self-help
groups and voluntary welfare organizations, is key to
addressing problems caused by rising income inequality.
The Singapore Government works to strengthen the
capabilities of those partners. That approach of working
with the community also promotes social inclusivity
and cohesiveness.
As reported by the Secretary-General, inequality
can reduce social mobility. In and of itself, social
mobility must be supported by a system that provides
inclusive opportunities and equal access to health care,
education and employment opportunities regardless of
one’s background. In that regard, Singapore advocates
the principle of “every school a good school” for all
Singaporeans, so that they all have access to quality
education regardless of where they live and what
their socioeconomic backgrounds are. In the highereducation landscape, Singapore also strives to provide
multiple pathways to success to allow individuals to
pursue excellence in their own ways.
It is in that spirit that our efforts in international
collaboration towards the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in tackling poverty and inequality must
continue to include relevant capacity- and capabilitybuilding efforts, which must be customized according
to the political, social and economic environments of
the respective countries. One size does not fit all, and
a policy suitable to one set of circumstances will not
necessarily be useful in another.
Singapore is committed to the efforts of the United
Nations and the international community in helping
partner countries in the achievement of the MDGs.
We encourage the development of the sustainable
development goals, as agreed upon at the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development,
which will build on the MDGs and converge with the
post-2015 development agenda. In that connection,
we support the High-level Panel on the Post-2015
Development Agenda, established by the SecretaryGeneral, to prepare a bold yet practical vision for
the post-2015 development agenda. We also join the
Secretary-General in his call for negotiations on the

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

Doha Development Agenda to be completed urgently to
establish a fair trading system and deliver the attendant
benefits to developing countries.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): First and foremost, I
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
on the role of the United Nations in promoting a
new global human order and an assessment of the
implications of inequality for development (A/67/394).
Malaysia welcomes the report and the assessment made
on the impact of inequality on the development agenda.
We appreciate the recommendations provided in the
report, especially on the call for the United Nations and
Member States to continue emphasizing the need to
reduce inequality throughout the consultative process
on the development agenda beyond 2015.
While we can be proud of our success in bridging
the development gap thus far, the road ahead is full of
challenges and uncertainties. For instance, the ongoing
global financial and economic crises and the slow
rate of recovery have hampered progress. We believe
that the United Nations provides the best platform to
address such challenges and the subsequent effects that
have led to greater inequality.
At this juncture, allow me to share some of
Malaysia’s experiences in addressing the gap between
opposite ends of the spectrum, including that between
the rich and the poor, as well as between men and
women.
Malaysia has been very fortunate that, since
its independence, in 1957, the Government has
continuously adopted policies geared towards the
people. Since 1970, the Government has undertaken
ambitious socioeconomic programmes intended to
balance the economic participation of various groups of
citizens and to promote equitable growth. As a result,
Malaysia’s per capita income has grown significantly.
The incidence of poverty has also decreased, from
75 per cent in 1957 to only 3.8 per cent in 2010, with
hardcore poverty having been virtually eradicated.
Malaysia believes that it is important to monitor the
effectiveness of poverty-eradication programmes. In
2008, Malaysia introduced the e-Kasih system, which
does just that to ensure fair distribution of aid to the
poor.
Malaysia truly believes that education is a
prerequisite for a nation to be able to fully address
inequality. That is due to the belief that knowledge is
the key to higher income for its people. At the same

12-66126

time, we feel that the development of human capital is
a crucial ingredient for success in the journey towards
becoming a developed economy. Since the mid-1990s,
the Government has consistently allocated at least
one-fifth of its national development expenditure to
education and training. Realizing the importance
of the acquisition of knowledge, particularly in
reducing income inequality, Malaysia also provides
free education to all of its citizens at the primary and
secondary levels.
The Government of Malaysia has always been
supportive of efforts aimed at providing an enabling
environment for the advancement of women at both the
national and international levels. The tenth Malaysia
Plan, for 2011-2015, highlights the Government’s
commitment to ensuring that at least 30 per cent of
positions at decision-making levels are held by women.
As a result of our efforts, we are seeing more women in
high-level political positions and as top administrators
and managers in all key socioeconomic areas. To
further underscore the importance the country places
in enhancing women’s participation in the labour force,
the Prime Minister of Malaysia recently announced that,
beginning in 2013, a double tax deduction incentive
would be provided for training expenditures incurred
by companies re-employing women after a career break.
We view the return of tertiary-level-educated women
into the workforce as a strategic advantage to the nation
in order to enhance the country’s competitiveness.
In order to allow the poor to lead comfortable lives,
Malaysia launched the House Built Project to repair and
rebuild houses of the poor. That is in addition to various
low-income housing schemes to allow the poor to own
houses.
In ensuring that health-care services are enjoyed
by all, the Government introduced the One Malaysia
Clinic. The Government’s emphasis and efforts in
enhancing health-care services have led to higher life
expectancy levels and lower infant mortality rates.
In conclusion, the Government of Malaysia has
certainly taken all the steps necessary to allow all of
its people to enjoy a higher quality of life. That has
been done mainly through addressing imbalances and
inequalities. While we have done much, there is always
more that can be done. In that regard, Malaysia looks
forward to the United Nations playing a more effective
role, not only in promoting but also in realizing greater
equality for all the peoples of the world in various

23

A/67/PV.61

aspects. Only then can we have a world free from
conflict and prejudices.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 16. The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.49.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.49, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Angola,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana, China,
Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau,
Honduras, India, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria, Paraguay,
Peru, the Philippines, Tajikistan and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.49?
Draft resolution A/67/L.49 was adopted (resolution
67/230).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 16?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/67/L.50)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held the debate on agenda item 70 and
its sub-items (a) to (c), at its 54th and 55th plenary
meetings, on 13 December. Members will also recall
that, under sub-item (a) of agenda item 70, the Assembly
adopted resolution 67/87, at its 55th plenary meeting, on
13 December.
I now give the floor to the representative of Algeria
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.50.

24

Mr. Chir (Algeria): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, it is my honour to introduce the
draft resolution contained in document A/67/L.50,
entitled “International cooperation on humanitarian
assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief
to development”. We are pleased to announce that the
following countries have joined the list of sponsors:
Australia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
Luxembourg, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, the
Russian Federation, Spain and Sweden.
By introducing the draft resolution, the Group of
77 and China reaffirms the importance of international
cooperation on humanitarian assistance in support
of the efforts of affected States in dealing with
natural disasters in all their phases, in particular in
preparedness, response and early recovery. At the same
time, it is recognized that the affected State has the
primary responsibility in the initiation, organization,
coordination and implementation of humanitarian
assistance within its own territory. The importance of
the humanitarian principles set out in resolution 46/182
are also highlighted in the draft resolution.
The draft resolution also recognizes the clear
relationship between emergency response, rehabilitation
and development. It also reaffirms that, in order to
ensure a smooth transition from relief to development,
emergency response should be provided in ways that
will be supportive of short- and medium-term recovery,
leading to long-term development.
Given the fact that the Hyogo Framework for Action
will come to an end in 2015, the draft resolution calls upon
Member States, the United Nations system and other
humanitarian development actors to fully implement
the Framework, in particular the commitments related
to assistance to developing countries.
The text of draft resolution A/67/L.50 is the result of
the consensus reached through informal consultations
and bilateral meetings that were convened over the past
few days. It incorporates most of the proposals made by
some major groups and delegations. The Group made
concrete efforts to include the contributions of other
groups and Member States.
The text of this year’s draft resolution contains
new elements based on recommendations from the
Secretary-General’s report (A/67/363). Those new
paragraphs highlight the importance of strengthening
international partnership at all levels when a natural
disaster situation arises so that there can be effective

12-66126

A/67/PV.61

cooperation in the provision of humanitarian assistance
to those in need.

that are sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.50. We look
forward to its adoption by consensus.

Another important area that the draft resolution
highlights is the importance to development of improved
data collection and analysis in order to facilitate
the exchange of information with humanitarian
organizations of the United Nations in order to support
preparedness efforts and improve the effectiveness of a
needs-based humanitarian response.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/67/L.50, entitled
“International cooperation on humanitarian assistance
in the field of natural disasters, from relief to
development”.

This year’s draft resolution also stresses the need
to enhance resilience at all levels. In that regard, we
encourage Member States, the United Nations system
and other relevant actors to support the process
appropriate to integrating resilience into humanitarian
and development programming.
Moreover, the draft resolution requests United
Nations humanitarian and development organizations
to improve the coordination of disaster-recovery
efforts, from relief to development, by strengthening
institutional coordination and strategic planning
efforts in disaster preparedness, resilience-building
and recovery, in support of national authorities, and
by ensuring that development actors participate in
strategic planning at an early stage.
Lastly, the draft resolution strongly encourages
giving appropriate consideration to disaster-risk
reduction and building resilience to disasters within the
post-2015 development agenda, as well as to promoting
a complementary approach between that agenda and
the post-2015 framework for disaster-risk reduction.
In conclusion, I would like to express the
appreciation of our Group for the collaboration and
cooperation shown by all partners during the informal
consultations, which enabled us to agree on the
important issues addressed by the draft resolution. The
Group also wishes to warmly thank all the delegations

12-66126

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In addition to the
sponsors listed in draft resolution A/67/L.50, the
following countries have also become sponsors of the
draft resolution: Australia, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, New Zealand,
Norway, the Russian Federation, Spain and Sweden.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.50?
Draft resolution A/67/L.50 was adopted (resolution
67/231).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 70.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I would like to make an
announcement concerning the consideration of draft
decision A/67/L.48. Although the text circulated was
approved by the regional groups, I have recently been
informed that some Member States will require more
time to conduct further consultations on the issue. In
the light of that fact, the consideration of draft decision
A/67/L.48 is deferred to the 62nd plenary meeting.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

25
