VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
organize its work on the draft convention on the rights
of the child at its thirty-fifth session so that the draft
of the Convention may be ready for adoption if possible during the International Year of the Child;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session the question of a convention on the rights of the child.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/167.

Regional arrangements for the promotion and protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/127 of 16 December
1977,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 24 (XXXIV) of 8 March 1978 82 on regional
arrangements for the promotion and protection of
human rights,
Noting with serious concern the report of the Secretary-General83 on the implementation of the abovementioned resolutions, in which he reported that owing
to financial difficulties he was unable to organize any
seminar for the purpose of discussing the usefulness
and advisability of the establishment of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human
rights in regions where no regional commission on
human rights exists,
Stressing the importance of the speedy and effective
implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly on this question,
1. Reiterates its appeal to States in areas where
regional arrangements in the field of human rights
do not yet exist to consider agreements with a view
to the establishment within their respective regions of
suitable regional machinery for the promotion and
protection of human rights;

2. Requests once again that the Secretary-General,
under the programme of advisory services in the field
of human rights, give priority to the consideration,
in regions where no regional commission on human
rights exists, of seminars for the purpose of discussing
the usefulness and advisability of the establishment
of regional commissions for the promotion and protection of human rights and that at least one such
seminar should be organized during 1979;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session
and also to include in his report to the Commission
on Human Rights, in accordance with paragraph 4
of Commission resolution 24 (XXXIV), such information as he may already possess on the implementation of this resolution.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
82 See Official Records of

the Economic and Social Council, 1978, Supplement No. 4 (E/1978/34 ), chap. XXVI, sect. A.
83 A/33/219.

33/168.

155

Narcotic drugs

The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,84 of that Convention
as amended by the 1972 Protocol Amending the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,85 and
of the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971,86
which form the main basis of all efforts in international
drug control,
Bearing in mind the numerous resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council and the World Health Organization on the
subject in recent years as well as the relevant recommendations of the Fifth United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 87
A ware of the comprehensive and valuable work of
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs and the International Narcotics Control Board as the main technical
and treaty organs entrusted with specific functions in
order to ensure and supervise the proper implementation of the Conventions and Protocol and to foster
the most efficient international drug control,
Preoccupied by the persistence of serious health,
social and economic problems of drug abuse for individuals, young and old, and for societies as a whole,
Noting with great concern the detrimental effects of
the continued international drug traffic,
Reaffirming the responsibility of Governments as
well as the collective responsibility of the international
community to regulate and limit the cultivation, production, manufacture and use of drugs to quantities
required for medical and scientific purposes, in accordance with the above-mentioned treaties,
Convinced that measures to reduce illicit demand
for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, including prevention through proper information and education, treatment and rehabilitation, must be taken
concurrently with measures of adequate control to
reduce illicit drug supply and traffic,
Also convinced that co-ordinated efforts by all competent agencies and organizations concerned with the
fight against illicit drug traffic should be intensified
to bring about even better results in the interception
of illicit drug traffic,
Considering the response to paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 32/124 of 16 December 1977
given by the Commission on Narcotic Drugs concerning the launching of a meaningful programme of
international drug abuse control strategy and policies
to be considered by the Commission at its twentyeighth session in February 1979,
l. Reiterates its appeal to all States not yet parties
to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, the
1972 Protocol Amending the Single Convention on
Narcotic Drugs, 1961, 88 and the Convention on Psycho84 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.
85 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.77.XI.3, p. 13.
86 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.78.XI.3, p.

7.

87 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.IV.2 and cor-

rigendum, para. 28.
88 See Official Records of the United Nations Conference to
consider amendments to the Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs, 1961, vol. I (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.73.XI.7), part three.
