UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26747
15 November 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3314th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 November 1993, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item "The question concerning
Haiti", the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the question concerning Haiti (S/26724) and the letter
dated 12 November 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Haiti to the
United Nations (S/26725).
"The Security Council commends the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretaries-General of the United Nations and the Organization of American
States, Mr. Dante Caputo, takes note of his oral report made to the Council
on 12 November 1993 and confirms its full support for his continued active
diplomacy for resolving the crisis in Haiti.
"The Security Council condemns the military authorities in
Port-au-Prince for failing to comply fully with the Governors Island
Agreement and in particular with points 7, 8 and 9. It reaffirms that this
Agreement constitutes the only valid framework for resolving the crisis in
Haiti, which continues to threaten peace and security in the region.
"The Security Council also reaffirms its support for the
democratically elected President, Mr. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and for the
legitimate Government of Mr. Robert Malval. It recalls that it holds the
military authorities responsible for the security of the members of this
Government and for the security of the United Nations and Organization of
American States personnel in Haiti.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the plight of the Haitian
people. It reaffirms that the military authorities in Haiti are fully
responsible for this suffering which directly results from their
non-compliance with their public commitments to the Governors Island
Agreement. The Council expresses its determination to minimize the impact
of the present situation on the most vulnerable groups and calls upon
Member States to continue, and to intensify, their humanitarian assistance
to the people of Haiti. The Security Council welcomes in this regard the
decision of the Secretary-General to dispatch a team of additional
humanitarian personnel to Haiti.

93-63580 (E)

151193

/...

S/26747
English
Page 2

"The Security Council encourages the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of American
States, to work for the earliest possible return of the International
Civilian Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH). The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue planning for additional measures including
for an appropriate United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to be deployed
as conditions permit, consistent with the Governors Island Agreement.
"The Security Council stresses that the sanctions contained in
resolutions 841 (1993), 873 (1993) and 875 (1993) will remain in force
until the objectives of the Governors Island Agreement are fulfilled,
including the departure of the Commander-in-Chief of the Haitian Armed
Forces, the creation of a new police force permitting the restoration of
constitutional order to Haiti and the return of the democratically-elected
President.
"The Security Council reaffirms its determination, expressed in the
above-mentioned resolutions, to ensure the full and effective enforcement
of current sanctions. It welcomes measures taken to this effect by States
on a national basis in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and relevant Security Council resolutions. In this regard, the Council is
prepared to consider additional mechanisms and practical measures to help
verify the full compliance with the decisions of the Security Council.
"The Security Council reaffirms its determination to consider
strengthening the measures regarding Haiti in accordance with its
resolutions 873 (1993) and 875 (1993) and its presidential statements of
25 October 1993 (S/26633) and of 30 October 1993 (S/26668) if the military
authorities continue to obstruct full compliance with the Governors Island
Agreement, thus preventing the restoration of lawful order and democracy in
Haiti."

-----
