S/PV.8954

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8954

th meeting
Wednesday, 26 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Støre/Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Boubeya
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-23993 (E)
*2223993*

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Pakistan and Uzbekistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Deborah
Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan; and Ms. Mahbouba Seraj, Afghan women
human rights defender and Executive Director of the
Afghan Women Skills Development Centre.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
remarks by the Secretary-General, as well as briefings
by Special Representative Lyons, Ambassador
Tirumurti, Permanent Representative of India, in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and
Ms. Seraj.
Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: Six months after the
takeover by the Taliban, Afghanistan is hanging by a
thread. For Afghans, daily life has become a frozen
hell. They are in the grips of another brutal winter of
2/32

26/01/2022

blistering winds, cold and snow. Families huddle in
makeshift tents under plastic sheets — even burning
their possessions to keep warm. Clinics are overcrowded
and under-resourced. Ambulances and hospital power
generators are running dry because of sky-rocketing fuel
prices. Afghans are stalked not only by the coronavirus
disease, but by deadly preventable diseases, such as
measles, diarrhoea and even polio. Education and social
services are on the brink of collapse.
Millions of children — critically, girls — are out of
school, and 70 per cent of teachers are not getting paid.
Over half of all Afghans face extreme levels of hunger.
The country is facing its worst drought in two decades,
pushing 9 million people closer to famine. More than
80 per cent of the population relies on contaminated
drinking water, and some families are selling their
babies to purchase food.
The Afghan economy is enduring a bitter winter
of its own. There is a danger that the currency could
go into free fall and the country could lose 30 per cent
of its gross domestic product within the year. Liquidity
has evaporated. Sanctions and mistrust by the global
banking system have frozen nearly $9 billion in central
bank assets. Vital systems are starved of needed funds.
A lack of liquidity — particularly in local currency — is
limiting capacity to reach Afghans in need.
As the economy spirals downward, human rights
are also losing ground. Women and girls are once
again being shut out of offices and classrooms. They
lost their country overnight — years of steady progress
gone in the blink of an eye. And I am deeply concerned
by recent reports of arbitrary arrests and abductions of
women activists. I strongly appeal for their release.
Meanwhile, terrorism remains a constant threat,
not only to the security of Afghanistan itself, but to the
entire world.
When it comes to complex humanitarian
emergencies, Afghanistan is as bad as it gets. That
is why we launched an appeal two weeks ago — the
largest in United Nations history for a single country,
more than $4.4 billion for this year. We are ramping
up life-saving support around health, shelter, nutrition,
protection and emergency education, as well as cash
transfers to help families make ends meet. Last year,
the United Nations and its partners reached 18 million
people across the country. And our teams are working
at scaled-up capacity to reach even more people this
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

year, and keep the country’s food, health and education
systems from collapse.
The appeal also contains vital support for
refugee-hosting countries. I will never forget the
generosity of countries like Pakistan and Iran, which
for decades have hosted millions of Afghans in need.
At this moment, we need the global community and
the Security Council to put their hands on the wheel
of progress, provide resources and prevent Afghanistan
from spiralling any further.
First and most urgently, we need to scale up our
humanitarian operations to save lives. This goes far
beyond our humanitarian appeal itself. We need to
suspend the rules and conditions that constrict not only
Afghanistan’s economy, but our life-saving operations.
At this moment of maximum need, these rules must
be seriously reviewed. International funding must be
allowed to pay the salaries of public sector workers.
From surgeons and nurses, to teachers, sanitation
workers and electricians — all are vital to keeping
systems up and running, and they are critical to
Afghanistan’s future. We need to give them a reason to
stay in the country.
I welcome the Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 2615 (2021), which provides a humanitarian
exemption to the United Nations sanctions regime for
Afghanistan. I repeat my call to issue general licenses
covering transactions necessary to all humanitarian
activities. We need to give financial institutions and
commercial partners legal assurance that they can
work with humanitarian operators without fear of
breaching sanctions.
Standing with the people of Afghanistan also
includes a strong role for the United Nations. This
includes the One-UN Transitional Engagement
Framework for Afghanistan, which is being launched
today — a plan to extend and accelerate humanitarian
and development support to the Afghan people, while
sustaining and strengthening essential services and
systems throughout this critical period of transition. And
it includes recommendations for a new mandate for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to
support security, progress and human rights, contained
in my upcoming report. I urge the Security Council to
consider these recommendations as that country enters
a new chapter in its history.
Secondly — and deeply connected to the first — we
need to jump-start Afghanistan’s economy through

S/PV. 8954

increased liquidity. We must pull the economy back
from the brink. This means finding ways to free up
frozen currency reserves and re-engage Afghanistan’s
central bank, and it means exploring other ways
to rapidly inject liquidity into the economy. The
World Bank Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund
transferred $280 million to UNICEF and the World
Food Programme last month. We need the remaining
$1.2 billion to be freed up urgently to help Afghanistan’s
people survive the winter.
Time is of the essence. Without action, lives will be
lost and despair and extremism will grow. A collapse
of the Afghan economy could lead to a massive exodus
of people fleeing the country. Our team in Afghanistan
stands ready to work with Member States and others to
establish accountable systems to ensure that funds go
to the Afghan people most in need and are not diverted.
Thirdly, now is the time for the Taliban to expand
opportunity and security for its people and demonstrate
a real commitment to being a part of the global
community. The window for trust-building is open, but
this trust must be earned.
Inside Afghanistan, Afghan and international
female aid workers are hard at work implementing
projects, supporting programmes and even leading
country operations across the country. They are making
a difference on the ground — clearly demonstrating
the contribution that women can make when given the
opportunity to do so. Unfettered humanitarian access
to all regions of the country is vital. At the same time,
every effort must be made to build inclusive Government
institutions in which all Afghans feel represented.
Promoting security and fighting terrorism is also
crucial. For far too long, the country has been a fertile
breeding ground for terrorist groups. If we do not act
and help Afghans weather this storm, the region and
the world will pay a heavy price. Illicit drug flows and
criminal and terrorist networks will increase. Without
food, without jobs, without their rights protected, we
will see more Afghans fleeing their homes in search of
a better life.
I urge the Taliban to work closely with the global
community and the Security Council to suppress
the global terrorist threat in Afghanistan and build
institutions that promote security. We must prevent the
expansion of all terrorist organizations in the country.
And just as I appeal to the international community to
step up support for the people of Afghanistan, I make

22-239933/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

an equally urgent plea to the Taliban leadership to
recognize and protect the fundamental human rights
that every person shares.
A stable, prosperous and peaceful Afghanistan is
an inclusive Afghanistan — one in which all people can
contribute to its future. This must include the rights of
women and girls, who are once again being denied their
rights to education, employment and equal justice. This
is a tragedy for those women and girls who grew up
believing that any dream was within reach and are now
helplessly watching those dreams slip away. But it is also
a collective waste of the talents and skills Afghanistan
needs as it navigates a precarious future. As a moral
imperative — and a practical one — all doors must
be kept open for women and girls in schools, in the
workplace, in the halls of justice and across all aspects
of public life. Opportunities for a new beginning are
rare. We urge the Taliban to seize this moment and
garner international trust and goodwill by recognizing
and upholding the basic human rights that belong to
every girl and woman.
In the depths of a frigid Afghan winter, renewal
and hope can seem distant. For decades — even
centuries — Afghanistan has been unfairly used as a
platform for political agendas, geopolitical advantage,
ideological dominance, brutal conflicts and terrorism.
As a matter of moral responsibility and regional and
global security and prosperity, we cannot abandon the
people of Afghanistan. They need peace. They need
hope. They need help. And they need it now.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his valuable introductory remarks.
I now give the floor to Ms. Lyons.
Ms. Lyons: Your participation, Mr. Prime
Minister, and that of the Secretary-General, Council
members and colleagues at this debate speak volumes
about the continued importance of Afghanistan to the
international community, as well as the rising concerns
of us all about the future of the country. It is, indeed,
a pleasure to be here with my friend, Ms. Mahbouba
Seraj, and to listen to her important message on behalf
of civil society.
When Kabul fell to Taliban forces in August,
the United Nations made a commitment to stay and
deliver to support the Afghan people at a moment of
humanitarian crisis and political uncertainty. A primary
focus of our work, with the generous assistance of
4/32

26/01/2022

donors, was to alleviate the dire humanitarian situation
as far as possible in the face of this difficult winter. In
addition to what the Secretary-General just said in that
regard, I would like to begin with a report of what we
were able to achieve.
By the end of 2021, as noted by the SecretaryGeneral, almost 18 million people had been provided
with life-saving assistance, including 10 million
people with food assistance and 1.5 million with
health care. That compares with 11 million people
assisted during 2020, when ongoing drought conditions
and the coronavirus disease pandemic had already
pushed humanitarian actors to exceed their initial
planning targets. Last year, more than 2,000 primary
and secondary health facilities in all provinces were
supported by humanitarian assistance, including 450
tons of imported life-saving health supplies. That
expansion of assistance was possible in part because,
due to the improved security situation after 15 August,
humanitarian actors were able to access parts of the
country that had been inaccessible for years.
It is clear from the above how much we have
accomplished, but, as we all know, the humanitarian
needs continue to be pressing. The approximately
$1 billion that we asked for last year to address the
humanitarian crisis must now be supplemented by
$4.4 billion in additional humanitarian assistance
for 2022, as set out in our recent appeal. To put it in
perspective, that is roughly the same amount as donors
spent on the entire operating budget of the Government
of Afghanistan in a given year. It is quite simply
unsustainable over the long term. We have therefore
simultaneously been advocating, and will continue to
advocate, for a relaxation of sanctions that prevent the
full delivery of essential services and continue to starve
the economy of liquidity. Because of the liquidity
crisis and the inability of banks to operate, we face an
extraordinary situation where people have money in
the bank but do not have full access to it to feed their
families or run their businesses.
The adoption of the humanitarian exemption
resolution 2615 (2021) and the issuing of new general
licences by the United States last December provided
some welcome assurances that facilitated our
humanitarian activities. I am also pleased to announce
that this afternoon in Kabul we launched our One-UN
Transitional Engagement Framework for Afghanistan,
for which we are seeking an additional $3.6 billion.
That brings the total ask for 2022 to $8 billion. That
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

comprehensive and system-wide strategy introduces
a basic human needs pillar that will deliver essential
services, such as health and education, as well as
providing maintenance for community infrastructure
and promoting livelihoods and social cohesion, with
a specific emphasis on the socioeconomic needs of
women and girls. Those investments are designed to
prevent a further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and to generate a sufficient level of economic
stability to reverse the steady increase in poverty rates
that we have seen, while ensuring that the critical donor
funds are not diverted or misused. Yet we know that
donors are understandably reluctant to show more
flexibility until they have a better idea of what sort
of government the de facto Administration intends to
create. Many donors were hesitant last fall to engage in
ways that might help the de facto authorities consolidate
their Administration or appear to legitimize the regime.
That hesitancy has been temporarily overcome in order
to help the Afghan people, who were suffering from
an extended humanitarian crisis and facing a brutal
winter. However, it is clear that donors, who face their
own domestic constituencies, are still not satisfied with
the political progress in Afghanistan and are watching
closely for more encouraging signals.
We therefore hope that in the next few months we
will see clear actions, not just announcements, that
demonstrate that the Taliban are committed to a pathway
of future engagement with the international community.
By pathway I mean a series of clear, mutually understood
commitments, with human rights at the forefront, which
would result in Afghanistan rejoining the community
of nations by securing domestic legitimacy that aligns
with Afghanistan’s modern history and the aspirations
of its population, its multi-ethnic character and its
traditional Islamic identity.
The de facto authorities have taken some steps to
function more effectively as a Government, including
the agreement on a budget fully financed by their own
revenues, the payment of Government salaries, reduced
corruption, the collection of revenues, the successful
management of the currency devaluation crisis at the
end of last year and efforts to engage the private sector.
The well-organized economic conference that they
hosted last week was an opportunity to present their
economic vision of achieving self-reliance based on
the private sector-led growth. However, we all know
that for that to happen, the private sector needs an end
to uncertainty, a stable policy environment, a reliable

S/PV. 8954

rule-of-law framework and an educated population if it
is to truly thrive.
With regard to political inclusion, there have been
some signs of wider consultation with political and civil
society actors. Senior Taliban officials met with ethnic
minority representatives, but to date there have been
no visible results in terms of greater ethnic inclusion
in governing structures. The de facto Foreign Minister
met with some former political leaders in Tehran earlier
this month. There was also the meeting held over the
past few days in Oslo between a high-level Taliban
delegation and Afghan civil society actors, including my
friend, Ms. Seraj, from inside and outside the country.
Their joint communiqué highlights that “understanding
and joint cooperation are the only solution to all the
problems of Afghanistan”. It is noteworthy that
the Taliban delegation widely acknowledged the
communiqué. Now they must act on it.
I would also like to take a moment to thank you,
Mr. Prime Minister, and your very capable team for that
timely initiative, which, we all understand, was not to
imply legitimacy but, indeed, to advance an inclusive
dialogue. It has succeeded in doing that.
On the other hand, here on the ground there is
compelling evidence of an emerging environment
of intimidation and a deterioration in respect for
human rights. That suggests that the consolidation of
Government authority may be leading towards control
of the population by fear rather than by understanding
and responding to its needs.
Afghans now live with different — but no less
real — fears than those they faced during decades of war.
Despite announcements of general amnesties for those
who worked for or defended the former Government,
we continue to receive credible allegations of killings,
enforced disappearances and other violations that are
not being addressed by the judiciary. In addition, we
are seeing a growing number of detentions of political
opponents, civil-society representatives and those who
voice dissent.
We note as well the increasing contraction of media
space, which is partly for economic reasons but also
due to pressure from the de facto authorities to report
in ways that are not critical of them. I must stress to
the Council that we remain extremely concerned about
the fate of several women activists who were abducted
from their homes and have disappeared. No Afghans
should live in fear of a knock at their door in the night,

22-239935/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

and no family should be left to wonder about the
whereabouts and fate of their loved ones. The United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
is engaging with the de facto authorities on this and
other incidents, urging them to investigate such cases,
to provide clear information and to hold perpetrators
accountable. We will continue to do so, and I expect
that our strong communications with the de facto
authorities will indeed lead to results in that area.
How can the Taliban demonstrate a clearer
commitment to the path of governing based on trust
rather than on fear, if that is indeed the path they choose
to take?
First, it is past time for them to initiate a wider
dialogue on a process for national reconciliation. The
international community would of course support such
a process, but it must be initiated and entirely shaped
by Afghans within and outside the country. Inclusion,
furthermore, should never be seen as an exterior demand
but as a long-standing and required source of domestic
legitimacy for such a diverse country and as entirely
critical to ongoing stability. For now the war has ended,
but peace has not yet been consolidated. The current
comparative stability is in many ways underpinned by
conflict fatigue and by communities and individuals
focusing on mere survival. That peace, that stability is
thus fragile and could unravel if measures are not taken
to govern in a way that builds trust and accountability
and that focuses on the genuine needs of the people,
including the need and the right to participate in
their Government.
Secondly, there is the all-important issue of girls’
education. We welcome the recent statements by the de
facto authorities’ leaders that girls of all ages will be
educated nationwide. Some international donors have
declared themselves ready to pay financial incentives
to Afghan teachers for January and February, but future
incentives will likely be determined by whether the de
facto authorities deliver on their stated commitments.
I am happy to report that UNICEF and the Ministry
of Education are having intensive sessions on technical
preparations to open schools for all Afghan boys and
girls in March. UNAMA also continues to meet with
the de facto authorities regarding higher education, a
vital and often overlooked sector that was particularly
dynamic in the past 20 years but that has been devastated
by the recent economic crisis.
6/32

26/01/2022

Thirdly, there must be more meaningful actions
behind the Taliban’s promise to contain terrorist
groups in Afghanistan. Since my previous briefing
(see S/PV.8908), it appears that the de facto authorities
have attempted to constrain the Islamic State’s ability
to carry out major attacks, and yet small-scale attacks
are still being carried out, particularly against religious
minorities. The existence of numerous terrorist
groups in Afghanistan remains a broad international
and especially regional concern. The desire of the de
facto authorities to take on that threat across the board
remains to be convincingly demonstrated. Yet at the
same time, a certain amount of realism is required
regarding its capacity to do so. Given the common
interest in addressing that threat, and if sufficient trust
can be established, this could be an area for potential
cooperation between the international community and
the de facto authorities. A new conversation, a new
dialogue on this is warranted.
I would like to take a moment to highlight the
cautious but constructive approach that countries
of the region have taken towards Afghanistan since
last August. Numerous meetings have been held in
various formats, as detailed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2021/759). Of particular note was the recent
extraordinary meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), hosted by Pakistan in December. The OIC agreed
to establish a humanitarian trust fund for Afghanistan
and appointed a Special Envoy. We welcome the
increased involvement of the OIC as a truly substantive
partner and look forward to its engagement with us and
the de facto authorities on inclusivity, human rights,
girls’ education and a broad set of common issues. I
am happy to report to the Council that I had a highly
productive meeting with the OIC’s Special Envoy for
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tarig Ali Bakheet, and that
we are preparing together a comprehensive agenda
of cooperation.
The commitment of the United Nations in August
to stay and deliver means that we are well positioned
now to continue supporting the Afghan people, acting
as an enabler of others who are willing to provide
additional support and engaging as a bridge with
the de facto authorities on the way forward. As the
Secretary-General has just noted, he is about to present
recommendations on a future political mission in
Afghanistan. Those are based on a presumed consensus
that it is in no one’s interest to see a collapse of the
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

current State in Afghanistan, but also that continued
engagement with the Taliban can and will lead to
progress along a negotiated pathway that delivers for
the people of Afghanistan, the region and the rest of the
world. Testing that hypothesis will be our task in the
months ahead.
I thank the Council once again for this opportunity.
The debate today and the high level of its participants
shows the people of Afghanistan that their plight is
not being ignored. It demonstrates our sincere hope
that the opportunity provided by the current end to
the conflict can and will transition to a dignified and
responsible peace. Indeed, we look forward to the
Council’s deliberations on UNAMA’s future mandate
in the coming weeks, and we trust in its support.
The President: I thank Ms. Lyons for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Tirumurti.
Mr. Tirumurti: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), which I am pleased to do in
accordance with paragraph 56 of resolution 2255 (2015).
I am also thankful to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Deborah Lyons and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
for their support of the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) and their continuous assistance to the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. I would also
like to thank the Monitoring Team and the Secretariat
for their assistance and efforts during the previous year
in supporting the work of this Committee in relation to
events in Afghanistan.
As Council members are aware, the latter half of
2021 saw consequential change in Afghanistan with the
Taliban takeover of Kabul in August, the concurrent
collapse of the Government of Afghanistan and the
humanitarian crisis that followed, as well as the concern
over the eroding of human rights and women’s rights.
These events occurred at a pace few envisioned or
expected. Given the fluid situation in Afghanistan and
the negotiations leading to the adoption of resolutions
2611 (2021) and 2615 (2021), this briefing to the Security
Council, in accordance with paragraph 56 of resolution
2255 (2015), has been deferred until now.
I would therefore like to begin this briefing on
the work and activities of the 1988 Committee and

S/PV. 8954

the Monitoring Team by recalling that the main goal
of the sanctions regime was, ultimately, to facilitate
conditions that promoted dialogue between the
Taliban and the Afghan Government, and which was
furthermore intended to result in a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. Although the events of August 2021
create a new situation, the need for peace and stability
in Afghanistan remains a key goal of this Committee.
In an effort to support that goal, on 22 December
2021, the 1988 Committee once again extended the
three-month travel ban exemption for 14 listed Taliban
members so that they could continue attending talks
in the interest of promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan. The exemption to the ban will be until
22 March 2022 and was accompanied by a decision, on
this occasion, to grant a limited asset-freeze exemption
for the financing of exempted travel. In this regard, I
would like to recall that the country hosting the peace
and stability talks will be required to report to the
Committee within 30 days from the date of travel.
The Committee fully supports the travel-ban
exemption for listed Taliban to attend talks that are in
the interest of promoting the prospect for peace and
stability in Afghanistan. However, I would remind
Member States that the travel-ban exemption is for this
purpose and this purpose only.
With the need for further discussions to promote
peace and stability also comes the need for further
reporting of the activities of the Taliban and those
individuals and entities listed under the 1988 sanctions
regime, in order to ensure compliance with sanctions
measures. To facilitate this, on 17 December 2021,
resolution 2611 (2021) extended the mandate of the
Monitoring Team relating to the Taliban for a further
year, until December 2022.
I would highlight to Member States that, in
2022, the Monitoring Team will be more reliant upon
information provided to it from outside Afghanistan,
and I would therefore urge all Member States officials,
including intelligence and security services, to respect
the annexes to resolutions, including resolution 2611
(2021), to consult in confidence with the Monitoring
Team to facilitate the sharing of information, and to
strengthen implementation of sanction measures.
On 30 November 2021 and pursuant to paragraph
44 of resolution 2255 (2015), the Committee invited
representatives of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United

22-239937/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations World Food Programme to brief it
on the impact of the sanctions regime on the current
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan since the Taliban
takeover of 15 August. Subsequently, on 22 December
2021, the Security Council adopted resolution 2615
(2021) concerning the need to facilitate the workings of
humanitarian agencies and those institutions involved
in supporting the resourcing and financing of critical
humanitarian-relief efforts in Afghanistan.
Resolution 2615 (2021) acknowledged the current
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan, emphasizing food
insecurity and the disproportionate effect the situation
was having on women, children and minorities. The
resolution provided clarity to ensure the continued
provision of assistance in future. The Security Council
decided that provision of humanitarian assistance
and other activities that support basic human needs
in Afghanistan are not a violation of sub-paragraph
(a) of paragraph 1 of resolution 2255 (2015), and that
the processing and payment of funds, other financial
assets, economic resources and provision of goods and
services necessary to ensure the timely delivery of such
assistance or to support such activities are permitted.
It further decided to review the implementation of this
provision after a period of one year. The current United
Nations assessment is that over 30 listed members of the
Taliban now occupy senior Cabinet positions, and the
Security Council therefore encourages humanitarian
providers to use reasonable efforts to minimize the
accrual of any benefits, whether as a result of direct
provision or diversion, to individuals or entities
designated on the 1988 sanctions list.
In its latest report for 2021, the Monitoring
Team noted that the ties between the Taliban, largely
through the Haqqani Network, and Al-Qaida and
foreign terrorist fighters remain close and are based on
ideological alignment and relationships forged through
common struggle and intermarriage. The continued
presence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and its activities in Afghanistan remain a matter of our
concern. Terrorist attacks have become despicable acts
used by this terrorist organization to demonstrate its
power and influence in the country and abroad.
Lastly, I wish to thank all Member States and
international bodies that have provided support to
the 1988 Committee and to the Monitoring Team in a
flexible and amenable manner during the coronavirus
disease pandemic and corresponding restrictions on
8/32

26/01/2022

foreign travel and meeting engagements. At this critical
time for Afghanistan, under my chairmanship of the
1988 Committee in 2022, the Committee looks forward
to continuing close engagement with UNAMA and
with States in the region.
The President: I thank Ambassador Tirumurti for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Seraj.
Ms. Seraj: My name is Mahbouba Seraj. I am an
Afghan-American women’s rights activist who has
been living in Afghanistan since 2003. Over the last
20 years, the people of Afghanistan — especially
women and girls — have fought for equality, human
rights, inclusive governance and peace in our country.
Yet the hasty exit of the international community
from Afghanistan last August has undermined our
achievements and dashed our hopes for a democratic
nation. The Taliban is once more in control and is
dismantling our rights daily. Hundreds of thousands
of Afghans have been displaced to countries around
the world. Today in Afghanistan women are literally
being erased from public life, down to the beheading of
female mannequins in shop windows.
My Afghan sisters and I warned the Security Council
and broader international community of this possibility
for decades. It pains me to be in this Chamber before
the Security Council today to affirm this truth. But we
will not be silenced, and the Council has a tremendous
responsibility for keeping the promises it has made to
us over the years. My statement today will focus on
the responsibility of the Security Council, the United
Nations and the international community for keeping
Afghan women’s rights front and centre throughout all
deliberations on Afghanistan.
After 20 years of tasting freedom — working,
studying, playing sports, performing music — it has
taken less than six months to completely dismantle
the rights of women and girls across the country.
The majority of Afghanistan’s girls are banned from
secondary school and university. Many women have
fled the country or are prisoners in their own homes.
Female judges, once celebrated by the international
community, are on the run from the very individuals
they imprisoned.
Women are now required to travel with a mahram,
or male guardian. This has restricted not only their
basic freedom of movement, but their ability to live
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

their lives. It has prevented women from reaching their
health appointments, escaping situations of domestic
violence and seeking employment. In a country where
millions of Afghan women are widows and the sole
breadwinners for their children, this rule is sabotaging
families and threatening their survival.
It feels as though the world has given up on
Afghanistan and Afghan women, but we have not.
Every day, we are in the streets protesting, despite the
threats, weapons and violence. We are fighting for our
inclusion, for justice and for an end to the repression of
our people. But we need the Council’s political support
and resources to succeed. We need the Council to
stand by us and ensure that Afghan women are equal
partners in making decisions about the future of our
country. That means calling for the Taliban to rescind
the mahram policy and uphold women’s freedom of
movement and to ensure that we can exercise our right to
education, work and health. It means that, upon hearing
that women human rights defenders like Tamana
Zaryab Paryani and Parwana Ebrahim Khel have been
taken from their homes for protesting against the hijab,
not giving up when asking about their whereabouts or
about the disappearance of Alia Azizi. If the Council
claims to support us, it cannot remain silent.
We are in the midst of a catastrophic humanitarian
crisis. Since the Taliban’s takeover, hunger and poverty
in Afghanistan have skyrocketed. More than half
the population needs urgent food assistance at this
very moment. Some families have resorted to selling
their children or marrying off their girls — some as
young as nine years of age — in order to pay for food
and urgent health care. The Taliban’s restrictions on
women aid workers and their systematic dismantling
of the country’s mechanisms to address gender-based
violence are endangering women’s access to services.
Our hospitals lack equipment and medication, including
tests for the coronavirus disease. As the humanitarian
situation has rapidly deteriorated over the past five
months, the people of my country have asked what
they have done to deserve this, and no one has answers
for them.
It is the responsibility of the Security Council,
the international community and the United Nations
to do everything in their power to provide life-saving
assistance in order to avert further suffering. Aid must
reach all Afghans, including women, minorities and
other marginalized groups. All humanitarian workers,
including women, must be able to carry out their

S/PV. 8954

work freely and without fear of reprisals. Further, the
international community must continue to ensure that
humanitarian assistance goes directly to principled
humanitarian organizations and local organizations
operating on the ground and not routed through the
Taliban. Women’s organizations in Afghanistan must be
consulted on all aspects of this humanitarian operation.
While humanitarian assistance is critical to
managing short-term needs, the collapsing banking
system and economy must also be addressed. Presently,
ordinary Afghans who need to withdraw money must
wait for hours before collecting the small amount
permitted for that day. The prices of food staples
continue to rise. Afghans have lost half a million
jobs since August, which disproportionately impacts
women. The massive brain drain, prompted by the
Taliban takeover, has left the country without enough
qualified workers.
Even if the banking system restarts and supplychain demands are addressed, women’s engagement
in the workforce will be critical to the success
of Afghanistan’s economy. We were taxpayers,
breadwinners and innovators — all critical for the
country’s prosperity. In fact, restricting women’s right
to work could reduce Afghanistan’s gross domestic
product by up to $1 billion. And although the Taliban
does not support our right to work outside the home, the
majority of Afghans do. The international community
must protect that right, dedicate funds to supporting us
and engage us as partners in developing solutions to the
current crisis.
That brings me to my final, but most important
point. The people of Afghanistan, especially its women,
see the dilemma the world currently faces regarding
how to engage with the Taliban while addressing the
present, urgent need of all Afghans. Ordinary Afghans
must not be punished for a crisis they had no part in
creating. At the same time, the Taliban cannot use the
lives of Afghans to hold the international community to
ransom. It is therefore in our collective interest to ensure
that there is a robust international presence through
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) who can be our eyes and ears on the ground,
monitoring developments in the country and whether the
Taliban are following through on their commitments.
That is especially important at a time where civil
society, the media and international non-governmental
organizations are unable to do so. UNAMA should also
play a key role in supporting dialogue with the Taliban

22-239939/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

and ensure inclusive consultations with Afghans from
all parts of the country and all walks of life.
At the same time, the international community
must not be afraid to use its important leverage
over the Taliban. Human rights, women’s rights and
accountability must be part of every conversation.
In addition, clear conditions must be placed on any
economic and political support to the Taliban in order
to ensure that they respect human rights. The Council
affirmed the importance of upholding all human rights
in resolution 2593 (2021). Now the Council must act
on it.
Finally, the international community must stop
sending all-male delegations to meet with the Taliban.
That sends a dangerous signal that the international
community does not value our rights or our views.
Sending foreign women is not enough; we must start
the process of inclusive governance for and by Afghans.
Diverse representation of Afghan women, especially
civil society, is essential.
I am not the first, nor will I be the last Afghan
woman to address the Council. But this time, I hope the
international community will start to take us seriously.
While we cannot turn back the clock, we can choose to
work differently moving forward. Ensuring that Afghan
women are meaningfully a part of our country’s future
is a critical place to start.
The President: I thank Ms. Seraj for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Prime Minister of Norway.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Special Representative Lyons and the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) for their introductions. I also
extend our heartfelt gratitude to Ms. Mahbouba Seraj
for her powerful and compelling statement.
During the past few days, a high-level delegation
from the de facto Afghan authorities visited Oslo. It
was not a bilateral visit in the traditional sense. The
purpose was to offer a most-needed opportunity for
non-Taliban women and men from Afghan civil society
to engage the Taliban in dialogue on the way forward for
Afghanistan. It offered an opportunity for Norway and
a range of national delegations to engage the Taliban
representatives on how the needs — political, human
rights and humanitarian — of millions of Afghans will
be met in the time to come.
10/32

26/01/2022

Let me be clear — the Taliban heard the serious
concerns shared by a variety of representative civil
Afghans, as well as a united international community.
The visit did not bestow international recognition on
the de facto regime. It provided an opportunity to
talk, exchange and formulate clear expectations on the
way ahead.
Such dialogue at this very moment is imperative.
The dire humanitarian situation in Afghanistan makes
dialogue even more important. We need new agreements
and commitments in place to be able to assist and help
an extremely vulnerable civilian population and the
most vulnerable among them — the children, who are
facing hunger and suffering. We must do what we can to
avoid another migration crisis and source of instability
in the region and beyond, and we need to express clearly
that it will not be possible to re-establish a sustainable
political system in Afghanistan unless Afghan men and
women from a variety of backgrounds are included. I
commend all delegations that were at the Oslo meeting
for having contributed to three days of meaningful
dialogue and exchange.
(spoke in French)
The humanitarian crisis facing the Afghan people
is dire. It has been exacerbated by the effects of climate
change, the global pandemic and the collapse of the
Afghan economy. We are witnessing the disruption of
civilian infrastructure and basic services, including
in the areas of health and education. The situation
is disproportionately affecting women and girls.
We therefore welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2615 (2021) on 22 December 2021. The
resolution clearly states that humanitarian assistance
can be provided without violating the United Nations
sanctions regime. We must now make best use of the
humanitarian exemption provided for by the resolution.
(spoke in English)
Multilateral cooperation is vital to respond to the
crisis in Afghanistan. It is essential that the Council
provide the United Nations political mission with
a comprehensive and robust mandate to engage the
Taliban, monitor and report on the human rights
situation and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and support for basic human needs.
In that context, I would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the United Nations on the launching
of the One-UN Transitional Engagement Framework
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

for Afghanistan today. It is extremely important. The
protection of civilians, including children, must be our
first priority. It is also critical to safeguard the rights
and equal participation of women, and Ms. Seraj made
such a contribution in her powerful explanation. That
was also clearly communicated by all delegations at the
meeting with Taliban at the Oslo meeting.
We are gravely concerned about the persistent
reports of women peace builders and human rights
defenders facing grave risk and reprisals for raising
their voices. Tamana Zaryabi Paryani and Parawana
Ibrahimkhel — two among the many who have faced
that risk — must be released. The members of the
Taliban must abide by the commitments that they have
made, and we have to hold them accountable.
Humanitarian assistance, while crucial, will not
be sufficient in the long-run. Afghanistan’s need for
development assistance did not decrease during the past
six months — on the contrary. Norway will continue
to provide humanitarian assistance to the people of
Afghanistan, through United Nations organizations
and the appropriate humanitarian non-governmental
organizations. We will support activities to meet basic
human needs and safeguard human rights.
We must not forget, however, that the primary
responsibility for responding to the current acute
crisis lies with the de facto authorities. The Taliban
must listen to the appeals of the Afghan people and
the international community to respect human rights
and establish a more inclusive and just Government. So
far, little progress has been made in addressing those
fundamental concerns. That has to change.
Finally, let me also take the opportunity to reiterate
the importance of combating terrorism, a priority
that we all share. Norway remains committed to
fighting terrorism worldwide, including in and from
Afghanistan. But I would like to emphasize that it is the
responsibility of the Taliban to prevent terrorist groups
from gaining a foothold in Afghanistan and once again
threatening international peace and security.
We must work together, leaving no stone unturned,
to tackle the profound and complex crisis that
Afghanistan and its people are facing. There can be
no sustainable peace, security or development without
respect for human rights, including the rights of women
and girls. The renewed mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan must reflect those

S/PV. 8954

fundamental priorities. We count on the support of
the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
Mr. Boubeya (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his informative briefing
and welcome the presence of Special Representative
Deborah Lyons and Ms. Mahbouba Seraj among us.
I thank them for their clear and powerful briefings. I
also thank the Permanent Representative of India, in
his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), for the information
he provided us.
My statement will focus on three main points: first,
the extremely worrisome sociopolitical and economic
situation; secondly, the security challenges being faced
and the serious humanitarian crisis that is devastating
the Afghan population; and, lastly, the unacceptable
treatment of women in the country.
Since the Taliban took power, the sociopolitical
environment has been marked by a total lack of
transparency with regard to the political process. The
closed circle of leaders that has emerged is hardly
representative of the diversity of the Afghan people
and clearly excludes most ethnic, political and social
minorities. The Taliban regime’s lack of inclusiveness
presents a genuine obstacle to the effectiveness of the
Government, garnering the support of the entire Afghan
population and the stability of the country.
We also believe that the international community
must maintain dialogue with the Taliban, as that
is important for the individual and collective wellbeing of the people. I must nevertheless stress that
the call for dialogue does not imply recognition of the
Taliban regime.
We support the exemption of the of the sanctions
list travel ban for Taliban members for travel related to
the peace process in Afghanistan, as stated by the Chair
of the Sanctions Committee. We also welcome the
12-month extension of the mandate of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team to assist
the Sanctions Committee in establishing lasting and
inclusive peace, stability and security in Afghanistan.
We should nonetheless note the clear progress in the
fight against corruption since the Taliban took power,
while bearing in mind the extent of the phenomenon

22-2399311/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

of corruption in the country and its negative impact on
economic growth, the rule of law, social norms and a
sense of civic awareness.
With regard to the security and humanitarian
situation, we remain deeply concerned about relationship
that Al-Qaida maintains with the Taliban, including the
Haqqani Network. Similarly, we are concerned about
the continuing danger posed by foreign fighters over
whom the Taliban seems to lack all control and who are
adding to the volatility of the security situation on the
ground. We fear an even more dramatic humanitarian
crisis in the face of the collapse of the economy and the
banking system. The cessation of funding from donor
countries and the freezing of the central bank’s assets
have already led to a major financial crisis, affecting
the majority of the Afghan people. Those sanctions,
although necessary, have contributed to increased
poverty, hunger and displacement.
With regard to the condition of Afghan women and
girls, it is unbearable to watch as their freedoms are
violated and their fundamental rights, including access
to education and basic health services, are denied. Many
have been stripped of their freedom of movement and
freedom to engage in the work of their choice. When
they do have the right to work, they are confined to
specific areas such as health, customs, education and
immigration. The situation is unacceptable.
Finally, I would like to stress the importance of
what is at stake in Afghanistan. Beyond the legitimate
aspirations of the Afghan people to security and dignity,
this is a question of the stability of the entire region.
There is a looming threat of a rear base for international
terrorism and a lawless zone for women and girls. The
international community needs to join forces and step
up its engagement, while the Council must react and act
commensurately with the perils of the situation and the
responsibilities to be assumed.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks. I also thank Special
Representative Lyons for her briefing on the latest
developments in Afghanistan and Ms. Mahbouba
Seraj, Executive Director of the Afghan Women Skills
Centre, for her insights this morning. I would also
like to thank Ambassador Tirumurti, as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), for his briefing to the Council
and for his work.
12/32

26/01/2022

Over the past few months, we have witnessed a
consistent and disturbing trend of terrorist attacks
against civilians that continue to undermine peace
efforts in Afghanistan. Kenya condemns all of those
atrocious acts, including the recent terrorist attack
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province in Herat, which claimed several innocent lives
and left many people injured.
That trend requires that international community
demand, in a unified voice, that the Taliban commit to
fighting terrorism and ensure that Afghanistan is not a
haven from which terrorist groups, such as the Islamic
State and Al-Qaida, can perpetrate their heinous acts
of terror, not only in Afghanistan but also within the
region and beyond.
Kenya commends the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for its versatility and
ability to operate in an increasingly complex and
challenging environment.
The harsh winter conditions have exacerbated
the humanitarian crisis, with over 24 million people
in need of urgent assistance. We appeal to the
international community and donor agencies to provide
adequate funding for the Afghanistan humanitarian
response plan.
The deteriorating economy is pushing more
Afghans into situations of need. Local industrialists
warn that, if the economy is not turned around
urgently, about 1.5 million people — including 500,000
women — could lose their jobs. There is a need to
consider how Afghan frozen assets, within an agreed
framework, can be injected into the ailing economy as
part of efforts to revamp it.
We want to underscore the importance of investing
in the livelihoods of the poorest and most vulnerable, as
that would have a positive net effect on the humanitarian
situation. In that regard, we commend the United
Nations team in Afghanistan for its relentless efforts
over the past few months and welcome the launch of its
One-UN Transitional Engagement Framework to assist
Afghans in 2022.
The recent disappearance of two Afghan women
activists is a representation of the perilous conditions in
which Afghan women find themselves. We call on the
Taliban to take the necessary steps to not only investigate
and locate and return the two women to safety, but also
to guarantee the inalienable right of Afghan women to
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

positively contribute to the development of their country
without their voices being silenced or ignored. In that
regard, we underscore the imperative for their full and
meaningful participation in all aspects of Afghan life,
including at the grass-roots and leadership levels.
We also call on the authorities to prioritize the
elimination all forms of sexual and gender-based
violence and other gendered harm against Afghan
women, girls and children, as well as the reversal of
any actions intended to restrict women’s freedom of
movement. Kenya welcomes reports that higher schools
for girls and public universities for girls and boys will
be reopened in the next educational year, starting in
March. We hope that commitment will be fulfilled.
We wish to commend Norway for hosting the
recently concluded talks with the Taliban, and we hope
that the deliberations in Oslo will help to chart a new
path towards sustainable peace for Afghanistan.
Finally, Kenya reaffirms its unwavering solidarity
with the people of Afghanistan and stands ready to
support all endeavours aimed at securing their safety
and well-being.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank you,
Mr. President, and once again warmly welcome you
to the Chamber. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his presence today, which underlines the enormous
effort of the United Nations system to help the people
of Afghanistan. I want to renew my thanks, of course,
to Special Representative Lyons and her team for the
tireless work they are doing, particularly during the
past challenging months for the Afghan people.
My thanks also go to Ms. Seraj, to whom I am
deeply grateful for her presence, as well as the muchneeded clarity and uncompromising voice that she
brought to the Chamber today. She has brought the
rights of Afghan women and girls to the heart of our
discussion in the Security Council, which is where they
should be. I wish to reassure her that I take her very
seriously indeed.
I would also like to thank my colleague Ambassador
Tirumurti, as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), for
his briefing.
I will focus on three issues of deep concern.
First, I will address the colossal humanitarian
crisis facing Afghanistan during this harsh winter. We

S/PV. 8954

are horrified by the fact that over half of Afghanistan’s
population is now facing acute food insecurity in
what the Secretary-General described earlier as a
“frozen hell”.
We acknowledge and have strongly supported the
actions taken by the United Nations in response the
extraordinary need in Afghanistan. The exemption,
unanimously adopted here by the Council, to the
resolution 1988 (2011) sanctions regime provides
certainty to the humanitarian response. The United
Nations Development Programme Special Trust Fund
for Afghanistan has injected much-needed liquidity
into the economy, while the Afghanistan humanitarian
response plan — once sufficiently funded — will be
a lifeline for millions. But it is clear that a crisis of
this magnitude requires a sustained response from the
international community. We must continue to stand
with the Afghan people in what are clearly going to be
challenging months ahead.
Secondly, Ireland remains deeply concerned that
the Taliban is depriving Afghan secondary schoolage girls of their education. For 131 days, girls have
been stripped of their right to learn and, as of today,
those girls are without a guaranteed path back to the
classroom. That cruel prohibition on access to schooling
is not solely about education, it is also about silencing
an entire generation of young girls. A future without
education, without the means to economic and social
independence, will mean many more girls — these
are children — will face forced early marriage and
childbirth. That unnecessary, unacceptable deprivation
must be reversed, and the rights of Afghan young girls
must be fully respected. Their futures are at stake. A
generation is at stake.
My third point is the issue so viscerally outlined by
Ms. Seraj in her briefing today. The fact is that women
of Afghanistan continue to be targeted; Afghan women
continue to be cruelly erased from society by the
Taliban. As their fundamental human rights continue to
be systematically denied, women across the country are
standing up and speaking out in defiance of the Taliban.
The response has been chilling: women torn from
their families, deprived of liberty, women disappeared.
Is that what the Taliban mean when they say the
international community should not worry about
women’s rights in Afghanistan? Where are Tamana
Paryani and Parawana Ibrahimkhel? They were
abducted from their homes just last week. Where are

22-2399313/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

they? And former police officer Alia Azizi has been
missing since October. Where is she? And there are
countless more forcibly disappeared Afghan women.
Where are they?
We are deeply troubled by the reports from Mazar
airport, where women trying to leave Afghanistan have
been detained by the Taliban, who refuse to release
them until they are collected by male relatives — the
operative word being “collected”.
We call on the Taliban to release all those
unjustifiably detained. We also call on the Taliban to
recognize their human rights. Women’s rights, let us
remember, are human rights.
Finally, I thank you, Mr. President, for the update
on the dialogue that took place earlier this week,
convened by your own Government. The centrality
of Afghan women in the talks, advocating directly
for themselves, is welcome. Ireland has consistently
emphasized that inclusive dialogue, with the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women, is the
only mechanism by which Afghanistan can have the
truly representative and participative democracy and
Government demanded by its people. No path that
excludes Afghan women, can lead to the peaceful,
stable future that the Afghan people deserve and seek.
Any halfway house — any claims otherwise — will not
fool the international community.
We need to be clear-eyed that the worst fears
expressed by many — not least Afghan women — about
what would happen under the Taliban is happening.
We are judging the Taliban by their actions, not by
their words. The international community must stand
resolute. There can be no dialogue, no solution, no path
forward that does not include women and the realization
of their rights. To quote what Ms. Seraj said earlier, we
have a “tremendous responsibility”. It is clear that we
have an obligation not to look away.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Prime Minister Støre, and I
thank the Secretary-General for his sobering remarks
and assessment of the situation in Afghanistan. I thank
Special Representative Lyons. We appreciate her briefing
and her team’s unflagging commitment to its mission.
I thank Ambassador Tirumurti for his briefing in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
14/32

26/01/2022

We are so grateful to hear Ms. Seraj’s insights and
her voice concerning the challenges facing the people
of Afghanistan. I commend her courage. I know she
will not stop until Afghan women enjoy the universal
rights to which they are entitled. And I thank her so
much for her recommendations to us, and I hope we
heard her clearly that our delegations to meet with the
Taliban must include women, and we must insist on the
inclusion of Afghan women.
Today I would like to address three aspects of
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the situation in
Afghanistan: the humanitarian crisis, the economic
crisis and our expectations for the Taliban.
First, as Afghanistan’s humanitarian crisis
worsens, UNAMA’s work in support of the people
of Afghanistan could not be more important. In
coordination with UNAMA, we all have a role to play
in helping the people of Afghanistan in desperate need.
For our part, the United States remains committed to
providing life-saving support to the Afghan people.
On 11 January, the United States announced an initial
contribution for the year of more than $308 million in
humanitarian assistance for the people of Afghanistan.
That funding will support aid that provides food
and nutrition, assistance support for health care,
winterization programmes and logistical support to
ensure aid workers and critical relief supplies can make
it to the parts of Afghanistan that are hardest to reach.
It will save countless lives.
In tandem, the United States has moved rapidly to
ensure any sanctions imposed by it and the international
community to support security and stability in
Afghanistan do not impede humanitarian activity. In
December, our Treasury Department issued three new
general licenses that expand upon existing authorizations
to facilitate the continued flow of vital humanitarian
assistance and basic needs for the Afghan people. The
United States also introduced a draft resolution at the
Security Council last month to establish a humanitarian
exemption in the Taliban sanctions regime of resolution
1988 (2011). The Council’s unanimous adoption of
resolution 2615 (2021), which establishes the carveout,
sends a clear message of support to the Afghan people.
The United States remains the single-largest
provider of humanitarian assistance in Afghanistan
but, like all of the major challenges facing the
international community today, the scale of the crisis
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

demands a global response. Much more support from
the international community will be required to meet
the extraordinary level of need the Afghan people
are experiencing.
Secondly, the United States is particularly sensitive
to Afghanistan’s liquidity crisis and how it is worsening
the humanitarian emergency. To that end, we continue
to examine various options to ease the liquidity crunch.
Ultimately, a functioning Afghan economy will require
an independent and technically competent central bank
that meets international banking standards. While
Afghan central bank reserves held in the United States
are subject to ongoing litigation, we recognize calls to
examine making available reserves to help the people
of Afghanistan.
Thirdly, and finally, the international community’s
expectations for the Taliban have not wavered. We
continue to expect the Taliban to allow unhindered
humanitarian access to people in need and free
movement for aid workers of all genders; ensure
that humanitarian personnel can operate under safe
conditions; and permit assistance to be provided
independently to all vulnerable people, regardless of
their identity. Those are basic humanitarian principles,
and we — as I know Council members do too — expect
the Taliban to abide by them.
We also expect the Taliban to take concrete
steps to demonstrate fidelity to its counter-terrorism
commitments, allow for safe passage and show respect
for human rights and inclusivity. Let me be clear: We
are unequivocal that women and girls must be able to
fully participate in political, economic and social life in
Afghanistan. We could not agree more with SecretaryGeneral Guterres’s assertion that no country can thrive
while denying such rights to half of its population.
We welcome the announcement by the Taliban that
secondary schools throughout the country will be
opened to girls in March. We will monitor the roll-out
of that process, but we must continue to press for postsecondary schools and all sectors of employment to be
opened as well.
We are deeply concerned about the reported
abductions and detention of women protesters and other
civil society activists and reports of reprisals, including
harassment and intimidation, against former members
of the Afghan security forces and former Government
officials and their families. Freedom of expression is
a universal human right. If the Taliban wants support

S/PV. 8954

from Afghans and the international community, that
freedom needs to be respected.
We heartily welcome the work of Special
Representative Lyons and UNAMA to reinforce such
expectations in their engagements with the Taliban, as
well as to keep the international community apprised
of the Taliban’s progress, or lack thereof, against those
expectations. Together, let us support the Afghan people
in their time of need and carefully watch the Taliban to
ensure that its actions truly live up to its words.
Mr. De La Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Secretary-General António Guterres,
Special Representative Lyons and Ms. Seraj for their
insightful briefings, which not only informed us but in
particular warned us. We also thank the Ambassador
of India, in his capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), for
his briefing.
Some 24 million Afghans require humanitarian
assistance in a country that also faces enormous
economic, humanitarian and social challenges and is
at a complex international crossroads. We hope that
the humanitarian exemption agreed last December
will facilitate conditions for continuing to provide that
vital assistance to millions of Afghans. The exemption
resolution 2615 (2021) was adopted to prevent an even
greater crisis. That must be made very clear.
We acknowledge Norway’s valuable efforts to
facilitate a dialogue between the Taliban and some of
the main humanitarian aid providers, as well as to bring
about effective engagement with Afghan civil society.
It is clear that if we wish to prevent a humanitarian
tragedy, to which we would be jointly responsible
witnesses, we need a seat at the table with those in
power in Afghanistan. We will therefore closely follow
the outcome of the Oslo meetings, and we hope that
they will continue to make progress so that the aid
arrives and the commitments made are fulfilled.
In addition to the humanitarian issue, allow me to
briefly highlight three other matters.
First, respect for and the promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans, including women, young people
and minorities, must be a sine qua non. To date, as
Ms. Seraj said, no real commitment has been shown to
upholding and preserving basic rights, such as education
for girls and the right of women to return to work, or to
demands for the formation of an inclusive Government.

22-2399315/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

The international community must present a united
front if we want that message to get through and the
Taliban to implement policies that protect and benefit
the Afghan people, without predetermined exclusions.
Secondly, the threat posed by the resurgence
of terrorism, which is genuine, must be urgently
addressed in a comprehensive manner with full
respect for international law, particularly international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Afghanistan cannot again become a haven or platform
for terrorists. If that were to happen, we all would
have failed.
Thirdly, it is increasingly clear that the increase
in criminal activity is a reflection of the precarious
economic situation, a lack of opportunity and the
imminent collapse of public services. That phenomenon
must be urgently dealt with. That would also help to
prevent the radicalization of the most marginalized
groups, which would lead to further cycles of violence.
Finally, Mexico reiterates its appreciation to the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and all the agencies on the ground for their essential
work in support of a peaceful, prosperous and
inclusive Afghanistan.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): We
have heard from the various speakers, whom I thank
for their briefings, starting with the Secretary-General,
that the situation in Afghanistan continues to be
extremely worrisome. Since mid-August, there has
not been any respite for the Afghan people on either
the humanitarian or the security front. They also
have to fight for respect for their basic rights. As this
year marks the centenary of Franco-Afghan relations,
France, alongside the United Nations and its partners,
will continue to stand by the Afghan people amid the
challenges that they must overcome.
The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate.
Poverty is widespread. Malnutrition is increasing
exponentially, with more than half the population
facing a food crisis this winter. Epidemics, including
polio, measles and the coronavirus disease, continue
to spread. It is therefore crucial that humanitarian aid,
including vaccines, be urgently delivered.
The Security Council acted by adopting resolution
2615 (2021) to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
aid, in accordance with humanitarian principles and
without any kind of diversion by the Taliban. That aid
16/32

26/01/2022

aims to meet the basic needs of the most vulnerable.
France contributed €100 million to respond to the
Afghan humanitarian crisis. In a joint operation with
Qatar on 2 December, we also delivered nearly 40 tons
of medical equipment, food and winter supplies. The
European Union and its member States also raised
more than €1 billion to help the most vulnerable
Afghan populations. The humanitarian crisis across
Afghanistan requires that we all step up our efforts.
The Afghan population also faces a significant
security challenge. The risk of terrorism remains owing
to not only Da’esh but also Al-Qaida. As the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pointed out
in its most recent report (S/2021/486), the Taliban has
not broken its ties with terrorist groups, including
Al-Qaida, but, on the contrary, has integrated them
into its interim Government. Upon taking power, they
bolstered their allies and their affiliates.
Given the global reach of those terrorist
organizations, the terrorist threat emerging from
Afghanistan is of a transnational and cross-border
nature. France will continue to make the fight against
terrorism a priority. Here, too, the international
community must shoulder its responsibilities, namely,
by continuing to demand that the Taliban cut all ties,
direct or indirect, including financial ones, with
terrorist groups.
The third challenge facing the Afghan people, in
particular women and girls, is ensuring respect for
their fundamental rights. Women are under increasing
pressure; they are excluded from universities and girls
from secondary schools; and they are forced to wear
the hijab. They are forbidden from travelling more
than 72 kilometres from their homes if they are not
accompanied by a man. Afghan television channels
have been banned from broadcasting shows featuring
women; the protests that they organize are suppressed;
and human rights or media activists, particularly those
fighting for women’s rights, receive constant threats.
Some of them have been arrested and executed.
France, alongside its partners, once again calls upon
the Taliban to respect their commitments and to uphold
resolution 2593 (2021). Failure to meet those demands
will place the Taliban at risk of international isolation.
Finally, we continue to call for the formation of
an inclusive Government that is representative of all
Afghan society, including all its ethnic groups, religions
and genders.
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

By way of conclusion, I wish to recall France’s
determination to strive for Afghanistan’s stability
through an exacting dialogue with the various
stakeholders concerned. The challenges facing them are
massive, and France, as in the past, will stand shoulder
to shoulder with the Afghan people to meet them.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your personal participation in this
meeting, Mr. Prime Minister. I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for his assessment of the situation in
Afghanistan. We also thank the Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons, for
her comments and her vision of the situation on the
ground. We are grateful to the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), Ambassador Tirumurti, for his analysis
of the sanctions track. We also listened closely to the
representative of civil society, Ms. Mahbouba Seraj.
We are pleased that representatives of the countries
of the region are able to participate in the discussion
of issues that are so important to them. Today it has
been five months since the Taliban acceded to power in
Afghanistan. As rightly noted by the Secretary-General
and Ms. Lyons, the situation of the country is subject to
a constant dynamic.
We note that certain steps have been undertaken
by the new authorities to tackle social, economic,
humanitarian and human rights issues, and to mitigate
challenges related to terrorism and drugs. We proceed
from the understanding that those actions are only the
beginning. We continue to expect the Taliban to take
serious measures to ensure the real ethnic and political
inclusivity of the Government, eliminating terrorist
and drug threats and ensuring respect for basic human
rights.
Our common priority is maintaining stability
in Afghanistan, which we are convinced will benefit
everyone — the Afghan people, the region and the
world as a whole. It is clear, however, that in the absence
of the necessary potential and resources, including
financial resources, the new authorities will hardly be
able to independently, rapidly and effectively deal with
the accumulation of old problems and new challenges.
Success here will depend, inter alia, on comprehensive
international assistance to Afghanistan.
On 22 December 2021, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2615 (2021), aimed at providing

S/PV. 8954

humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan in the context
of the 1988 sanctions regime. We hope that this will
make it possible to step up humanitarian assistance
involving all interested parties, including the United
Nations, its humanitarian agencies and key donors.
At the same time, unfortunately, those efforts are
not sufficient. With imminent economic catastrophe
looming over Afghanistan, the current humanitarian
steps are just a drop in the ocean. The paralysis of the
banking system, the liquidity crisis and unemployment
reduce to naught prospects for post-conflict recovery, as
we have heard from representatives of the humanitarian
community.
The unfreezing of assets is a serious matter. Failing
that, Afghanistan simply will not be able to emerge
from the crisis in the long term. We call on the United
States and other Western donors to return funds to
the country. Those funds belong to the Afghan people
and cannot be used as a bargaining chip or to punish
Afghans for the new realities in the country.
At the end of the day, the consequences of a
collapse would be far graver and inevitably lead to an
increased number of refugees and more terrorism and
drug production, resulting in even greater instability,
including in the region and beyond. The threat of
the infiltration of militants and drug dealers into the
region, including under the guise of refugees, cannot
but concern our Central Asian partners.
We maintain regular contacts with all five countries
of Central Asia. It is vital to continue to cooperate
within the framework of regional organizations such
as the Collective Security Treaty Organization (SCTO)
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
including the SCTO working group on Afghanistan
and the renewed mechanism of the SCO-Afghanistan
Contact Group.
We would like to underscore that, in the current
conditions, attempts to pursue dialogue with the new
Afghan authorities in the language of ultimatums and
pressure rather than diplomacy while using assistance
in the recovery and socioeconomic development as
leverage would be counterproductive. We must draw
lessons from previous mistakes and miscalculations.
We have said on many occasions that maintaining a
political dialogue will provide effective answers to
current issues. To quote an example of such successful
cooperation, we refer to the extended “Troika” that
promotes a peaceful settlement in the country.

22-2399317/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

The situation in Afghanistan as it develops will
inevitably affect the future of UNAMA, whose
mandate expires on 17 March. We hope that in his
forthcoming report, the Secretary-General will provide
balanced assessments, recommendations and proposals
as to what to include in the mandate based on the new
circumstances.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome you, Sir, as you preside over today’s meeting.
This meeting is very timely and crucial. I also welcome
and thank Secretary-General Guterres, who made
time in his busy schedule to attend this meeting. I
endorse his assessment of the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan and support the United Nations in its focus
on saving Afghan lives, preventing economic collapse
and ensuring the establishment of trusted interactions.
I also thank Special Representative Deborah Lyons;
Ambassador Tirumurti, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011); and Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for their briefings.
I also welcome the presence of the representatives of
Uzbekistan, Pakistan and Iran.
This winter is the first war-free winter in
Afghanistan in 20 years. However, for the people of
Afghanistan this winter seems even colder and harder.
After the hasty withdrawal of foreign troops last
August, the Afghan economy has been in freefall, and
the Afghan population is experiencing a humanitarian
crisis of the worst kind.
We have seen that with the sudden withdrawal of
foreign troops, in the past five months, the Afghan
people have been experiencing an unfolding nightmare
in terms of humanitarian aid, on which many people
rely for their survival, simply disappearing overnight
forever. Some 95 per cent of Afghan families are
without food and clothing. More than a million children
are suffering from malnutrition, and 23 million people
are suffering from severe famine.
At this rate, by the middle of the year, 97 per cent
of the Afghan population will be impoverished and
will not be able to afford to live on two dollars a day.
Rahmati, a mother in the Harathi refugee camp, sold
her right kidney and two daughters to get her family
through the winter. This is a human tragedy that is
happening right now.
Secretary-General Guterres has made repeated and
urgent appeals about the situation in Afghanistan and
said that it is a race against time to help the country’s
18/32

26/01/2022

people. Unfortunately, without massive emergency
action, it looks like we will lose this race.
The Council adopted resolution 2615 (2021) last
month affirming that humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan does not violate the Council’s sanctions
measures, clearing any legal obstacles that may exist.
Unfortunately, there has been no fundamental change
in the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan.
Clearly, the key issue is not a legal obstacle but a
political one — the politicization of the humanitarian
issue. Humanitarian aid is being used as a bargaining
chip, a political tool that is being leveraged, and that
tool is playing games with the lives and well-being
of 38 million Afghans in dire need of relief. This is
morally unacceptable and strategically short-sighted
and dangerous.
The more fundamental challenge facing the Afghan
population and international humanitarian agencies
is that the Afghan economy has not yet returned to
normal functioning. Unilateral coercive measures have
not only frozen more than $9 billion in Afghan assets
abroad, but also severely hindered Afghanistan access
to international financing, leading to an economic
liquidity crunch and stifling Afghanistan’s potential to
resume economic development on its own.
China welcomes the efforts of the World Bank
and other international institutions aimed at exploring
financing support for Afghanistan, but without a full
injection of liquidity or the restoration and development
of the domestic market and foreign trade, the efforts
of international institutions will only be a drop in the
bucket. In the current situation, unilateral sanctions
have the effect of freezing, not only Afghanistan’s
financial assets, but also the hopes of the Afghan
people to survive. The unilateral sanctions are no less
lethal than military intervention. They are starving
and killing the Afghan people. We once again urge the
immediate lifting of the assets freeze and unilateral
sanctions against Afghanistan.
The international community is generally united in
its expectations for the future of Afghanistan. We hope
that the country will adhere to a broad and inclusive
political orientation, implement moderate and prudent
internal and external policies, effectively protect the
rights and interests of ethnic minorities, women and
children, resolutely combat terrorism and develop
good-neighbourly cooperation. China’s position in
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

this regard is clear, and we have always been working
actively to this end.
We need to increase engagement with the interim
Afghan Government in a rational and pragmatic manner,
enhance mutual trust and exert positive influence. The
Norwegian Government invited an interim Afghan
Government delegation to Oslo for talks. We believe
that such engagement and dialogue are useful.
At present, the international community should
make it its most important and urgent priority to help
Afghanistan alleviate the humanitarian crisis and
stabilize its economy. Adhering to the principle of
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned solutions certainly
means respecting Afghan ownership and leadership of
economic resources.
It is essential to safeguard the rights of Afghan
women and children, which also means providing them
with much-needed humanitarian help. If they cannot
even have food or survive, then talk of education,
employment and political participation will become
empty words.
The international community shares the goal of
preventing Afghanistan from once again becoming
a hub for terrorism. But if the humanitarian and
economic situation in Afghanistan is allowed to
continue to deteriorate, the only ones that will benefit
from it are such terrorists as the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida and the Eastern Turkistan
Islamic Movement.
China calls for a stronger sense of urgency from
the international community and more humanitarian
and economic assistance for Afghanistan so as to bring
warmth and hope to the Afghan people. Countries that
have caused the current predicament in Afghanistan
should more than others abandon their politicized
approach and take urgent action to shoulder their
primary responsibility.
As a neighbour and partner of Afghanistan,
China has always made positive contributions to the
peaceful development of Afghanistan. At the moment,
China is stepping up efforts to deliver ¥200 million
in humanitarian aid for the country. Supplies of all
kinds are arriving in Afghanistan, in particular, the
local provinces and cities of the country. Meanwhile,
we have already opened the air corridor and resumed
exporting Afghan pine nuts to China so as to alleviate
the livelihood difficulties of the Afghan people.

S/PV. 8954

China supports the active work done by UNAMA.
At the moment, the most important task is to follow
the advice of Secretary-General Guterres and
encourage the international community to provide
urgent humanitarian assistance and help the Afghan
people overcome their current difficulties. We support
a continued important role for the United Nations in
the peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan and looks
forward to the reports and the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.
We are ready to stay in close touch with members
of the Security Council and countries of the region so
as to make viable and appropriate arrangements for
UNAMA’s mandate that will meet the current actual
needs and respect the will of the Afghan people.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
commending you for Norway’s very able leadership
of the Security Council this month. We also warmly
welcome the remarks by the Secretary-General and
the briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), Ambassador Tirumurti.
We also welcome the briefing by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), Ms. Deborah Lyons, and pay tribute to
the entire UNAMA team for the incredible work they
are doing under difficult circumstances and in a very
challenging environment. We also thank Ms. Mahbouba
Seraj, Executive Director of the Afghan Women Skills
Development Centre, for her valuable perspectives.
I also acknowledge the participation in this meeting
of the representatives of Afghanistan, Uzbekistan,
Pakistan and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ghana remains committed to a stable, secure and
peaceful Afghanistan. We are convinced that a resurgent
Afghanistan is in the best interests of the international
community. We believe that, if it is actively and
constructively engaged, Afghanistan can return to the
international stage as a bona fide member of the comity
of nations, but only if it fully and effectively utilizes
the resourcefulness and ingenuity of all of its citizens
to spur national development.
In that regard, I would like to highlight the need for
the international community to remain steadfast in the
provision of all the support required to eliminate the
needless suffering of the Afghan people. The Security
Council and, indeed, all regional and international

22-2399319/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

actors, including Afghanistan’s partners and neighbours,
can contribute positively to help Afghanistan overcome
its multilayered political, humanitarian, economic and
security difficulties.
Last month, the Council unanimously adopted two
important resolutions on the Afghanistan situation. It
is worth noting that the adoption of resolution 2615
(2021) determined, in paragraph 1, that “humanitarian
assistance and other activities that support basic
human needs in Afghanistan” will not constitute
a violation of sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 1 of
resolution 2255 (2015), of 22 December 2015, which
prohibits the provision of funds, financial assets or
economic resources to individuals listed under the 1988
Afghanistan sanctions regime.
While we acknowledge that resolution 2615
(2021) is a commendable step in tackling the tragic
humanitarian catastrophe engulfing the country, we
are clear in our minds that, given the sheer size and
scale of the humanitarian needs, it is not enough to
get Afghanistan out of the woods. The fact that more
than 20 million Afghans, according to reports by the
United Nations, remain food insecure and a staggering
8.7 million of the Afghan population are on the brink
of starvation, should be disconcerting for the Council.
The plain truth is that time is running out for
the international community to avoid an already dire
humanitarian situation from spiralling out of control.
The risk of a catastrophic outcome is real because, as
we speak, millions of Afghans are being threatened by
hunger and destitution.
In the face of this unfolding monumental
humanitarian catastrophe, the Council has a
responsibility to be united on what must be done in
order to comprehensively address the challenges. It
is imperative now, more than ever, to adopt swift and
consequential decisions that will resonate positively on
the lives of the Afghan people.
Ghana would like to make several recommendations
in that regard.
First, Ghana firmly supports and echoes the
Secretary-General’s call for Afghanistan’s assets to
be unfrozen and immediately channelled into funding
emergency social and health services for the Afghan
people. It is quite paradoxical for a country with
enormous financial resources locked up in foreign
banks, including $9.6 billion in international financial
20/32

26/01/2022

assets belonging to the central bank of Afghanistan, to
be on the brink of starvation and economic collapse.
Secondly, we urge the de facto authorities to open
up the country to humanitarian agencies by removing
all restrictions placed on humanitarian operations,
including the acceptance of women humanitarian
workers. The Taliban should choose the path to be a
force for good by cooperating unconditionally and
facilitating the unfettered delivery of humanitarian
assistance to every Afghan, without discrimination, in
line with international humanitarian law.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned about the
alleged and reported cases of violations of the human
rights of vulnerable persons within Afghan society,
in particular the suppression and erosion of the rights
of women, girls and children and their access to
education. Ghana believes that Afghan women and
minorities are legitimate stakeholders of Afghanistan
and must be given every opportunity and support to
protect and enhance their effective participation in
the country’s reconstruction and future growth and
development. Precluding any group from the political
process is counterproductive and denies the country the
contributions of all its citizens.
Fourthly, the Taliban authorities have a
responsibility to ensure that reports of extrajudicial
killings, particularly against former members of the
Afghan security forces, are swiftly investigated and
that the perpetrators are held to account. That duty
extends to guaranteeing the safety of all civilians and
humanitarian workers within Afghan territory.
Lastly, we note that the events of August 2021
created a new situation in Afghanistan. We therefore
keenly look forward to the Secretary-General’s report
at the end of this month on the strategic and operational
recommendations for the UNAMA mandate, which is
due for renewal in March 2022. We believe UNAMA
should be vested with the necessary capacity to enable
it respond effectively to the profound changes that have
taken place in Afghanistan.
Let me conclude by saying that, now more than
ever, we must collectively and constructively work to
keep the focus on a coordinated, comprehensive and
balanced approach in resolving the complex issues of
Afghanistan, devoid of geopolitical considerations and
interests. It should be clear to everyone that there is
no alternative to Council unity on the vexing matter
of Afghanistan. The Afghan people have demonstrated
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

resilience and fortitude and will require the full support
of the international community in order to pull out of
the cycle of war and internal conflicts as they forge a
common vision of an Afghanistan that accommodates
the various perspectives of their rich society and
unique past.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I also thank the
Secretary-General, Special Representative Lyons and
Ms. Seraj for their sobering briefings today, and I am
grateful to Ambassador Tirumurti for his update on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
The situation in Afghanistan remains of deep
concern. More than 20 million people — half the
population — are in need of urgent assistance. The
risks of a humanitarian catastrophe are real, and urgent
action is needed to avert economic collapse.
The work of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and United Nations leadership remains
crucial. The United Kingdom welcomes the launch today
of the One-UN Transitional Engagement Framework,
a whole-of-United-Nations system approach to the
provision of life-saving assistance and support for
basic human needs. Saving lives requires an adequately
resourced, prioritized and coordinated United Nationsled international response. We pledge our support.
It also requires constructive engagement by the
Taliban on delivery under humanitarian principles.
We welcome a positive trajectory in the ability of
female humanitarians to deliver assistance to the
most vulnerable.
The United Kingdom has shown our commitment to
the Afghan people by doubling our aid for Afghanistan
this financial year to £286 million. Importantly, we have
disbursed £163 million of that money. We encourage
others to support the Organization’s appeal to release
their generous commitments without delay.
We recognize that humanitarian assistance can go
only so far, as we must also address the liquidity crisis.
We strongly support the efforts of the United Nations
and the World Bank to find creative solutions.
We also welcome ongoing discussions between the
World Bank and donors on repurposing a portion of
the remaining $1.2 billion Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund, in addition to the $280 million already
released, in order to support essential health services
and food security and nutrition.

S/PV. 8954

This week’s conference in Oslo has been an
important opportunity for the United Kingdom, other
donors and civil society to communicate expectations
directly to the Taliban — expectations set by the
Council in resolution 2593 (2021).
We are deeply concerned in particular by reports
of an increase in reprisals against former security
forces and Government officials, as well as attacks
against minority groups and detentions of civil society
members, particularly female activists. We call on the
Taliban to respect the amnesty they issued in August for
all Afghans and to carry out transparent investigations
into all allegations of human rights abuses.
As we heard clearly from Ms. Seraj and others
today, women’s rights have also been sharply restricted,
with many women unable to work and girls kept away
from school. The Taliban’s assurances that girls will
be able to return to school on 21 March is welcome.
The international community will be watching closely.
Schools were already segregated under the previous
Government and many parents want to see their
daughters educated. Sustainable peace and stability
in Afghanistan will rely on politics that reflect
Afghanistan’s rich diversity and we continue to call for
inclusive governance.
With regard to terrorism, we welcome the Taliban’s
commitments to tackle terrorist groups and urge its
members to ensure that Al-Qaida, Islamic State and
other terrorist groups can never again organize, raise
funds or plan attacks from Afghan territory. We took
careful note of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Lyons’ remarks in that regard and we will
continue to calibrate our approach towards the Taliban
according to its actions — not just its words — against
those core priorities.
It is vital that we in the Council continue to speak
with one voice in support of the United Nations work in
the months ahead.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): We thank
Secretary-General António Guterres, Ms. Deborah
Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Ambassador Tirumurti,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), for their thorough
briefings. We also welcome the civil society briefer,
Ms. Mahbouba Seraj, and thank her for her very
valuable insights today.

22-2399321/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

Since August 2021, the United Arab Emirates has
followed developments on the situation in Afghanistan
with great concern, particularly the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
conditions on the ground. Our meeting today offers
an important opportunity to consider the best way to
achieve stability and security in Afghanistan, as well
as how to fulfil the aspirations of the Afghan people.
It is important for tangible and measurable
progress to be made with respect to the challenges
facing Afghanistan, specifically with regard to forming
an inclusive Government, protecting women’s rights,
combating terrorism and supporting humanitarian
and development needs. Security and stability in
Afghanistan cannot be achieved without addressing
those issues.
I will start with our key priorities.
First, ensuring and protecting the rights of women
and girls in all aspects of society must remain a priority,
including their right to equal access to education. We
also affirm the need for Afghan women and girls to
have full, equal and meaningful participation in all
fields, as that is an essential element of development,
peace and security on the ground in Afghanistan. In that
context, we must reject the exploitation and distortion
of religion or culture as an excuse to deprive women
and girls in Afghanistan of their basic rights. There is
no religious basis for that in Afghanistan or indeed in
Islam. In fact, the opposite is true.
The international community must show its
solidarity with the Afghan people by providing them
with the necessary life-saving humanitarian aid as
they face one of the fastest-growing humanitarian
and economic crises in the world. We reiterate the
importance of contributing to the United Nations
humanitarian response plan, which seeks to provide
relief to the 22 million people in need in Afghanistan
today. We also call on the Taliban to continue to
facilitate and allow United Nations organizations and
humanitarian actors to enjoy safe and unhindered
humanitarian aid access to the areas and groups most
in need.
We welcome the consensus adoption of resolution
2615 (2021), which decided that humanitarian assistance
and other activities that are in support of basic human
needs in Afghanistan are not in violation of the assets
freeze imposed by the 1988 sanctions regime.
22/32

26/01/2022

The United Arab Emirates continues its support
for international efforts to build a more resilient
and sustainable future for the Afghan people. In
August 2021, we launched an air bridge, which to
date has carried more than 485 tons of humanitarian
aid, including medical and food supplies. We have
also assisted in the evacuation of more than 40,000
individuals from Afghanistan who requested that
support or whose Governments requested it. That is of
course not sustainable and we must work collectively to
stabilize the situation on the ground and the liquidity
crisis as well, in a robust and accountable way.
The United Arab Emirates will continue to provide
assistance through its humanitarian institutions,
while at the same time coordinating its approach to
Afghanistan as a proactive member of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). We welcome Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons’
update that she is closely cooperating with the OIC
Special Envoy for Afghanistan as an important step in
that direction.
The United Arab Emirates also joins the
international community in expressing its deep concern
about the threat posed by terrorism to the security of
Afghanistan and neighbouring and regional countries.
Over the course of the recent period, we have witnessed
violent terrorist attacks in Afghanistan that have
claimed the lives of hundreds of innocent civilians.
We condemn those attacks in the strongest terms
and call on the Taliban to take the necessary measures
to combat terrorism in Afghanistan, sever ties with
all terrorist groups worldwide and prevent such
groups from using Afghanistan to threaten or attack
other countries.
We stress here that terrorism in Afghanistan is an
international threat, the fight against which requires
regional and international support and cooperation.
Supporting the social and economic development
of Afghanistan will also significantly contribute to
preventing the spread of extremism, as others have
said earlier today. We also affirm the need to promote
peaceful coexistence in Afghanistan and protect the full
fabric of Afghan society, including religious minorities,
who have been targeted in recent attacks.
We look forward to reviewing the SecretaryGeneral’s strategic and operational recommendations
for UNAMA’s mandate that will be issued at the end
of this month. With regard to the developments that
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Ms. Lyons mentioned on the positive engagement of the
Taliban with UNAMA, we hope they will contribute to
ensuring the success of the Mission in implementing
its mandate.
We take this opportunity to stress the vital role
that UNAMA and all United Nations personnel play
in promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan. We
thank them for their work. The United Arab Emirates
believes that, going forward, the situation will require
a robust UNAMA mandate so that it is best able to
contribute to maintaining international peace and
security in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates looks
forward to supporting international efforts to achieve
security and stability in Afghanistan and we hope to
see positive developments in that direction so that the
aspirations of the Afghan people for a dignified life and
stable prosperous future can be met.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me also thank the
Secretary-General for his evaluation of the situation
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lyons and Ms. Seraj for the information they provided.
I also thank our colleague from India, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011), for his update on the work of the
Sanctions Committee.
Six months after the Taliban takeover, Afghanistan
continues to be at a crossroads. Every indicator is in the
red and the world remains rightfully concerned about a
wide range of key issues linked to the dire humanitarian
situation, bleak economic prospects, poor governance,
weak institutions, serious threats to the rights of
women and girls, fear of terrorism, increasing internal
instability and the mass exodus of refugees. With such
prospects, it is not easy to find a glimmer of hope.
Let me make five key points.
First, calls for an all-inclusive Government in
Afghanistan have so far not been answered. We
support the people of Afghanistan in their hopes and
expectations of peace, justice and development. The
country needs to engage in an Afghan-led and Afghanowned process of national reconciliation. Only an
inclusive and negotiated political settlement offers
a sustainable future for all the Afghan people. We
welcome the ongoing talks in Oslo.

S/PV. 8954

The important gains achieved in the past 20 years
are not only under serious and continuous threat but
as we heard are being systematically dismantled. The
Taliban must be clearly and firmly told that is the
wrong course. It must understand that a responsible
Government needs the full strength, talent and diversity
of the Afghan people. We have seen it elsewhere and
we also know from our own experience that the full,
equal and meaningful participation of women is a
prerequisite for social cohesion, political stability and
meaningful progress.
Albania urges the Security Council to place a clear
priority on women’s involvement in the processes that
shape their future. We owe that to the Afghan women,
many of whom have given everything and risk their
lives for peace and dignity, including those today who
are unaccounted for and for whom the Taliban must
answer. Ms. Seraj is just one among those courageous
women who have not given up and are not afraid of men
with weapons.
Secondly, it is impossible not to be alarmed by
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, especially
during the winter. We applaud the tremendous efforts
that the United Nations is making on the ground,
despite various challenges, to alleviate the suffering of
those in absolute need as much as possible. We urge
the Taliban to facilitate full, safe and unimpeded access
to humanitarian organizations and their personnel,
regardless of gender.
Thirdly, respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms, including freedom of the press, in Afghanistan
should remain an important objective. Living in safety,
security and dignity for all, including women and girls,
young people, children and minorities, should not be a
dream but a reality.
The Council needs to stand firmly in favour of the
rights of women and girls to full and equal access to
education, to health care, to freedom of movement in
their own country and to participate fully in public life.
Those are not gifts — they are universal rights. Women
and girls in Afghanistan must be treated as equal
citizens. Gender-based discrimination and violence
against women and girls have no place in Afghanistan,
or anywhere else in the world.
Fourthly, there is no doubt that terrorism remains
a danger in Afghanistan. The country must never again
become a haven for international terrorism, and its
authorities must stand by the standards and norms of

22-2399323/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

international law. Afghan territory must not be used to
threaten or attack any other country, to shelter or train
terrorists or to plan or finance terrorist acts. The Taliban
must unambiguously break ties with all international
terrorist organizations.
Fifthly, Albania supports the vital role and
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan in the country. We commend the work
of the Mission on the ground despite the financial
shortfalls, the logistical challenges and the increasingly
complex geopolitical situation. We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s report and its recommendations
and advocate for a stronger role and a strengthened
mandate of the United Nations in Afghanistan.
(spoke in French)
The Council can and must do more to help the
Afghan people. If we are to keep our promises, it is
essential that we act with clarity, with determination
and, most important, with unity. Albania will remain
engaged in efforts aimed at helping the Afghan people
to build their future. More than 2,000 Afghan refugees
who have found shelter in Albania have seen their
lives transformed. We would soon like to see similar
prospects realized for all Afghans, including children,
girls and women, in their own country. We must judge
the authorities, as Special Representative Lyons rightly
pointed out, not by their words but by their actions.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
Secretary-General for his intervention and Ms. Lyons
for her valuable information on the situation on the
ground. I also thank Ambassador Tirumurti for his
assessment as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and
Ms. Seraj for her presentation. I also welcome the
delegations of Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Pakistan and
the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The international community cannot turn a blind
eye to the Afghan people in their time of need. The fate
of millions of families facing hardships depends on a
quick response to the worsening humanitarian crisis.
I wish to express Brazil’s support for the Afghanistan
humanitarian response plan and the Afghanistan
situation regional refugee preparedness and response
plan. The United Nations must act urgently and with
one voice to ensure that the Afghan people will not
be abandoned.
24/32

26/01/2022

In an effort commensurate with Brazil’s
humanitarian commitments and responsibilities, we
have established a humanitarian visa policy to help
those affected by the situation in Afghanistan, with a
particular focus on women and girls. We have already
authorized more than 600 such visas for persons in
need, helping them to find refuge and dignity in our
country with the support and solidarity of Brazilian
civil society and host communities.
However, emergency humanitarian assistance will
not be enough to stabilize the country. Brazil considers
it essential to take measures that favour long-term
development so that the scenes we witness today are
not repeated in the future.
In December, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2615 (2021), which determined that the
provision of humanitarian assistance does not constitute
a violation of the sanctions regime. We must go beyond
that important step and address Afghanistan’s urgent
liquidity crisis. If Afghanistan is to have a chance at
preventing a severe economic downturn and a dreadful
rise in poverty and hunger, Afghan financial institutions
must have access to its assets, which are currently
subject to unilateral sanctions. We therefore appeal
to the countries concerned to consider the issue in the
light of Afghanistan’s critical humanitarian situation.
Nevertheless, we must continue to demand that
de facto authorities adhere to the provisions of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. For Brazil,
that includes four main issues: first, the formation of
an inclusive Government, with the participation of
women and ethnic and religious minorities; secondly,
respect for women’s right to work and girls’ free access
to education at all levels; thirdly, adherence to the
principles of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
and its Optional Protocol II, on the involvement of
children in armed conflict, the Paris Principles and the
Safe Schools Declaration, as well as the 2014 road map
to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
by the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces;
and fourthly, credible and decisive action against the
use of Afghan territory by terrorist organizations.
The Afghan crisis poses a threat to the lives
of millions of families in Afghan territory and
neighbouring countries. Moreover, its continuation
seriously jeopardizes regional peace and stability.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his insights and the Special Representative,
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her briefing. I would like to
express my delegation’s appreciation for the work
done by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in these challenging times. I
also thank Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for sharing her insights
with us.
As an immediate neighbour and long-standing
partner of Afghanistan, the recent developments
in Afghanistan — particularly the deteriorating
humanitarian situation — continue to be of concern.
India also shares the concern of the international
community on issues related to providing immediate
humanitarian assistance, ensuring the formation of
a truly inclusive and representative Government,
combating terrorism and drug trafficking and preserving
the rights of women, children and minorities.
India’s approach to Afghanistan has always been
guided by its historical friendship with its people. Our
special relationship with the Afghan people and the
guidance spelled out in resolution 2593 (2021) will
continue to guide India’s approach to Afghanistan.
We remain steadfast in our commitment to providing
humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan.
In that endeavour, India has committed to provide
the Afghan people with 50,000 metric tons of wheat,
as well as life-saving medicines and 1 million doses
of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines. We have
already dispatched three shipments of humanitarian
assistance materials consisting of medicines, including
COVID-19 medicines, which were handed over to the
World Health Organization and the Indira Gandhi
Children’s Hospital in Kabul.
Last month, we joined other Council members in
supporting the adoption of resolution 2615 (2021) in
order to provide humanitarian assistance for the people
of Afghanistan, while ensuring that the Security Council
exercises its oversight to guard against any possible
diversion of funds and misuse of exemptions from
sanctions. We also supported the call of the international
community for access to humanitarian assistance for
Afghanistan to be direct and without any hindrance.
We reiterate that humanitarian assistance should be
based on the principles of neutrality, impartiality
and independence and that the disbursement of aid
should be non-discriminatory and accessible to all,
irrespective of ethnicity, religion or political belief. In
particular, assistance should reach the most vulnerable
first — including women, children and minorities. As

S/PV. 8954

Afghanistan’s largest regional development partner,
India is willing to coordinate with other stakeholders
to work towards enabling the expeditious provision of
much-needed humanitarian assistance to the people
of Afghanistan.
Terrorism continues to pose a serious threat to
Afghanistan and the region. Resolution 2593 (2021)
clearly outlines the international community’s
expectations on a range of critical and immediate
issues. It lays down the requirements in terms of the
fight against terrorism, while noting the commitment
of the Taliban not to allow the use of Afghan soil for
terrorism, including for terrorists and terrorist groups
designated under resolution 1267 (1999). However,
we need to see concrete progress in ensuring that
such proscribed terrorist entities do not get any
support — tacit or direct — either from Afghanistan or
the terrorist sanctuaries based in the region.
Resolution 2593 (2021) also lays out the
expectations of the international community in terms
of the need for an inclusive and representative political
settlement, with meaningful participation by women
and minorities and diverse political-ethnic groups in
the country; the importance of upholding human rights,
including those of women, children and minorities; and
the requirement to provide humanitarian assistance to
the people of Afghanistan.
Peace and security in Afghanistan is a critical
imperative that all of us need to collectively strive for.
The recent developments in Afghanistan will have a
significant impact on neighbouring countries and the
wider region, with global implications. India calls for
an inclusive dispensation in Afghanistan that represents
all sections of Afghan society. A broad-based, inclusive
and representative formation is necessary for legitimacy.
Today it is more necessary than ever that the
international community speak with one voice on
Afghanistan. Resolution 2596 (2021) requires the
Secretary-General to report to the Security Council
on strategic and operational recommendations for the
mandate of UNAMA, in the light of recent political,
security and social developments. We look forward to
receiving the report and believe that it should contain
holistic recommendations from a strategic perspective.
When the Council decides on the future of the UNAMA
mandate in March this year, its focus needs to be
centred on the welfare, well-being and expectations of
the Afghan people.

22-2399325/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

The President: I wish to again remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order for the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
thanking Norway, as President of the Security Council,
for organizing this high-level briefing on the situation
in Afghanistan and for its continued peace mediation
efforts while upholding and protecting human
rights principles, including the rights of women and
girls, promoting the women and peace and security
agenda and advocating for the protection of civilians
in Afghanistan.
I would also like to thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Lyons for their powerful
and candid remarks about the ongoing situation in
Afghanistan and the crucial role of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) at this
critical juncture.
I further wish to thank His Excellency Ambassador
Tirumurti, Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), for his
assessment, as well as Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for her
insightful statement and presentation.
I speak on behalf of the people of Afghanistan, who
have endured four unbearable decades of conflict, and
on behalf of 28 million Afghans, including women and
girls, who are suffering from hunger, poverty and the
deprivation of their fundamental human and Islamic
rights and who must not be abandoned.
I speak on behalf of Afghanistan’s civil servants
in different Afghan institutions, including career
diplomats, who for the past two decades have worked
with integrity for a common vision in implementing
a republican system that would serve the national
interests of Afghanistan and its people, in partnership
with the international community.
I speak to legitimately represent the shared values
and achievements made in Afghanistan and the
blood and treasure sacrificed by our people and the
international community since 2001 in order to voice
before the Security Council the rightful demands
and concerns of the people of Afghanistan over the
uncertain the future and the fate of our country.
26/32

26/01/2022

I would like to underline that I do not represent
the former Government of Afghanistan, led by Ashraf
Ghani, which has lost its national and international
legitimacy, and neither do I represent the interests of
any political group.
For more than 40 years, my country’s men
and women have suffered from relentless wars and
violence — and there is no end in sight to their pain,
suffering and misery. I am almost the same age as the
war going on in my country. As an Afghan who was
born and raised in Afghanistan, I have experienced the
adverse impacts of war at first hand.
The brutal conflict has caused bloodshed, poverty
and the destruction of infrastructure in the country. I
have seen how millions of Afghans, including women
and children, have lost their lives, become disabled or
been forced to leave their homes, their families and
the country they love. Unfortunately, our aspiration to
achieve peace remains no more than a dream.
The past five months have seen an intensification
in the dire humanitarian, political, economic and social
crisis in Afghanistan. That is happening in the aftermath
of shared failure and inaction by all sides, but is largely
due to the continuous disruption of intra-Afghan
peace talks by former President Ashraf Ghani and his
Government and, finally, their irresponsible and sudden
flight from the country, which led to the collapse of
the republic.
That event sealed the definitive failure of the
peace talks, which could have achieved a negotiated
political settlement supported by national, regional
and international partners. That failure also enabled
the takeover of Afghanistan by the Taliban and the
disastrous consequences of destroying the common
achievements of the past 20 years and the immediate
hopes for a better future in Afghanistan.
As a result, more than half of the Afghan
population, including men, women and children, are
in desperate need of humanitarian assistance today
and are faced with a lack of food, shelter and essential
health services in the harsh winter. Politically, the
Taliban de facto authorities have not been recognized
by the international community, as they have failed to
fulfil their commitments, including the formation of
an inclusive and accountable Government to provide
essential services to the Afghan people while ensuring
respect for human rights principles, including the rights
of women and girls and other minorities.
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Against that backdrop, I would like to share
the following points for consideration by the
Security Council to save the Afghan people from the
current situation.
First, I would like to underline the urgency of
addressing the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan
as a top priority. I would like to support and echo the
call by the Secretary-General to find practical ways to
rapidly inject cash into the Afghan economy to pay the
salaries of public sector officials, teachers and healthcare workers and to prevent the banking sector from
collapsing. The delivery of humanitarian aid is crucial
to saving the lives of Afghan people. It should be
channelled and delivered to vulnerable Afghans based
on transparent mechanisms.
Let me express our deep appreciation to the United
Nations, regional and international donors for the great
steps taken so far, including the generous humanitarian
support provided and the hosting of Afghan refugees,
evacuations and all other measures, such as the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2615 (2021), which
provides a humanitarian exemption, and the launch
of the 2022 Afghanistan humanitarian response plan.
I urge Council members to support the funding of
the humanitarian response plan and to continue their
humanitarian support for the sake of the Afghan people.
Secondly, while humanitarian aid delivery is
key as a stop-gap solution, I would like to highlight
the importance of channelling development aid to
Afghanistan to avoid the regression of progress
made so far and to resume economic development
projects in order to create job opportunities and help
further sustainable development. That will require
the establishment of a legitimate State through the
formation of an inclusive and accountable Government,
based on integrity, competence and merit, with
professionals, including women, who are committed to
the national interests of Afghanistan. The international
community’s support for the formation of an inclusive
and accountable Government in its engagements with
the Taliban is imperative.
Third, the fundamental human rights and freedom
of expression of all Afghan citizens, including women,
girls and minorities, must not be compromised or
negotiated. Unfortunately, there are concerns over
reports from United Nations entities, Human Rights
Watch and Amnesty International that indicate
serious violations of human rights by the Taliban in

S/PV. 8954

Afghanistan, including gender-based discrimination
against women and girls, the detaining of journalists,
human rights activists and peaceful protesters and
the torture and summary executions and forced
disappearance of former Government officials and
members of the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces across Afghanistan.
I call on the Taliban to put an end to such human
rights violations, honour its general amnesty, allow
women to work and open the doors of schools and
universities to girls. I would also like to express my
concern about the disappearance of two activists,
Tamana Zaryabi Paryani and Parawana Ibrahimkhel, as
well as Alia Azizi, a senior female prison official, who
have been missing. I would like to call on the Taliban
to provide information regarding their whereabouts and
immediately release them.
Fourth, we must sustain the achievements of the
past 20 years and not let the international investment
go to waste. If the international community does not
act to address the current crisis, Afghanistan will
lose all those gains, especially its human capital
through a brain drain and migration. Moreover, more
than 70 per cent of the Afghan population is young,
and there are no job opportunities. If there are no
job opportunities and legitimate sources of income,
there is a high risk of terrorist groups recruiting and
misusing that young generation, which will promote
extremism and fundamentalism and once again turn
Afghanistan into a terrorist hub, posing a potential
threat to the country itself, the region and the world. In
addition, the influx of Afghan migrants and refugees
into neighbouring countries will further overwhelm
regional humanitarian capabilities.
Fifth, while we appreciate all the efforts of regional
and international partners to convene conferences
and address the situation in Afghanistan by hosting
and facilitating dialogues between Afghans and the
Taliban, we would like to request that the Council
convene an international conference, led by the United
Nations, for the holding of intra-Afghan talks to start
negotiations among key Afghan stakeholders, including
persons not involved in corruption and criminal cases,
public figures with a good reputation and background,
civil servants, career diplomats, civil society and
human rights activists, to work on a political road map
towards the formation of an inclusive and accountable
Government, paving the way for the amendment of the

22-2399327/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

26/01/2022

Constitution and enabling the Afghan people to elect
their leaders and representatives through elections.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.

Sixth, I would like to request the freezing and
confiscation of all Afghan assets illegally transferred
to the accounts of former Government officials who
were involved in corruption and the embezzlement of
international aid for the Afghan people. They must be
held accountable and tried. It is unfair that 28 million
people starve and mothers sell their children to survive,
while those corrupt former Government officials live
in luxurious houses and villas in various countries
around the globe. We also call on Member States and
all international partners not to provide them with
asylum and platforms to engage politically or speak
about Afghanistan, as that will further hurt the feelings
of Afghan people, harm countries’ international
interests and, ultimately, undermine the efforts of the
international community and partners to achieve any
future political settlement in Afghanistan.

Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, let me
commend Norway for convening this meeting on the
situation in Afghanistan. Taking this opportunity,
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Deborah Lyons, Ambassador
Tirumurti, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), and civil society representative
Ms. Mahbouba Seraj for their informative briefings.

Seventh, I would like to stress that the role of the
United Nations in addressing the current situation in
Afghanistan through the coordination and delivery of
humanitarian aid in a political settlement is now more
crucial than ever. We particularly applaud and support
the important role being played by UNAMA, and look
forward to a greater and more robust role for UNAMA
in its mandate renewal in March.

In Tashkent, we believe that today it is important for
the international community to maintain a constructive
dialogue with the new authorities in Kabul in order to
engage and encourage them to honour their promises
and international obligations, such as the formation of an
inclusive Government based on a broad representation,
ensuring the fundamental rights and freedoms of their
people, including women and national minorities.

Lastly. I call on the Taliban to comply with its
national and international commitments and seek its
national legitimacy from the Afghan people by ensuring
safety, security and a dignified life for all Afghan
citizens, without discrimination, where their social,
economic and political rights are fully respected and
protected. This is a time that demands that the Taliban
act responsibly for the sake of the interests, well-being
and rights of every single Afghan, including women
and girls. To save Afghanistan from the ongoing crisis,
the Taliban must prove its intentions and commitment
through tangible actions to benefit the people of
Afghanistan, leaving no one behind, regardless of
gender or ethnicity. Otherwise, its inaction will
exacerbate the current crisis and lead to a humanitarian
catastrophe in Afghanistan.

The Afghan nation is currently in a very difficult
situation. The country is almost on the verge of a
humanitarian crisis. Therefore, we believe that the
international community should make the necessary
efforts to prevent its further deterioration. For its
part, last September and December Uzbekistan sent
necessary humanitarian aid consisting of foodstuffs,
daily necessities, clothes and coal to the Afghan people.

I thank everyone for their statements and
expressions of support to the Afghan people at today’s
meeting. The Security Council has at its disposal all the
relevant tools to save Afghanistan.
28/32

For centuries, the Uzbek and Afghan peoples have
lived side by side in a single cultural and civilizational
space. Both countries are linked with each other through
centuries-old bonds of friendship, a shared history,
religion, customs and traditions. Therefore, Uzbekistan
has always pursued a friendly policy towards that
fraternal neighbouring nation based on the principles
of mutual respect, equality, non-interference in internal
affairs and consideration of mutual interests.

Currently, humanitarian aid not only from
Uzbekistan but also from other regional countries
and international organizations, including the United
Nations, is being transported to Afghanistan through
the Uzbek border city of Termez. In order to efficiently
and effectively utilize the resources allocated by the
international community and ensure the timely and
targeted delivery of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan
on a systematic basis, the Uzbek side recently proposed
establishing a multifunctional hub in Termez city
under United Nations auspices. One should note that
Termez city has all the necessary infrastructure for
such purposes — an airport, a railway and highways
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

connected with Afghanistan, as well as a large logistics
terminal, the Termez Cargo Centre, located in close
proximity to the border with Afghanistan, which has
modern equipment and sufficient storage facilities. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the World Food Programme have already
used the terminal for delivering humanitarian aid
to Afghanistan.
In Uzbekistan, we believe that, in order to pull
Afghanistan out of the current deep socioeconomic
crisis, it is important to unfreeze the country’s
foreign financial assets, lift unilateral sanctions and
encourage the more active participation of international
institutions in financing various infrastructure projects
in the country.
Uzbekistan supports the continued implementation
of socioeconomic projects, including in the areas of
energy and transportation. In particular, Uzbekistan
is ready, jointly with the Afghan side, to implement
two major projects — the construction of the SurkhanPul-e-Khumri power transmission line and the TermezMazar-e-Sharif-Kabul-Peshawar railroad. In addition,
Uzbek specialists have recently completed work on
resuming operations at the international airport in
Mazar-e-Sharif.
At the same time, Uzbekistan remains convinced
that the territory of Afghanistan should never again be
used as a safe haven for various international terrorist
groups. During our regular contacts with the new
authorities in Kabul, the latter have given us assurances
that the territory of Afghanistan will never again pose
a threat to its immediate neighbours or to any other
third countries.
In conclusion, I would like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s statement earlier today that at this difficult
time we should not abandon the Afghan people, who are
facing their most challenging problems. We believe that
the United Nations should continue to play a leading
role in mobilizing and coordinating international
efforts in rendering assistance to Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Afghanistan is facing an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. Since the most recent meeting of the Security
Council on this issue, in November 2021 (see

S/PV. 8954

S/PV.8908), the situation has been deteriorating, with
no sign of progress in sight.
According to United Nations reports, more than
24 million people need humanitarian aid, and half of
the population faces acute hunger. Furthermore, more
than 9 million people are displaced. If left unchecked,
the situation could lead to the socioeconomic collapse
of the country and to tragic impoverishment for the
entire nation.
The Islamic Republic of Iran expresses its serious
concern over the possible devastating consequences of
that situation on the security and stability of the region,
including neighbouring countries. During the last 40
years, Iran has done everything in its power to support
the Afghan people. That has been the official policy of
our Government, endorsed by our Supreme Leader. We
have dispatched humanitarian convoys, including food,
medicine and medical supplies, to Afghanistan.
After the Taliban’s takeover last summer, we did
not close our border with Afghanistan, and currently
normal trade between the two sides is ongoing. During
this winter season, it is crucial to continue the provision
of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. Since last
August, thousands of Afghans have been entering Iran
on a daily basis. The overall situation inside Afghanistan
has a direct effect on the decision of the population to
stay or to leave the country for neighbouring countries
and beyond.
While the United States’ inhumane sanctions have
created tremendous difficulties for our Government and
our people, various services, including education, health
care and medical treatment, are being provided to the
Afghan people living in Iran, with minimal assistance
from the international community. Furthermore,
concurrently with the vaccination programme of our
population, we have also been vaccinating Afghan
refugees against the coronavirus disease.
However, owing to the imposition of United States
sanctions, our financial resources are restrained.
Obviously, if the international community fails to
provide sufficient assistance to the Afghan people
living in Iran in a timely manner, we will be unable, on
our own, to continue our support for Afghan refugees,
a huge number of whom are seeking to go to Europe
through Iran.
We once again call on the international community
and in particular donor countries to live up to their

22-2399329/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

responsibilities and extend new and additional
financial resources to Afghanistan’s neighbours to help
refugees and displaced persons. Moreover, the release
of Afghanistan’s frozen assets, which is essential to
reviving Afghanistan’s economy and saving people’s
lives, should in no way be politicized or conditional.
We support the commendable efforts made thus
far by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and other United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan and welcome in that respect the launch
of the recent mechanism, namely, the One-UN
Transitional Engagement Framework, as well as the
virtual joint launch by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees of the
humanitarian and regional refugee response plan.
Those initiatives are important steps that need to
be strengthened along with other efforts to address
and meet the needs of the Afghan people and
refugee-hosting countries.
We take note of the unanimously adopted resolution
2615 (2021), on the exemption of humanitarian assistance
and other activities from the sanctions regime. We hope
that the resolution can facilitate the timely provision of
humanitarian aid to the people in need.
Along with humanitarian issues, other legitimate
concerns such as the need for the establishment
of an inclusive and representative Government in
Afghanistan, should continue to be emphasized by the
international community. Furthermore, efforts should
be made to combat terrorism and organized crime in
Afghanistan, and, equally important, the promotion and
protection of the human rights of all Afghans, including
women and girls, should be ensured.
To that end, Iran will continue its engagement
with all parties in Afghanistan, including the Taliban.
Recently we hosted a high-level delegation from the
Taliban and exchanged views with them along the
lines I have elaborated on, particularly on the need
for the establishment of an inclusive Government in
Afghanistan that truly represents the multi-ethnic
Afghan society. We will also continue our consultations
with Afghanistan’s neighbours as well as regional and
international partners, including the United Nations,
to help bring durable peace, security and stability
to Afghanistan.
The President: I now ive the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
30/32

26/01/2022

Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to express my
gratitude to you, Madam President, for having convened
this debate on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and to the Prime Minister of
Norway for his participation. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ms. Deborah Lyons, for their important briefings. I
also welcome the powerful message that Ms. Mahbouba
Seraj has conveyed, as well as the interesting statement
by my dear brother from Afghanistan, Mr. Faiq.
We have listened to two citizens of Afghanistan.
I believe that our debate would have been more
interactive and more productive if we had also been able
to listen to a representative of the interim Government
of Afghanistan so that we could achieve some progress
through these discussions.
Owing to the cumulative impact of conflict,
drought, external dependency and sequestered assets,
millions of Afghan men, women and children are, as
the Secretary-General has described, in a race against
time to avoid deaths from hunger amid a brutal winter.
As the Secretary-General has himself put it, freezing
temperatures and frozen assets are a lethal combination.
Without humanitarian assistance, chaos and
renewed conflict could return to Afghanistan, with an
exodus of refugees and an escalation of the terrorist
threat. We commend the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral in mobilizing international support for the
Afghan people and the critical help being provided by
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the World Food Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF,
the World Health Organization and other United
Nations bodies and non-governmental international
organizations, including the International Committee
of the Red Cross, to the Afghan people.
We hope and trust that the international community
will respond positively and generously to the United
Nations humanitarian and refugee response appeals
first launched by the Secretary-General on 11 January
and today in the context of the One-UN Transitional
Engagement Framework, which he has announced.
While there was never any doubt that the targeted
sanctions against certain individuals and entities
in Afghanistan should not prevent the provision of
humanitarian, economic or development assistance to
Afghanistan, the adoption of resolution 2615 (2021) has
reaffirmed and clarified that understanding. Pakistan
22-23993

26/01/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

believes that all actors can now undertake their actions
in Afghanistan without fear of arbitrary censure or
restraints. We welcome the release of some funds by
the World Bank and urge that the rest of the allocations
for Afghanistan be released forthwith. Above all, it is
vital to unfreeze Afghanistan’s reserves. There is no
legal justification for depriving the Afghan people of
their national assets. That money is critically needed
to sustain, stabilize and revive the Afghan economy
and to save the lives of millions of poor and hungry
Afghan children, women and men. That would be the
most effective and generous display of solidarity with
the people of Afghanistan.
Pakistan is doing all it can to help our Afghan
brothers and sisters. We have provided $30 million
in food and other assistance. We have established a
land and air bridge for Afghanistan. We are helping to
restore hospitals and other facilities. We have opened
our borders for Afghans in need of medical support.
And, of course, we will continue to care for the nearly
4 million Afghan refugees until they are able to return
to their homes.
On 18 and 19 December 2021, together with Saudi
Arabia, Pakistan hosted an extraordinary session of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) to
mobilize support for Afghanistan. It has set up an OIC
humanitarian trust fund and will help to revive the
Afghan banking system. The OIC will work closely
with the United Nations in that endeavour.
Pakistan supports the objective of an inclusive
Government and respect for the human rights of all
Afghans, especially those of women and girls. We are
aware of the discussions that are taking place in various
locations to promote such inclusivity. We hope that they
will be a success.
We also know of the acting Government’s
assurances with regard to the provision of education for
girls. We look forward to the reopening of girls’ schools
next month.
We are also aware of the assurances that have been
provided that the instances of arbitrary arrests and
violations of human rights will be investigated. We
hope that they will implement those assurances.
Pakistan reaffirms the importance of combating
terrorism in Afghanistan and ensuring that the territory
of Afghanistan is not used as a platform or safe haven
by any terrorist group or organization. We are glad that

S/PV. 8954

the sponsors of terrorism against Pakistan have been
obliged to exit from Afghanistan. It is important that
the international community engage with the Taliban in
order to develop appropriate modalities for cooperative
action against terrorism from Afghanistan. That is a
principal priority for Pakistan.
Pakistan believes that the international community
should continue and enhance its engagement with the
new Government in Afghanistan, utilizing all available
formats — the extended troika, the six-neighbours
platform, the OIC and other multilateral and bilateral
consultations, such as those convened by Norway
earlier this week in Oslo. It is only through dialogue
and consultations and mutual persuasion that we will
be able to achieve agreed outcomes. Coercion is not the
road to peace in Afghanistan. It has not been for the
past 20 years, and it will not be in the future.
We support the proposal of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to develop
a pathway — I call it a road map — to stabilize
Afghanistan. That should incorporate the expectations
of the international community for inclusivity, human
and women’s rights and counter-terrorism, as well as
the expectations that have been voiced by the interim
Afghan Government for economic and financial
support, an end to sanctions and eventual recognition.
UNAMA is playing an important role at this
critical moment of transition. We welcome the close
cooperation established between UNAMA and the
new authorities. UNAMA will continue to have an
important role in the future in coordinating and
ensuring timely and expedited delivery of humanitarian
and emergency assistance, supporting the revival of
the Afghan economy and financial system, building
the capacity of Afghan institutions and facilitating
the revival and implementation of reconstruction
and connectivity projects. We look forward to the
report of the Secretary-General on the new UNAMA
mandate, which should enjoy the endorsement and full
support of the interim Afghan Government and respect
Afghanistan’s sovereignty.
As we meet today, there are reasons for concern,
and we have heard them. But there are also reasons for
optimism. We are encouraged that, after 40 years, there
is no internal conflict in Afghanistan. There are no
foreign forces in Afghanistan. There is one Government,
which controls the entire country. Internal security has
improved. And corruption has been curtailed. There

22-2399331/32

S/PV.8954

The situation in Afghanistan

is an opportunity for sustained peace in Afghanistan,
which can end the suffering of the Afghan people
and enhance peace and stability in the entire region.
Pakistan has a vital stake in realizing such a vision of
peace and stability.

32/32

26/01/2022

The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I shall now adjourn the meeting so that the Council
can continue its discussion in closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

22-23993
