A/RES/73/198

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
11 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 80

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 December 2018
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/496)]

73/198.

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law wi th a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of internati onal
trade,
Recalling also its resolution 57/18 of 19 November 2002, in which it noted the
adoption by the Commission of the Model Law on International Commercial
Conciliation 1 and expressed the conviction that the Model Law, together with the
Conciliation Rules of the Commission 2 recommended in its resolution 35/52 of
4 December 1980, contributes significantly to the establishment of a harmonized legal
framework for the fair and efficient settlement of disputes arising in international
commercial relations,
Recognizing the value of mediation as a method of amicably settling dis putes
arising in the context of international commercial relations,
Convinced that the adoption of a convention on international settlement
agreements resulting from mediation that is acceptable to States with different legal,
social and economic systems would complement the existing legal framework on
international mediation and contribute to the development of harmonious
international economic relations,

__________________
1
2

18-22460 (E)

Resolution 57/18, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/35/17),
para. 106; see also Yearbook of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law ,
vol. XI: 1980, part three, annex II.

150119

*1822460*

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

Noting that the decision of the Commission to concurrently prepare a convention
on international settlement agreements resulting from mediation and an amendment
to the Model Law on International Commercial Conciliation was intended to
accommodate the different levels of experience with mediation in different
jurisdictions and to provide States with consistent standards on the cross-border
enforcement of international settlement agreements resulting from mediation, without
creating any expectation that interested States may adopt either instrument, 3
Noting with satisfaction that the preparation of the draft convention was the
subject of due deliberation and that the draft convention benefited from consultations
with Governments as well as intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
Taking note of the decision of the Commission at its fifty-first session to submit
the draft convention to the General Assembly for its consideration, 4
Taking note with satisfaction of the draft convention approved by the
Commission, 5
Expressing its appreciation to the Government of Singapore for its offer to host
a signing ceremony for the Convention in Singapore,
1.
Commends the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
for preparing the draft convention on international settlement agreements resulting
from mediation;
2.
Adopts the United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation, contained in the annex to the present resolution;
3.
Authorizes a ceremony for the opening for signature of the Convention to
be held in Singapore on 7 August 2019, and recommends that the Convention be
known as the “Singapore Convention on Mediation”;
4.
Calls upon those Governments and regional economic integration
organizations that wish to strengthen the legal framework on international dispute
settlement to consider becoming a party to the Convention.
62nd plenary meeting
20 December 2018

Annex
United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation
Preamble
The Parties to this Convention,
Recognizing the value for international trade of mediation as a method for
settling commercial disputes in which the parties in dispute request a third person or
persons to assist them in their attempt to settle the dispute amicably,
Noting that mediation is increasingly used in international and domestic
commercial practice as an alternative to litigation,
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/72/17),
paras. 238–239; see also A/CN.9/901, para. 52.
4
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-third Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/73/17),
para. 49.
5
Ibid., annex I.
3

2/9

18-22460

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

Considering that the use of mediation results in significant benefits, such as
reducing the instances where a dispute leads to the termination of a commercial
relationship, facilitating the administration of international transactions by
commercial parties and producing savings in the administration of justice by States,
Convinced that the establishment of a framework for international settlement
agreements resulting from mediation that is acceptable to States with different legal,
social and economic systems would contribute to the development of harmonious
international economic relations,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Scope of application
1.
This Convention applies to an agreement resulting from mediation and
concluded in writing by parties to resolve a commercial dispute (“settlement
agreement”) which, at the time of its conclusion, is international in that:
(a) At least two parties to the settlement agreement have their places of
business in different States; or
(b) The State in which the parties to the settlement agreement have their places
of business is different from either:
(i) The State in which a substantial part of the obligations under the settlement
agreement is performed; or
(ii) The State with which the subject matter of the settlement agreement is
most closely connected.
2.

This Convention does not apply to settlement agreements:

(a) Concluded to resolve a dispute arising from transactions engaged in by
one of the parties (a consumer) for personal, family or household purposes;
(b)
3.

Relating to family, inheritance or employment law.

This Convention does not apply to:
(a)

Settlement agreements:

(i) That have been approved by a court or concluded in the course of
proceedings before a court; and
(ii)

That are enforceable as a judgment in the State of that court;

(b) Settlement agreements that have been recorded and are enforceable as an
arbitral award.
Article 2
Definitions
1.

For the purposes of article 1, paragraph 1:

(a) If a party has more than one place of business, the relevant place of
business is that which has the closest relationship to the dispute resolved by the
settlement agreement, having regard to the circumstances known to, or contemplated
by, the parties at the time of the conclusion of the settlement agreement;
(b) If a party does not have a place of business, reference is to be made to the
party’s habitual residence.
2.
A settlement agreement is “in writing” if its content is recorded in any form.
The requirement that a settlement agreement be in writing is met by an electronic
18-22460

3/9

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

communication if the information contained therein is accessible so as to be us eable
for subsequent reference.
3.
“Mediation” means a process, irrespective of the expression used or the basis
upon which the process is carried out, whereby parties attempt to reach an amicable
settlement of their dispute with the assistance of a third person or persons (“the
mediator”) lacking the authority to impose a solution upon the parties to the dispute.
Article 3
General principles
1.
Each Party to the Convention shall enforce a settlement agreement in
accordance with its rules of procedure and under the conditions laid down in this
Convention.
2.
If a dispute arises concerning a matter that a party claims was already resolved
by a settlement agreement, a Party to the Convention shall allow the party to invoke
the settlement agreement in accordance with its rules of procedure and under the
conditions laid down in this Convention, in order to prove that the matter has already
been resolved.
Article 4
Requirements for reliance on settlement agreements
1.
A party relying on a settlement agreement under this Convention shall supply to
the competent authority of the Party to the Convention where relief is sought:
(a)

The settlement agreement signed by the parties;

(b)

Evidence that the settlement agreement resulted from mediation, such as:

(i)

The mediator’s signature on the settlement agreement;

(ii) A document signed by the mediator indicating that the mediation was
carried out;
(iii) An attestation by the institution that administered the mediation; or
(iv) In the absence of (i), (ii) or (iii), any other evidence acceptable to the
competent authority.
2.
The requirement that a settlement agreement shall be signed by the parties or,
where applicable, the mediator is met in relation to an electronic communication if:
(a) A method is used to identify the parties or the mediator and to indicate the
parties’ or mediator’s intention in respect of the information contained in the
electronic communication; and
(b)

The method used is either:

(i) As reliable as appropriate for the purpose for which the electronic
communication was generated or communicated, in the light of all the
circumstances, including any relevant agreement; or
(ii) Proven in fact to have fulfilled the functions described in subparagraph (a)
above, by itself or together with further evidence.
3.
If the settlement agreement is not in an official language of the Party to the
Convention where relief is sought, the competent authority may request a translation
thereof into such language.

4/9

18-22460

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

4.
The competent authority may require any necessary document in order to verify
that the requirements of the Convention have been complied with.
5.
When considering the request for relief, the competent authority shall act
expeditiously.
Article 5
Grounds for refusing to grant relief
1.
The competent authority of the Party to the Convention where relief is sought
under article 4 may refuse to grant relief at the request of the party against whom the
relief is sought only if that party furnishes to the competent authority proof that:
(a)

A party to the settlement agreement was under some incapacity;

(b)

The settlement agreement sought to be relied upon:

(i) Is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being performed under the
law to which the parties have validly subjected it or, failing any indication
thereon, under the law deemed applicable by the competent authority of the
Party to the Convention where relief is sought under article 4;
(ii)

Is not binding, or is not final, according to its terms; or

(iii) Has been subsequently modified;
(c)

The obligations in the settlement agreement:

(i)

Have been performed; or

(ii)

Are not clear or comprehensible;

(d)

Granting relief would be contrary to the terms of the settlement agreement;

(e) There was a serious breach by the mediator of standards applicable to the
mediator or the mediation without which breach that party would not have entered
into the settlement agreement; or
(f) There was a failure by the mediator to disclose to the parties circumstances
that raise justifiable doubts as to the mediator’s impartiality or independence and such
failure to disclose had a material impact or undue influence on a party without which
failure that party would not have entered into the settlement agreement.
2.
The competent authority of the Party to the Convention where relief is sought
under article 4 may also refuse to grant relief if it finds that:
(a)

Granting relief would be contrary to the public policy of that Party; or

(b) The subject matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by mediation
under the law of that Party.
Article 6
Parallel applications or claims
If an application or a claim relating to a settlement agreement has been made to
a court, an arbitral tribunal or any other competent authority which may affect the
relief being sought under article 4, the competent authority of the Party to the
Convention where such relief is sought may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the
decision and may also, on the request of a party, order the other party to give suitable
security.

18-22460

5/9

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

Article 7
Other laws or treaties
This Convention shall not deprive any interested party of any right it may have
to avail itself of a settlement agreement in the manner and to the extent allowed by
the law or the treaties of the Party to the Convention where such settlement agreement
is sought to be relied upon.
Article 8
Reservations
1.

A Party to the Convention may declare that:

(a) It shall not apply this Convention to settlement agreements to which it is
a party, or to which any governmental agencies or any person acting on behalf of a
governmental agency is a party, to the extent specified in the declaration;
(b) It shall apply this Convention only to the extent that the parties to the
settlement agreement have agreed to the applicatio n of the Convention.
2.

No reservations are permitted except those expressly authorized in this article.

3.
Reservations may be made by a Party to the Convention at any time.
Reservations made at the time of signature shall be subject to confirmation upon
ratification, acceptance or approval. Such reservations shall take effect
simultaneously with the entry into force of this Convention in respect of the Party to
the Convention concerned. Reservations made at the time of ratification, acceptance
or approval of this Convention or accession thereto, or at the time of making a
declaration under article 13 shall take effect simultaneously with the entry into force
of this Convention in respect of the Party to the Convention concerned. Reservations
deposited after the entry into force of the Convention for that Party to the Convention
shall take effect six months after the date of the deposit.
4.

Reservations and their confirmations shall be deposited with the depositary.

5.
Any Party to the Convention that makes a reservation under this Convention
may withdraw it at any time. Such withdrawals are to be deposited with the
depositary, and shall take effect six months after deposit.
Article 9
Effect on settlement agreements
The Convention and any reservation or withdrawal thereof shall apply only to
settlement agreements concluded after the date when the Convention, reservation or
withdrawal thereof enters into force for the Party to the Convention concerned.
Article 10
Depositary
The Secretary-General of the United Nations is hereby designated as the
depositary of this Convention.
Article 11
Signature, ratification, acceptance, approval, accession
1.
This Convention is open for signature by all States in Singapore, on 7 August
2019, and thereafter at United Nations Headquarters in New York.
2.
This Convention is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval by the
signatories.
6/9

18-22460

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

3.
This Convention is open for accession by all States that are not signatories as
from the date it is open for signature.
4.
Instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession are to be
deposited with the depositary.
Article 12
Participation by regional economic integration organizations
1.
A regional economic integration organization that is constituted by sovereign
States and has competence over certain matters governed by this Convention may
similarly sign, ratify, accept, approve or accede to this Convention. The regional
economic integration organization shall in that case have the rig hts and obligations of
a Party to the Convention, to the extent that that organization has competence over
matters governed by this Convention. Where the number of Parties to the Convention
is relevant in this Convention, the regional economic integration organization shall
not count as a Party to the Convention in addition to its member States that are Parties
to the Convention.
2.
The regional economic integration organization shall, at the time of signature,
ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, make a declaration to the depositary
specifying the matters governed by this Convention in respect of which competence
has been transferred to that organization by its member States. The regional economic
integration organization shall promptly notify the depositary of any changes to the
distribution of competence, including new transfers of competence, specified in the
declaration under this paragraph.
3.
Any reference to a “Party to the Convention”, “Parties to the Convention”, a
“State” or “States” in this Convention applies equally to a regional economic
integration organization where the context so requires.
4.
This Convention shall not prevail over conflicting rules of a regional economic
integration organization, whether such rules were adopted or entered into force before
or after this Convention: (a) if, under article 4, relief is sought in a State that is
member of such an organization and all the States relevant under article 1,
paragraph 1, are members of such an organization; or (b) as concer ns the recognition
or enforcement of judgments between member States of such an organization.
Article 13
Non-unified legal systems
1.
If a Party to the Convention has two or more territorial units in which different
systems of law are applicable in relation to the matters dealt with in this Convention,
it may, at the time of signature, ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, declare
that this Convention is to extend to all its territorial units or only to one or more of
them, and may amend its declaration by submitting another declaration at any time.
2.
These declarations are to be notified to the depositary and are to state expressly
the territorial units to which the Convention extends.
3.
If a Party to the Convention has two or more territoria l units in which different
systems of law are applicable in relation to the matters dealt with in this Convention:
(a) Any reference to the law or rule of procedure of a State shall be construed
as referring, where appropriate, to the law or rule of procedure in force in the relevant
territorial unit;
(b) Any reference to the place of business in a State shall be construed as
referring, where appropriate, to the place of business in the relevant territorial unit;

18-22460

7/9

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

(c) Any reference to the competent authority of the State shall be construed as
referring, where appropriate, to the competent authority in the relevant territorial unit.
4.
If a Party to the Convention makes no declaration under paragraph 1 of this
article, the Convention is to extend to all territorial units of that State.
Article 14
Entry into force
1.
This Convention shall enter into force six months after deposit of the third
instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession.
2.
When a State ratifies, accepts, approves or accedes to this Convention after the
deposit of the third instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, this
Convention shall enter into force in respect of that State six months after the date o f
the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession. The
Convention shall enter into force for a territorial unit to which this Convention has
been extended in accordance with article 13 six months after the notification of the
declaration referred to in that article.
Article 15
Amendment
1.
Any Party to the Convention may propose an amendment to the present
Convention by submitting it to the Secretary-General of the United Nations. The
Secretary-General shall thereupon communicate the proposed amendment to the
Parties to the Convention with a request that they indicate whether they favour a
conference of Parties to the Convention for the purpose of considering and voting
upon the proposal. In the event that within four months from the date of such
communication at least one third of the Parties to the Convention favour such a
conference, the Secretary-General shall convene the conference under the auspices of
the United Nations.
2.
The conference of Parties to the Convention shall make every effort to achieve
consensus on each amendment. If all efforts at consensus are exhausted and no
consensus is reached, the amendment shall, as a last resort, require for its adoption a
two-thirds majority vote of the Parties to the Convention present and voting at the
conference.
3.
An adopted amendment shall be submitted by the depositary to all the Parties to
the Convention for ratification, acceptance or approval.
4.
An adopted amendment shall enter into force six months after the date of deposit
of the third instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval. When an amendment
enters into force, it shall be binding on those Parties to the Convention that have
expressed consent to be bound by it.
5.
When a Party to the Convention ratifies, accepts or approves an amendment
following the deposit of the third instrument of ratification, acceptance or approval,
the amendment shall enter into force in respect of that Party to the Convention six
months after the date of the deposit of its instrument of ratification, acceptance or
approval.
Article 16
Denunciations
1.
A Party to the Convention may denounce this Convention by a formal
notification in writing addressed to the depositary. The denunciation may be limited

8/9

18-22460

United Nations Convention on International Settlement
Agreements Resulting from Mediation

A/RES/73/198

to certain territorial units of a non-unified legal system to which this Convention
applies.
2.
The denunciation shall take effect 12 months after the notification is received
by the depositary. Where a longer period for the denunciation to take effect is
specified in the notification, the denunciation shall take effect upon the expiration of
such longer period after the notification is received by the depositary. The Convention
shall continue to apply to settlement agreements concluded before the denunciation
takes effect.
DONE in a single original, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian
and Spanish texts are equally authentic.

18-22460

9/9
