V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of the whole to draw up a constitution for the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Bearing in mind the urgent need to complete the work
required for the conversion of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization into a specialized
agency,
Taking note of the report of the Committee to Draw
Up a Constitution for the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization as a Specialized Agency, 72
Noting with concern that it has not been possible
to convene the conference of plenipotentiaries, originally scheduled to take place in the last quarter of 1976,
because the Committee has not been able to complete
its work,
I. Decides to extend the mandate of the Committee to Draw Up a Constitution for the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization as a Specialized
Agency;
2. Calls upon the Committee to accelerate its work
so as to enable the conference of plenipotentiaries on
the constitution of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization to convene during the second
half of 1977;
3. Emphasizes the need for all Governments to
participate fully in the elaboration of the draft constitution, bearing in mind the need for continuity of representation, since such participation would contribute
positively towards facilitating agreement and adoption
of such a constitution at the conference of plenipotentiaries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make the
arrangements necessary for convening the conference of
plenipotentiaries during the second half of 1977 at
United Nations Headquarters.
l 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/162.

Strengthening of operational activities
in the field of industrial development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, in particular the purpose of
the organization as defined by that resolution,
Recalling the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order contained in its resolution 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974,
Recalling the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action
on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 73 adopted
by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization at its Second General Conference,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975, in which it, inter alia, endorsed the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action and requested all
Governments to take individually and/or collectively
the necessary measures and decisions required to implement effectively their undertakings in terms of the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action,
Bearing in mind the programme of studies and research envisaged in the revised programme budget
72 See A/31/405, annex.
73 See A/10112, chap. IV.

71

proposals of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for the biennium 1976-1977,74
Considering that the resources available to the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
should, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 215 2 ( XXI), be devoted to assisting the developing countries in meeting their requirements in the field
of industrial development,
Considering further that these resources should be
deployed by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization in accordance with the needs of developing countries as identified by the Governments
of these countries themselves,
Bearing in mind the spirit of its resolutions 2688
(XXV) of 11 December 1970 and 31/171 of 21
December 1976,
1. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization to
strengthen the operational activities of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, in particular at the national and subregional levels, with a
view to enabling it, through an enhanced knowledge
of the actual problems in the field of industrialization
faced by the developing countries, to provide the Governments of those countries with the types of assistance
they most urgently need and thereby to help focus its
programmes more effectively on the specific requirements of the developing countries;
2. Also requests the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
in developing the programme of studies and research,
to take into account the results of research and other
studies carried out by government agencies, universities and other institutions in the developing countries,
thereby permitting the allocation of a larger proportion of resources to strengthening units within the
secretariat concerned with the delivery of assistance
to the developing countries, according to their requirements, and with operational field work;
3. Further requests the Executive Director of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
to submit an interim report to the Industrial Development Board and an up-dated report through the Economic and Social Council to the General Assembly at
its thirty-second session on the measures taken in accordance with the provisions of the present resolution.
I 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/163.

Industrial redeployment in favour of
developing- countries

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the objectives set forth in section IV of
its resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Reaffirming the target contained in the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development
and Co-operation,7~ adopted at the Second General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, namely, that the share of developing countries in total world industrial production should
be increased to the maximum possible extent and, as
far as possible, to at least 25 per cent by the year 2000,
H See A/C.5/31 / 1! and Corr. I.
"'See A/10112, chap. IV.
