A/62/PV.87

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-second session

87

th plenary meeting
Monday, 31 March 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kerim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/62/657/Add.5 and 6)
The Acting President: Before turning to the item
on our agenda, I would like to invite the attention of
the General Assembly to documents A/62/657/Add.5
and 6, in which the Secretary-General informs the
President of the General Assembly that, since the
issuance of his communications contained in
documents A/62/657 and Add.1 to 4, Dominica and
Paraguay have made the necessary payments to reduce
their arrears below the amount specified in Article 19
of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly
takes note of the information contained in these
documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 46
Global road safety crisis
Note by the Secretary-General (A/62/257)
Draft resolution (A/62/L.43)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to the representative of Oman to introduce
draft resolution A/62/L.43.

Mr. Al-Hinai (Oman): Five years ago, during the
fifty-seventh session of the General Assembly, I stood
before this Assembly to introduce resolution 57/309 on
the global road safety crisis. It was a very modest
resolution; all it asked was a report on the global road
safety crisis from the Secretary-General for
consideration by the Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session. We have come a long way since then. The
Assembly had its first-ever debate on road safety at its
fifty-eighth session, and Members were unanimous in
emphasizing that road traffic injuries posed a global
public health crisis that required urgent action at the
national and international levels.
A major development, which took place in April
2004, was the launching of the “World report on road
traffic injury prevention” by the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the World Bank. The report
served as both an advocacy tool and a technical
document, containing six major recommendations on
what countries can do to address the problem of road
traffic injuries. Also at the fifty-eighth session, the
Assembly recognized the need for the United Nations
system to support efforts to address the global road
safety crisis, and it invited WHO, working in close
cooperation with the United Nations regional
commissions, to act as coordinator on road safety
issues within the United Nations system.
I thank the Secretary-General for transmitting to
us the report contained in document A/62/257 on
improving global road safety, prepared by WHO and
the regional commissions and other partners of the
United Nations Road Safety Collaboration. I would

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-28848 (E)

*0828848*

A/62/PV.87

like to thank members of the Collaboration, under the
able guidance of WHO, who have contributed so much
to the contents of the report.
The report provides an update on the status of the
implementation of the recommendations made in
resolution 60/5 on improving global road safety. It
describes how efforts made at the international level
have served to increase awareness about road safety. It
proposes a number of recommendations for
consideration by the Assembly that would facilitate the
implementation of effective interventions known to
improve road safety at the national level.
In April 2007, WHO and the United Nations
regional commissions organized the first United
Nations Global Road Safety Week to serve as a
platform for global, regional and national activities to
raise awareness about road safety issues. The Week
also focused on young road users, highlighting the
risks for children and young people. The World Youth
Assembly for Road Safety was the key global event of
the Week, which brought together over 400 young
people from 100 countries to share experiences and
create a global network of young road safety
advocates. The young delegates developed and adopted
a declaration, called the Youth Declaration for Road
Safety. Also held during the Week was the second
Stakeholders’ Forum for Global Road Safety, organized
by the Global Road Safety Forum, which brought
together
participants
from
Governments,
non-governmental organizations and the private sector.
I would be remiss if I did not compliment the
United Nations regional commissions and their
subsidiary bodies for increasing their road safety
activities and advocating for increased political
commitment to road safety.
The Economic Commission for Europe continues
to advocate global action in the elaboration of safetyrelated global technical vehicle regulations and
amendments to the Convention on Road Traffic and the
Convention on Road Signs and Signals.
The Economic and Social Commission for Asia
and the Pacific held a Ministerial Conference on
Transport in Busan, Republic of Korea, and adopted
the Ministerial Declaration on Improving Road Safety
in Asia and the Pacific.
The Economic Commission for Africa and WHO
jointly organized an African road safety conference in

2

Accra, during which the delegates adopted a
declaration that committed ministers to working
together to stop the growing epidemic of death and
injuries on African roads.
The Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean held its first Latin American and
Caribbean Road Safety Stakeholders Forum in San
José in 2006. Participants there adopted the
Declaration of San José.
The Economic and Social Commission for
Western Asia and WHO jointly organized a regional
training course for ministry of health officials in Cairo
in 2006.
Elsewhere, the Commission for Global Road
Safety, under the able leadership of Lord Robertson of
Port Ellen, issued the landmark Make Roads Safe
report, which included a proposal for the holding of a
ministerial conference on road safety. The Make Roads
Safe report frames road safety as an issue in
sustainable development and clearly illustrates the
direct link between safe roads and the effective
delivery of many of the Millennium Development
Goals. It also highlights the need for road
infrastructure development projects, backed by the G8,
to include a viable road safety component.
But, despite that progress, there is a growing gap
between the developed countries and developing and
transitional countries, where the problem is,
unfortunately, getting worse. If we cannot accelerate
our response to the epidemic of road traffic deaths in
low- and middle-income countries by mobilizing more
effective enforcement, building safer roadways,
changing road user behaviours and providing better
care, we will lose tens of millions of lives before those
problems turn the corner and start on a downward
curve. Therefore, we need a number of sustained and
coordinated global initiatives to help close that gap.
Just as a rising tide lifts all boats, those initiatives can
move us forward on all fronts together.
One of the areas in which substantial progress has
been made is the development of the first funding
mechanism designed to support capacity-building and
provide technical support for road safety at the global,
regional and country levels. I commend the World
Bank on its initiative to establish the Global Road
Safety Facility, a funding mechanism that would
support the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the World Report on Road Traffic Injury

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

Prevention. I thank the Governments of Australia, the
Netherlands and Sweden and the FIA Foundation for
their financial support to the Facility.
Here, I would like to point to the steps
implemented by the Government of Oman at the
national level. Those include the enactment of
legislation, the establishment of a national road safety
agency, updating comprehensive regulations to meet
the needs of the injured and their rehabilitation, and the
creation of a registry to obtain detailed information on
the consequences of injuries with the aim of
minimizing the crisis and with the ultimate goal of
creating for our citizens an environment that is
conducive to achieving further social and economic
development. The Royal Oman Police has organized
and participated in a number of events in its continuing
efforts to raise greater awareness of road safety issues.
It has participated in both the Gulf Cooperation
Council Road Safety Week and in the Arab Road
Safety Week.
The Directorate-General for Traffic of the Royal
Oman Police established in 2006 the Road Safety
Institute, whose mission is to train traffic officers. The
Institute conducts a number of training programmes for
driving instructors, taxi drivers and public
transportation drivers. It also conducts programmes on
first aid, administering cardiopulmonary resuscitation
and defensive driving. The Institute has organized
18 conferences and events relating to road safety, and
two regional conferences were held at the Institute in
2006.
To ensure the safety of drivers and pedestrians
alike, the Royal Oman Police is sparing no effort in
making sure that traffic regulations are complied with.
As speed is the major cause of road crashes, resulting
in 53 per cent of crashes in Oman, the Royal Oman
Police has installed high-quality fixed-speed radars on
all lit dual carriageways, and mobile speed radars have
been provided to all police departments in the
provinces and regions of Oman. Since the installation
of the speed radars, there has been a significant
decrease in the rate of speed violations.
The Royal Oman Police is also concerned about
the road worthiness of vehicles and has established
vehicle technical inspection stations in all the regions
of Oman. Those stations are equipped with the most
modern technology and systems used in vehicle
inspections.

08-28848

With the increase in the number of vehicles and
road users, it is important that rules and regulations be
kept in line with accelerating developments in all
aspects of life. Traffic laws have been amended to
address new and unfamiliar patterns of traffic
behaviour.
On behalf of the sponsors — Albania, Argentina,
Austria, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Costa Rica, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, France, Greece, Iceland,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, the Philippines,
Portugal, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, South Africa, the Sudan, Thailand, Tunisia,
Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam, Yemen
and Oman — I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/62/L.43, on which
my delegation held a number of consultation meetings
with other Member States in order to arrive at a
consensus.
The
draft
builds
on
the
practical
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report contained in document A/62/257. In its
preambular part, the draft resolution underlines the
importance for Member States to continue using the
World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention as a
framework for road safety efforts. It commends the
World Health Organization (WHO) for its role in
implementing the mandate conferred upon it by the
General Assembly to coordinate road safety issues
within the United Nations system. It recognizes the
important contribution of the United Nations regional
commissions in helping the WHO to carry out its
mandate. It commends the World Bank for its initiative
in establishing the Global Road Safety Facility,
expresses concern at the continued increase in road
traffic fatalities and injuries, and reaffirms the need for
further strengthening of international cooperation.
The time has come for our ministers and other
Government officials with responsibilities for
transport, health, education, safety and law
enforcement to meet to discuss this issue and consider
the progress made so far and what remains to be done.
Operative paragraph 7 welcomes the offer of the
Government of the Russian Federation to host the first
ministerial conference on road safety, to be held in
2009. We hope that that important event will bring
together ministers responsible for transport, health,

3

A/62/PV.87

education and law enforcement to exchange views and
discuss progress in implementing the recommendations
of the World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention
and General Assembly resolutions on improving global
road safety.
Here, I would like to offer my thanks and
gratitude to the Government of the Russian Federation
for its generous offer and for the leading role it is
playing in raising awareness of the road safety issue.
Since the issuance of the draft resolution, the
following additional countries have joined the list of
sponsors: Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Belarus, Belgium,
Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Djibouti, Fiji, Finland, Guyana, Haiti,
Hungary, India, Ireland, Israel, Italy, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta,
Monaco, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Paraguay, Poland,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, the Syrian Arab
Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
I would like to express my deep gratitude to the
delegation of the Russian Federation and the
representatives who participated in the many informal
meetings we held and who offered constructive
suggestions, amendments, advice and support. To all of
them, I offer many, many thanks.
I am honoured to recommend draft resolution
A/62/L.43 for adoption by the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation, Mr. Victor
Kiryanov, Chief State Inspector of Traffic Safety.
Mr. Kiryanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation, along with a number
of other countries, has submitted to the sixty-second
session of the General Assembly a draft resolution
entitled “Improving global road safety” (A/62/L.43).
We hope that it will enjoy the Assembly’s support,
because the issue of road safety is now more important
than ever and requires our constant attention.
Interaction in the field of road traffic safety has
lately become a priority area of international
cooperation at the bilateral and multilateral levels and
is becoming an important item on the agendas of the
United Nations and other international organizations.
That is due to the growing use of vehicles throughout

4

the world and, as a result, an increase in the number of
road accidents.
United Nations data shows that each year nearly
1.2 million people die and millions are injured or
disabled as a result of road accidents. Besides
economic and social costs for individuals and their
families, road traffic injuries place an onerous burden
on public health-care services. Each year, the costs
associated with road traffic injuries in the world
amount to hundreds of billions of dollars, and they
continue to increase.
Reducing the number of road traffic injuries is
one of the necessary preconditions for successful
socio-economic
development,
achieving
the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and,
ultimately, for ordinary people to feel safe and secure
when travelling by road, and that concerns all road
users — both drivers and pedestrians.
This problem is extremely urgent for the Russian
Federation. The road safety situation remains difficult
in our country. A high accident rate is in many respects
caused by the constantly growing mobility of the
population, with a shift from public to private
transportation and a growing disproportion between a
rise in the number of automobiles and the development
of the street and road network. This situation leads to
worsening traffic and environmental conditions,
congestion, an increase in fuel consumption and
growth in the number of road accidents.
In his annual address to the Federal Assembly in
2007, the President of the Russian Federation
presented the issue of ensuring road safety as a priority
development goal for our country. The Government of
the Russian Federation has adopted a special
programme entitled “Improved Road Safety for 20062012”. In our country as a whole, activities in this area
have been intensified. All regions of Russia have
adopted appropriate programmes on road safety. Their
financing has also been increased.
The Russian Federation has traditionally been an
active participant in multilateral efforts in the field of
road safety. We were among those who initiated regular
consideration of the topic of overcoming the global
road safety crisis at the General Assembly of the
United Nations. In particular, Russia was the first to
inform the international community about the
implementation measures of the relevant resolution of
the fifty-eighth session of the General Assembly.

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

The international community highly commended
the efforts of the Working Party on Road Traffic Safety
of the Inland Transport Committee of the Economic
Commission for Europe. Since March 2006, that
working party has been headed by a representative
from Russia. The role of this body of the United
Nations system as an effective tool of international
legal regulation in this area was stressed welcomed in
resolution 60/5 (A/Res/60/5, para. 6).
We took an active part at both the international
and national levels in the preparation and holding of
the first United Nations Global Road Safety Week,
which focused on young road users. The Russian
Automobile Federation became a member of the
Global Road Safety Partnership, the major conference
of which also took place in Moscow recently.
In 2006, Lord Robertson, Chairman of the
Commission for Global Road Safety, whose active
work to raise public awareness of the issue of
preventing road accidents in the world merits great
respect and our full support, proposed holding the first
international conference on road safety. It is planned to
focus this event on a comprehensive discussion of the
road safety situation throughout the world and its
influence on socio-economic development and
countries’ implementation and attainment of the
MDGs. In particular, it is planned to review the
progress of countries’ implementation of the
recommendations of the World Report on Road Traffic
Injury Prevention and also to determine ways to step
up international cooperation.
The Russian Federation has decided to present an
initiative to hold the first global high-level conference
on road safety in 2009 in Moscow, together with other
actors interested in international cooperation in the
area of road safety. The draft resolution being
considered today refers to this and other initiatives.
For my part, as someone responsible for ensuring
road safety in Russia, I would like to stress our
determination to make vigorous efforts to improve the
situation in this area and to assist in the strengthening
of international cooperation everywhere, to ensure
sharing of experience and knowledge, coordination of
joint work, elaboration of common rules and standards,
and finally, improving the level of the road safety and
the quality of life for all road users.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica, Her Excellency,

08-28848

Mrs. Karla González, Minister of Public Works and
Transportation.
Mrs. González (Costa Rica): I want to thank the
Assembly for the privilege of addressing this sixtysecond session of the General Assembly of the United
Nations.
Roads are a big part of my responsibilities in the
Ministry of Transport. The daily life of each person
depends on the roads — to get to school, to work or to
the health centre; to facilitate business, agriculture and
trade; and to provide the jobs that can lead people out
of poverty.
In developing countries like Costa Rica, even
simple journeys are hazards. Half of the people killed
or badly hurt in road crashes are simply walking. One
in ten is killed on bicycles. The death rate of people
simply riding in vehicles is also high. Overall, a Costa
Rican is more than three times likely to die in a sudden
violent road crash than a Northern European. This state
of affairs is unacceptable.
Costa Rica is well known for non-violence. We
abolished our army 50 years ago. Our president, Óscar
Arias, won a Nobel Peace Prize for his work in
bringing conflicts to a close in our region. He now sees
that ending the violence on our roads would be an even
greater prize. So he is using his international standing
to mobilize action against the violence of road crashes
in Latin America.
In Costa Rica, we look for good international
advice. We are acting to tackle the key risk factors in
road crashes — poorly designed roadways, failure to
use safety belts and helmets, drunk driving and
excessive speed. Costa Rica believes deeply in
constitutional rights and individual freedom. In the
past, some had argued that an individual had the right
to decide if he or she wanted to protect himself or
herself by using a seat belt and that the law should not
interfere with such rights. In 2003, we as Governments
decided that civil society had elected us to represent
and protect its rights. It was time for us to protect
ourselves from our worst enemy — our freedom to
decide not to protect ourselves. We fought, argued and
persuaded. We changed the law on seat belt use and we
brought the work of the police and road safety
education together. We created a campaign that spoke
to our people in a language that they could understand,
saying: “For the sake of the people you love, and for
those who love you, wear a seat belt.”

5

A/62/PV.87

The forces of the new law and emotion worked
together. The rate of seat belt usage rose from around
20 per cent to over 80 per cent — better than the rates
in the United States and many European countries at
that time. The automobile death rate fell by about
30 per cent. It was, and is, extremely important to
realize that we have the tools and ability to reduce
these death rates. If we try hard, we can do it.
We were grateful for the help from the
international community, especially from the FIA
Foundation for the Automobile and Society. We are
pleased that our success is being repeated elsewhere.
The Government of President Arias is now
tackling another major issue, our roads. Our roads are
in bad condition. The same rain that lures tourists to
visit the beautiful wildlife and rain forests of Costa
Rica is the same rainwater that washes away our roads.
For the past 10 years, our roads have been neglected in
terms of investment and maintenance. The national
budget for roads has been meagre. That has been
changing in recent years. For the first time, the
Government has decided to dedicate all the resources
provided by our fuel-tax law to maintaining our roads.
Nevertheless, the damage was so extensive that we
could spend the entire budget just patching and
painting the roads.
It must be difficult for those in developed
countries to imagine the problems that our engineers
face. In well-run developed countries, professionals
debate various tactics to achieve the lowest whole-life
cost of road treatment over the next 20 or 40 years. In
Costa Rica, we have more than 30,000 kilometres of
roads. We struggle to find the money to keep them in
good condition and to build new ones. It is very hard to
run a programme to improve the situation, when money
is scarce and the road network is so big. Unfortunately,
we believe that scenario is the same in most developing
countries. But despite our circumstances, we have to
change the priorities.
When thinking about road safety, behaviour is
key. But there is another key, which depends only
upon Governments and decision-makers, namely,
infrastructure. If Governments have the money to build
new roads, they certainly must take care of the safety
component. It is no longer acceptable to spend scarce
money to build bigger or longer roads, if we are not
also investing money to make our roads safer.

6

We have a vision, and we are looking ahead,
anticipating the needs for the next two decades. Global
health equity means that people everywhere — in rich
countries and poor ones — have access to vaccines.
Global road safety equity means that people
everywhere have access not to roads, as we used to
believe, but to safe roads, as we believe today.
On 8 May 2006, as the first decision of the new
Arias Government, the Ministry of Public Works and
Transportation, under my command, decreed that we
would evaluate our roads, both old and new, in terms of
safety. In the past, when we spent money improving
roads, we often increased casualties. Speeds rose but
the roads were not safely designed. International
institutions were short-sighted as well. Too many
believed that tackling health, education and poverty
could be done, while cutting back on basics.
Now everyone recognizes that we need safe,
clean and affordable transport. We need maintenance
budgets that are sustainable. We need budgets that will
let us surface roads to keep water out today, and not
spend 10 times more in major reconstruction tomorrow.
We need simple and affordable safety features, which
would be expected in a developed country, such as
footpaths and safe crossing points, traffic management
in villages, safety fencing, safe road and junction
layouts, bike paths and uphill lanes. We know that
roundabouts and centre and side barriers can reduce
traffic fatalities by 90 per cent. Those interventions are
as effective as any medicine. They can be our road
safety vaccines.
Last year, Costa Rica won a place in the
International Road Assessment Programme (IRAP).
Costa Rica is one of a handful of developing countries
worldwide whose roads were inspected as part of a
pilot programme. Working with my Ministry, the road
assessment team identified about 2,800 kilometres of
road where deaths and serious injuries are
concentrated. They then inspected those roads to
determine what could be fixed quickly and affordably.
Right now, we are studying IRAP’s report and
recommendations on the roads most in need of safety
treatment, if money can be found.
The IRAP report for Costa Rica does more than
suggest where thousands and thousands of deaths and
serious injuries could be prevented over the years
ahead by simple measures such as foot paths, safe
crossing points and safety barriers. As a road safety

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

minister, I am quite convinced that common sense
measures based on the systematic measurement of
problems are what is needed. However, the report goes
on to give the figures that finance ministers and
development banks need. Countries such as Costa Rica
lose about 2 to 3 per cent of gross domestic product to
road crashes. The report shows how treating the roads
where serious crashes are concentrated can provide an
economic payback of 10 times the money invested. I
am therefore pleased that road assessment is
recognized in today’s draft resolution.
Infrastructure is part of the safety system where
Governments have the greatest ability to save lives and
prevent injuries. On the other hand, it is also the most
expensive part, the part where major investments are
required. Let me therefore conclude with a question.
Assuming the political will exists to take action, are we
going to be able to find the international financing
community ready to take those actions and become part
of the solution?
With adequate support from developed nations,
the World Bank’s Global Road Safety Facility —
which is also referred to in the historic draft resolution
before us today — has the potential to transform this
epidemic and provide road safety for everyone. I
suspect that many countries are in the same position as
Costa Rica. With investment from the international
community, there is much we can do for many.
On behalf of my country and all the developing
countries of our region, I am here to attest that we have
learned from our mistakes. We think that we now know
the way. We have decided to tear down all political
barriers and obstacles, the mental schemes that have
prevented us from changing. We will fight and we will
prevail. If we can find the funding, we are ready to
take action.
(spoke in Spanish)
If we want to make significant progress in regard
to violence in our countries, we need to start with our
roads.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Honourable Michael Henry, Minister of Transport and
Works of Jamaica.
Mr. Henry (Jamaica): Permit me to convey
greetings from our Prime Minister, the Honourable
Bruce Golding, who was invited to address the

08-28848

Assembly. He is unavoidably absent due to prior
commitments.
Allow me also, at the outset, to express my
appreciation of the privilege of addressing the General
Assembly at its sixty-second session in my capacity as
Minister with portfolio responsibility for transport on a
matter that we consider to be of significant national
importance.
The Jamaican delegation welcomes the report
transmitted in document A/62/257, prepared by the
World Health Organization (WHO) in consultation
with the regional commissions and other partners of
the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration. Our
support for draft resolution A/62/L.43 is reflected in
our sponsorship of the text and is a signal of our desire
that global road safety issues be addressed, with a
further strengthening of international cooperation and
taking into account the needs of developing countries.
In Jamaica, the issue of road safety is given
priority attention on our national agenda. The Prime
Minister assumes the lead role as Chair of the National
Road Safety Council, a body with overarching
responsibilities for road safety matters in the country.
That in itself demonstrates the seriousness of my
Government’s commitment to bring attention to this
issue at the highest level. In this arrangement, the
Government, the private sector and academia
collaborate for the singular purpose of establishing
measures to enhance road safety. We are convinced that
without this political will, the problem will only be
exacerbated and spiral out of control.
This multisector approach has reduced our
fatality rate from road traffic injuries from a high of
17.8 per 100,000 of the population to a low of 11.4 per
100,000 in 1999, a situation which at that time
compared favourably with many developed countries.
Unfortunately, our fatality rate has again climbed to
unacceptable levels, peaking at 15.6 per 100,000 in
2002. With a concerted effort, there was a further
reduction to 12.1 in 2005.
Jamaica is of the view that stopping this epidemic
will take more than any one country can grapple with.
Thus, at the regional level, we participate fully in the
Latin American and Caribbean Road Safety Forum,
which is sustained by the Global Road Safety Forum, a
non-governmental agency committed to advocacy and
collaboration. The Latin American and Caribbean
Forum brings together government representatives

7

A/62/PV.87

from the transportation, health, law enforcement and
education sectors, while mobilizing relevant regional
and international organizations with a view to greater
collaboration and efforts to curtail — if not eliminate —
the epidemic of death on our respective roadways.

youth aged 10 to 24 years, road traffic injuries have
become the number-one cause of death. Daily, 1,049 of
our youth die from injuries sustained on the world’s
roads network. That means that, worldwide, every one
to three minutes, a child perishes from a road accident.

Under the leadership of Costa Rica, the Forum is
now in the final stages of developing a charter that upon
adoption will serve as a signpost — pun intended — for
the guidance of the regional committee to fulfil its
mandate within the framework of wider collaboration
and cooperation to make roads safer for the people of
Latin America and the Caribbean.

If indeed Governments are to ensure that children
survive and develop healthily, leaders must admit that
road traffic injuries are seriously challenging their
ability to deliver on this essential right of the child.
They must take the bold steps necessary to confront
their lethal impact on our societies.

According to WHO, more than 85 per cent of
road traffic injuries occur in low- and middle-income
countries, a fact that we cannot ignore. One notable
consequence of this epidemic is what I would like to
describe as a stifling effect that imposes a huge
economic burden on developing countries and
economies, particularly small and vulnerable
economies such as that of Jamaica, where it accounts
for 1 to 2 per cent of the gross domestic product. This
figure, according to WHO, is compiled with a total
bilateral overseas aid contributed by the industrial
countries. We are reliably informed by those who carry
out research on the burden of road traffic injuries that
this staggering effect on GDP represents only half of
the story; as that figure only represents lost
productivity.
As part of the new political Administration in
Jamaica, which is busy with the task of constructing
our first budget, we are painfully aware of the
additional burden caused by the social and economic
costs of the epidemic, especially the negative effects on
the health sector. In many low- and middle-income
countries, road traffic injuries account for half of the
hospital-bed occupants of surgical wards. In such
scenarios, the most affected are usually the poorer
groups within the society, including many whose
historical claims for just compensation are yet to be
addressed.
The plight of children in all of this deeply affects
me. Article 6 of the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child articulates, inter alia, that children
have the right to life and that Governments should
ensure that children survive and develop in a healthy
manner. The data are particularly startling, as they
indicate that this right, especially in low- and middleincome countries, is constantly under siege. For our

8

When set against the background of struggling
economies, record-high oil prices and the subsequent
upsurge in food costs, the effects on the poor and
needy present a major challenge for many
Governments across the world. The plight of the poor
becomes even more complicated, because those who
are unable to afford automobiles are the most
vulnerable on the roadways, especially in low- and
middle-income countries. Thus in Jamaica, we have a
situation in which, consistently for that last 20 years,
pedestrians account for 33 per cent of all road fatalities.
The larger category of vulnerable road users —
pedestrians, bicyclists and motorcyclists — accounts
for 66 per cent of fatalities. In many countries in the
Latin American and Caribbean region, pedestrians
account for as much as 50 per cent of road fatalities.
The very limited funding available does not allow the
privilege to adequately plan for the road users at that
level.
What makes this carnage on our roads even more
challenging is that the lower and middle-income
countries, which are least equipped to deal with this
crisis, account for 90 per cent of road traffic injuries.
That presents a serious impediment to our efforts to
achieve sustainable development and has a negative
impact on our efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. Preliminary estimates indicate
that Jamaica’s accident emergency costs amounted to
$14 million in 2006. That represented 0.48 per cent of
our gross domestic product; 7.2 per cent of the budget
allocated to hospitals; and 0.33 per cent of our national
budget. That is an economic drain, in our situation, in
which scarce resources would be better spent in areas
of development. We need to actively seek to spend
those dollars on preventative interventions, where they
are an investment rather than an expense.

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

Of significant note too, is that this modern day
plague is almost invisible. It is, indeed, very tragic, as
it silently undermines the overall quality of life, and
that silence must be broken.

forward to the day when we can strengthen our safety
management capacity in conformity with agreed
principles and best practices, of course with the
required assistance.

I
close
this
presentation
with
three
recommendations. The first one has emerged from the
multi-sectoral collaboration that we have fostered in
Jamaica relating to the need to adopt standards for the
design and manufacture of imported vehicles. One of the
great contributions towards reducing the rate of motor
vehicle deaths in the highly developed countries has
been the development of such standards. In Europe and
the United States, for example, government regulations
require that vehicles protect passengers and other road
users with enhanced environmental performance
standards; front- and side-airbag impact protection; rollover protection; three-point seat belts; and a growing list
of designs and devices that help passengers avoid
crashes and survive when crashes do occur.

Jamaica is working to get out of the mindset of
constructing roads without due attention to the safe use
of the facilities. Accordingly, we are numbered among
the nations that are signatory to the Make Roads Safe
petition. Our previous Prime Minister was therefore the
first signatory, and our current Prime Minister has
affixed his signature since assuming office.

Unfortunately, many of the low- and middleincome countries — where the great majority of road
traffic deaths occur — do not currently have the
capacity to enforce such standards. In Jamaica, about
48 per cent of road fatalities involve motor vehicle
occupants, many of them as passengers in vehicles that
would not meet the minimum standards for the United
States or the European Union. A truly global standard
that manufacturers are obliged to comply with would
go a long way towards protecting the citizens of
countries like Jamaica, where this standard could be
legally adopted and used to screen vehicles imported to
our shores. Jamaica has recently had costly experience
in terms of serious injuries and fatalities from the
importation of defective used vehicles, a situation that
needs to be quickly and seriously remedied. I therefore
call for the establishment of a global motor vehicle
safety standard that would establish the minimum
standard for vehicles manufactured anywhere in the
world, and I hope that the United Nations global
ministerial conference will address that.
Secondly, I make an urgent plea for Jamaica and
other countries in the region to have easier access to
the International Road Assessment Programme for riskmapping and tracking the safety performance of the
road network. That assessment will provide us with the
protocols for measuring risk, setting benchmarks and
utilizing a star rating that gives a road protection score.
I am particularly interested in that initiative, as it
relates directly to my ministerial portfolio. I look

08-28848

Thirdly and finally, our experience at the national
and regional levels has taught us the critical
importance of employing multi-sectoral collaboration
in addressing this epidemic of road traffic injuries.
Dire projections have been made about the devastation
that will occur if we do not take action quickly and act
together to fight this modern-day scourge.
The proposal for a United Nations global
ministerial conference therefore provides the perfect
opportunity for the international community to
mobilize the leaders in the transport sector. It will also
serve to focus our minds on practical solutions that can
make a lasting difference and create the opportunity for
enhanced leadership, which can assist in reducing the
devastation now taking place in the developing world.
That is against the background of the chilling data that
every one to three minutes a child dies from a road
accident; that is not just information found in a
research document, but the reality faced by countless
families and communities.
On behalf of the Prime Minister and people of
Jamaica, I therefore express our full support for the
draft resolution to be adopted this morning, calling for
the first ever United Nations ministerial conference on
road safety, and hope that it will receive overwhelming
endorsement from the international community.
I look forward to the day when the nations of this
planet can turn the tide and reap the benefits of safer
travel on our roadways. Our concerted actions today
with the adoption of this draft resolution will serve to
further solidify a global partnership of collaboration
and cooperation, which I know will overcome all
impediments to achieving that endeavour.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of Slovenia, Her Excellency
Ms. Sanja Štiglic.

9

A/62/PV.87

Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this declaration.
Traffic collisions are at epidemic levels in many
countries, and there seems to be a widespread
acceptance that they are an inevitable consequence of
ever-increasing
mobility.
The
World
Health
Organization (WHO) has estimated that in 2002 almost
1.2 million people died in road crashes worldwide, and
as many as 50 million were injured. Failure to act
could not only double the number by 2020, but would
see injuries from road traffic rise to be the third highest
contributor to the global burden of disease and injuries.
Nonetheless, many societies and Governments have
chosen to face this challenge. Indeed, mentalities are
changing with regard to road safety: road accident
fatalities are no longer accepted as an inevitable
corollary of increased mobility.
In the EU, we can look to the successes of
countries such as the United Kingdom, Sweden and the
Netherlands. Against the background of rising vehicle
numbers and increases in driver numbers, those States
have recorded dramatic reductions in road casualty
levels. In parallel to those success stories, other
European countries have also achieved considerable
improvements. It is important to underline that those
successes are generally based on the adoption of wideranging planned approaches to road safety policy with
ambitious targets.
In fact, the EU has recognized that there is scope
for greater advances if all of the member States are
prepared to share not just a vision for the future but
also the best practice that has delivered such progress
at the national level in the past. Referring to recent
developments in that regard, the European Commission
has issued a mid-term review of the European Road
Safety Action Programme, expressing that we have
accomplished a lot in the last five years, yet more must
be done together to achieve our objectives. The
European Road Safety Action Programme, established
by the European Commission in June 2003, has at its
core the goal of achieving a reduction of 50 per cent in

10

the number of people killed in traffic collisions by
2010 as compared to 2001.
The European Parliament and the Council of
European Ministers of Transport have, on several
occasions, subscribed explicitly to that goal. In doing
so, they have placed road safety very high on the
political agenda, where it will remain, since they have
also acknowledged that improving road safety requires
a continuous effort.
The Programme identifies excessive speed,
drinking and driving, and not using protective
measures, such as seat belts and motorcycle helmets, as
the main causes of collisions and as major contributing
factors to their effects. For that reason, it underlines the
urgent need for stricter enforcement of existing
legislation in that respect. Furthermore, the Action
Programme provides European States with an overview
of the relevant information that is required in order to
achieve the goal of a 50-per cent reduction of road
accident fatalities. It also describes structures through
which we can better address those issues and provides
the information required to replicate the performance
of those States which have taken the lead in road safety
policy.
The Programme also places great emphasis on the
absolute need to engage civil society in the delivery of
better road safety. To that effect, it encourages the
signing of a road safety charter by actors from the
public and private sectors, in which those actors should
list their individual aims and actions concerning road
safety.
The EU Action Programme also places great
emphasis on the need to gather collision data and
information
relating
to
collision
prevention
programmes deployed in each of the member States.
That will be achieved through the establishment of the
European Road Safety Observatory, which shall
disseminate information on best practices in addressing
road safety challenges.
Of course, it is clear that we should exchange
best practices across all nations worldwide, not just
within the European Union. We can all learn from the
relevant experience of other nations in that context. To
meet that challenge, we highly appreciate the initiative
of the Russian Federation to host and provide the
necessary financial support for the first global highlevel conference on road safety, to be held in 2009, to
bring together delegations of ministers and

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

representatives to discuss and to exchange information
and best practices.
The lack of visibility of road traffic injuries has a
direct impact on political will to recognize and address
the problem. Against that background, the EU
established a European Road Safety Day. The first
European Road Safety Day on 27 April 2007 was a day
for young people to share experiences. It focused on
the subjects of alcohol and drugs in traffic, training and
education. The second road safety day, to be held on
13 October 2008 in Paris, will address the subject of
road safety in our cities.
Having heard that the major contributing factors
to road crashes and injuries are drunk driving, lack of
helmet use, seat belt non-compliance, excessive speed
and poor infrastructure design and management, we
know that many of those deaths are preventable. That
is why we must act together to take up the challenge to
drastically reduce the numbers of our citizens who
needlessly lose their lives on roads every day of every
year.
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the United Kingdom, His Excellency
The Honourable Lord Robertson of Port Ellen,
Chairman of the Commission for Global Road Safety.
Lord Robertson (United Kingdom): Today we
have the opportunity to begin to turn the tide — a
terrible tide of bloodshed on the world’s roads. I carry
with me at all times a small photograph of my road
crash 32 years ago — a reminder of how lucky I am to
be here today — but millions of others carry the
injuries of road crashes throughout their blighted lives,
and tens of millions of others who have died on the
world’s roads will carry nothing ever again.
That is why today matters. Today’s debate in the
General Assembly and the draft resolution before us
can mark the moment when the world community
looks out at the suffering and at the grief and at the
cost of road crashes and decides to end it. That is in
our power to do. We have the tools, we have the
knowledge and we have the means. What we have to
do now is act.
We have to act for Le Xuan Han, who died on a
road in Ho Chi Minh City last month, just a few weeks
before her ninth birthday, because she was not wearing
a motorcycle helmet and because the rider who crashed
into her family had been drinking. We have to do it for

08-28848

Mukela Mumbuna, a young and gifted Zambian woman
who left behind her husband and five-month-old baby
when she died in a bus crash caused by a speeding
driver, and for Baligeya in Uganda, who lost a leg and
therefore his livelihood when he was knocked down by
a hit-and-run driver. After months in hospital, he now
faces a future of constant pain and poverty, unable to
provide for his family again. No crash helmet;
inappropriate speed; drunken driving — collectively
we know how to tackle those problems. Unsafe
vehicles; badly designed roads; no seat belt — those
are all solvable problems.
Most of those present will know me as an
individual from jobs that I have held in the past, as the
Minister of Defence of the United Kingdom and then
as the leader of NATO, the world’s most successful
defence alliance. They will know that I spend most of
my time preoccupied with the statistics, casualties and
consequences of military conflicts worldwide, and
most of them will know some basic statistics about
some of the best-known conflicts. The number who
died in Viet Nam is known by every United States
citizen; the number of casualties in Afghanistan is
known by every Russian citizen; and concerning your
country, Sir, we are all too aware of the casualties of
the conflict going on in Iraq today.
And yet all of those figures are dwarfed by the
carnage that takes place on the world’s roads every day
of every year. We know about some of those casualties;
it is time that we acted on the day-to-day misery that is
being created on our roads in our countries today. We
must act for all the millions of people who have been
killed or left maimed in this decade alone; for the 500
children who die every day, leaving their parents with a
grief that we only imagine; and for the millions of lives
that we could save in the decades ahead if we
implemented the policies and solutions that are proved
to work — that are proved to save lives and to make
the roads safer.
So I am delighted that the General Assembly is
supporting the recommendation of the Commission for
Global Road Safety — which I am proud to chair — in
our report Make Roads Safe, to organize the first ever
global United Nations ministerial conference on road
safety. I also welcome recognition by the Assembly for
the work that is being done by the World Bank’s Global
Road Safety Facility and for the need for road safety to
become an integral element of road infrastructure
project design.

11

A/62/PV.87

I would also pay tribute to the Sultanate of Oman
and Ambassador Al-Hinai for leading the effort to
secure a new United Nations resolution. I also want to
thank the Government of the Russian Federation and
General Kirianov for generously offering to host the
ministerial conference next year and for their
leadership in global road safety. I want to thank all of
the countries that have supported this draft resolution
and will be vital to the success of the forthcoming
United Nations conference, and particularly the
Government of the United Kingdom, which has
sponsored this draft resolution and allowed me to
speak on its behalf today.
I would like to thank President Arias of Costa
Rica, former United States President Carter,
Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Mrs. Mary Robinson of
Ireland and Mrs. Sonia Gandhi of India, who are
among those who have joined me in signing an Open
Letter to the United Nations urging action today.
I also recognize Michelle Yeoh, Jean Todt and
David Ward of the FIA Foundation, who are here with
me today at this momentous General Assembly
meeting. And I ask the Assembly to take note of the
more than one million people across the world who
have cared enough to sign the petition to the United
Nations urging action.
This effort — this huge effort — will require both
political will and public support. It is a challenge that we
need to face together, the rich and the poor, the North
and the South, the developed and the less developed
worlds. And the United Nations ministerial conference
will be an important milestone in this effort — a chance
to come together, to review progress, to share
knowledge, but most of all, to plan the action ahead of
us. Today we can begin to turn the tide.
We, the United Nations, can determine to
recognize the scale of this modern global epidemic of
road deaths and injuries, and we can decide that the
time has come to act to stop it.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico, Mr. Arturo Cervantes Trejo,
General Director of the National Centre on Accident
Prevention.
Mr. Trejo (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Assembly for the privilege of
addressing this sixty-second session of the General
Assembly of the United Nations.

12

Allow me also to convey greetings from the
President of Mexico, Felipe Calderón Hinojosa, and
from the Minister of Health of Mexico, Dr. José Ángel
Córdoba Villalobos.
Mexico is no stranger to the problem of road
safety and road traffic injuries, which affect countries
throughout the world. Every year, road traffic injuries
are responsible for the deaths of more than 17,000
Mexicans, which is the equivalent to losing 47 people a
day. Fifteen of them are pedestrians, which is a group
at particularly high risk. Alarmingly, road traffic
accidents are the number one killer of children,
teenagers and young adults between the ages of 5 and
35 in our country.
Apart from these high death rates, road accidents
have resulted in more than 750,000 hospitalizations,
and many millions of injured have required medical
attention. Road injuries are the second leading cause of
permanent disability and also the second leading cause
of orphanhood in our country.
In our country, the number of road accidents is on
the rise, with official figures placing the growth in the
number of accidents at more than 45 per cent in the
current decade.
Estimates place the economic burden of road
traffic injuries in Mexico at more than $100 million per
year. Of these, $45 million is the estimated costs of
hospitalization, surgery, medical treatment and
rehabilitation services. Material damages are estimated
at $13 million, and more than $35 million is due to the
drop in productivity, the loss of income that the
deceased, who are economically active members of
society, would have produced. Their average age at
death is 35.
Victims of traffic accidents are mostly people
who are starting their families. They tend to have these
accidents at a time when they are most productive
economically. Thus, the consequences for families,
communities, the economy and the country as a whole,
are devastating.
The epidemic of traffic injuries in Mexico is
compounded by many social, economic and cultural
factors. Among them, the country is becoming largely
urban, with more than 80 per cent of the population
living in urban areas. In addition, the vehicle fleet,
including motorcycles, trucks and buses, has increased

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

in size by more than 60 per cent in the last decade,
standing at more than 24 million motor vehicles.
Research presented at the ninth World Conference
on Injury Prevention and Safety Promotion, held in the
second week of this month of March in the city of
Merida, Mexico, suggests that the high rate of
pedestrian road traffic deaths in large cities is not just a
problem of the developing world, but also in the most
developed countries. So we need to do a better job of
protecting vulnerable road users in all of our cities.
Alarmingly, it is important to mention the
estimated number of accidents, injuries, disability and
deaths related to motor vehicle traffic accidents tend to
be much higher than official statistics would show.
That is true both in Mexico and in other countries of
the region, because of the significant underreporting of
road traffic accidents and the casualties that result
therefrom.
According to data from the World Health
Organization and the World Bank, traffic injuries now
constitute a true global epidemic, and Latin America
and the Caribbean have the highest road traffic fatality
rates of any region in the world.
The economic burden, as was mentioned by the
Minister of Costa Rica and the Minister of Jamaica, is
very high and climbing. Some of the problems that
contribute to this pandemic in the region are associated
with the increased urbanization of the population, the
increased availability and use of motor vehicles,
including a substantial increase in motorcycles, poor
quality of roads, streets and highways, the absence of
road safety education for all types of transport and road
users, as well as the lack of sustainable mass
transportation systems and adequate urban planning,
among other causes.
Mexico, therefore, recognizes with concern that
all countries of the world must confront this problem
together. It is essential that all countries share
knowledge and efforts regarding road safety and bring
together all our knowledge and our scientific,
technical, human and economic resources to face this
pandemic in a well-coordinated global effort. It is a
matter not only of economics, but also of social justice.
I should say that encouraging things are taking
place in the Latin America and Caribbean region, in
that we are beginning to work together, as the
representatives of Costa Rica and Jamaica have already

08-28848

pointed out. In September 2006 at San José, Costa
Rica, we held the first regional Road Safety
Stakeholders Forum, at which a significant number of
institutions — including the World Bank, the Pan
American Health Organization, the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, the
Inter-American Development Bank and the FIA
Foundation — demonstrated genuine leadership and
united to raise awareness and take action on the very
important issue of road safety. Thanks to that
collaborative effort and the leadership of those
institutions and a number of key individuals, the region
has begun to mobilize multisectoral efforts to promote
road safety in the region.
As previous speakers have mentioned, a
Transitional Commission was established following
that first meeting of key stakeholders in Costa Rica.
Nobel Peace Prize laureate President Oscar Arias
Sánchez is the honourary president of the Commission.
Members of the Transitional Commission include the
founding institutions to which I have referred and
governmental and civil society representatives from
across the region.
In December 2007, the second regional Forum of
Road Safety Stakeholders was held in Puerto Rico. A
large number of key regional officials representing
Governments and institutions met with one common
goal, namely, to reduce the number of people injured
and killed on our streets and highways. Participants
also shared a common vision: safe roads in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Along with those regional
stakeholders, Mexico has been an active participant
working towards a regional approach to road safety in
order to promote cooperation, pool resources and share
knowledge to speed up the development of national
capacities to promote road safety.
Mexico is proud to inform the General Assembly
that, for the first time in the region, two weeks ago, on
14 March, at Mérida, we held a ministerial meeting on
violence and injury prevention. That event took place
on the eve of the ninth World Conference on Injury
Prevention and Safety Promotion. Twenty-nine
countries of the Americas met at that unprecedented
meeting of health ministers to discuss the issue of both
intentional and unintentional injuries. Participating
countries agreed that additional efforts were needed to
address those major public health issues. They also
committed themselves to taking significant steps to
respond to this regional pandemic.

13

A/62/PV.87

The ministerial meeting at Mérida resulted in the
signing of the Ministerial Declaration on Violence and
Injury Prevention in the Americas by more than 24
countries. We will provide a copy of the Declaration to
the General Assembly for its records. The 24 signatory
countries committed themselves to important steps that
will help us to improve road safety in the region. Those
steps included recognizing that injuries constitute a
priority public health problem and that we need to
intensify regional prevention efforts. They also
committed themselves to develop, implement and
evaluate national injury-prevention plans, as well as to
encourage the establishment of strategic agreements
and alliances in order to develop national policies on
the prevention of injuries. Moreover, they committed
themselves to strengthening or establishing injuryprevention units within their ministries of health
offices that are endowed with appropriate budgets, staff
and authority. Signatories also agreed to strengthen
data collection efforts on injuries and to improve the
provision of health care services to victims of injuries.
Mexico worked very closely with the World
Health Organization and the Pan American Health
Organization in planning and preparing for the
ministerial conference. We would like to thank both of
them for their leadership in promoting road safety, as
well as for the ongoing technical support they provide
us.
As underscored in the draft resolution we are
debating today, Mexico is participating actively with
the World Health Organization in the preparation of the
global road safety status report now under way. Mexico
has been chosen to be part of a new effort by the World
Health Organization to develop pilot policies and
programmes aimed at preventing the needless loss of
life on the streets and roads of our planet. The World
Health Organization has received financing from the
Bloomberg Family Foundation, which will help to
significantly decrease the number of persons killed,
injured or left disabled as a result of traffic accidents.
That is an area of public health that has received very
little funding in recent years.
In order to augment the resources being provided
by the Bloomberg Family Foundation and the World
Health Organization, the Mexican Government has
decided to invest double the amount we are receiving
in the pilot programmes that have begun to operate in
four of the main cities of our country. Those
programmes are aimed at tackling such important risk

14

factors as driving while intoxicated, the use of seat
belts and child restraints in vehicles, speed control
initiatives and pedestrian road safety issues.
An unprecedented national programme on road
safety was recently launched by our Minister of Health.
Our National Centre for Injury Prevention, which I
have the honour to lead, has been granted a significant
budget and appropriate human resources to carry out
road safety initiatives at the national level. We hope to
be able to share our positive results and experiences in
the area of road safety at the 2009 global ministerial
conference.
Mexico’s Ministry of Health has demonstrated
strong support because we believe that the health
sector can contribute to improving road safety in
various ways. First of all, our public health initiatives
are focused on prevention, although we do not ignore
the areas of emergency medical treatment,
hospitalization, long-term care and rehabilitation. We
are focused on prevention. Our approach to public
health is based on science. It is an intrinsically
collaborative approach that highlights the need for a
multisectoral focus, which we hope will characterize
the first global ministerial conference on road safety
that has been proposed for November 2009 in the
Russian Federation.
Mexico strongly supports this draft resolution on
improving global road safety, which was introduced
today by the representative of Oman. We agree that we
need to build greater political will and to implement
the recommendations of the World Report on Road
Traffic Injury Prevention and the resolutions of the
General Assembly on improving global road safety.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): At the outset I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his note
transmitting the report on the implementation of
resolution 60/5, on improving global road safety
(A/62/257). I would also like to use this opportunity to
express my gratitude to the Government of the
Sultanate of Oman for taking the initiative to bring
attention to the important issue of the global road
safety crisis. He may be assured of our full support, for
no countries are immune to this modern scourge, even
islands far away from other countries.
The statistics in the report tell a grim story. Every
year, nearly 1.2 million people die in traffic accidents
and millions more are injured or disabled. Road traffic
injuries are the leading cause of death globally for

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

those between the ages of 10 and 24. That figure is
comparable to death rates from malaria or tuberculosis.
To a large extent, the solution to the problem
involves raising awareness and persuading motorists to
change their behaviour. In other words, road traffic
injuries can be prevented.
Unlike many other countries, the large majority
of road accident fatalities in Iceland do not occur in
cities. Indeed, the accident rate in built-up areas has
declined significantly over recent years, and now
statistics show that last year over 90 per cent of road
accidents in Iceland occurred in the countryside. The
concern in Iceland is that actions to reduce the number
of those severely injured in traffic accidents have failed
to show results. Studies have confirmed other findings
that attribute road accidents to a number of key factors:
speeding, driving under the influence of alcohol or
other drugs, failure to use seat belts and poor
infrastructure.
In light of this information, the Icelandic Ministry
of Transport, Communications and Municipal Affairs
has developed a four-year traffic safety plan, for the
years 2007 to 2010, which was adopted by the
Icelandic parliament in 2007 as a part of the general
transport policy plan. The main aim of the traffic safety
plan is to take action against driving under the
influence of alcohol and/or substances and against
speeding and not wearing seatbelts, as well as to
introduce measures to improve road infrastructure and
other tasks specified in the plan. The plan places
special emphasis on road safety education for all
children from preschool to 18 years of age. The aim of
the project is that the children will enjoy
comprehensive road safety education that will lay the
foundation for responsible traffic behaviour and
thereby challenge the notion that road accidents are
unavoidable.
Icelandic authorities noted with special interest
the announcement of the First United Nations Global
Road Safety Week, 23 to 29 April 2007, which was
dedicated to young road users. It was implemented in
an effective manner in Iceland, with a variety of
programmes taking place throughout the week.
Interestingly, figures showed a sharp decline in road
traffic accidents during the Road Safety Week
compared to the same week the year before, and the
same trend continued the weeks after.

08-28848

The success of the United Nations Global Road
Safety Week in Iceland was mainly due to successful
collaboration among interested parties, such as the
Government,
the
police,
non-governmental
organizations, local authorities and the media. The
United Nations initiative to organize the Road Safety
Week worldwide underlines the value and significance
of international cooperation in the area, especially with
regard to efforts to be undertaken in the developing
countries.
Iceland is proud to be a sponsor of the draft
resolution A/62/L.43 on global road safety, introduced
earlier today by my friend Ambassador Fuad Al-Hinai.
We highly value his proactive and constructive role in
bringing this important issue to the attention of the
United Nations.
Road traffic injuries continue to be an important
public health and development issue. They threaten to
undermine the development gains in many countries
and impose a huge economic burden on developing
countries. We must therefore intensify our international
efforts to raise awareness about global road safety.
Iceland warmly welcomes the offer by the
Russian Federation to host and provide the necessary
financial support for the first global high-level
conference on road safety, to be held in 2009. Such a
conference should complement national and regional
efforts to promote road safety and bring together
transport, infrastructure and health ministers. It will
play an important role in scaling up the political and
institutional response to global road safety.
Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): I would first like
to thank the Secretary-General for transmitting the
report entitled “Improving global road safety”
(A/62/257) to the General Assembly for consideration.
I would also like to thank the World Health
Organization (WHO) for preparing this report in
consultation with partners of the United Nations Road
Safety Collaboration. Our special thanks go to the
delegations of Oman and the Russian Federation for
their relentless efforts in drafting the resolution on
improving global road safety, which my delegation is
honoured to co-sponsor.
We are encouraged by the considerable
collaborative efforts that have been made at the
national, regional and international levels to address
road safety since the adoption of resolution 60/5 in
October 2005. However, we are alarmed by the report

15

A/62/PV.87

that this year road traffic injuries continue to be a
major health problem and a leading cause of death,
injury and disability around the world, with nearly
1.2 million people losing their lives and millions of
others being injured and disabled. Those injuries
constitute not only a major health concern, but are also
a threat to the hard-earned development achievements
in many countries.
The annual costs of road traffic crashes in lowand middle-income countries are estimated to be
between $65 billion and $100 billion — more than the
total amount received in development aid. The regret
here is that, as suggested by WHO, such tragic road
traffic injuries could largely have been prevented and
controlled through rational analysis and countermeasures.
Viet Nam has always been among the countries in
the spotlight whenever the issue of road traffic safety is
raised. Given its high population density, fast
urbanization process and continuously high economic
growth rates resulting in a rapid increase in the
numbers of vehicles on the road, Viet Nam’s transport
infrastructures failed to develop accordingly.
Awareness of road users remained low with
regard to observance of traffic safety legislation.
Consequently, the number of road traffic accidents
went up sharply. Official statistics showed that in 2007
there were approximately 15,000, making up 96 per
cent of traffic accidents of all types. Most deaths and
injuries occurred to people between age 15 and 49,
who account for 56 per cent of the total population and
who are the most economically active. A study by the
Asian Development Bank conducted only from an
economic perspective estimated that in 2002 and 2003,
traffic accidents in Viet Nam cost the country close to
$900 million per year.
Deeply
conscious
of
the
tremendous
consequences of road traffic accidents, especially the
links between road safety and sustainable development,
the Government of Viet Nam has attached great
importance and given high priority to the issue of road
safety. The National Strategic Plan for Traffic Safety
Improvement 2001-2010 was designed to upgrade the
transport infrastructure system; develop a legal system
relevant to ensuring traffic safety; establish a traffic
accident database; put in place information, education
and
communication
campaigns;
involve
all
governmental and non-governmental, national and

16

local organizations in road traffic safety; set up a
vehicle safety inspection system; and carry out strict
enforcement measures. A series of policies and
mechanisms have been introduced to provide
incentives for good practices and impose sanctions
against violations. The National Traffic Safety
Committee was established as the inter-agency
governmental body responsible for leading and
coordinating the implementation of national road
safety plans among various ministries and localities.
Last year saw the first United Nations Global Road
Safety Week observed in Viet Nam, with diverse
information, education and communication activities
conducted and safety regulations and law enforcement
tightened.
All those efforts combined have brought about
certain initial positive results. Here, due to time
constraints, allow me to give the Assembly just one
example of such a result: the reduction in the levels of
head trauma caused by accidents involving
motorcycles, the most popular means of personal
transport in Viet Nam.
By October 2005, Viet Nam had around
16 million registered motorcycles, or approximately
one for five people. In 2005, 70 per cent of the road
crashes involved motorcyclists, and 88 per cent of the
associated death tolls resulted from head trauma. Data
from Cho Ray Hospital, the largest hospital in the
largest and most populated city of the country, Ho Chi
Minh City, show that 85 per cent of its traffic-related
patients were motorcyclists and nearly 74 per cent of
its traffic-related hospitalizations were due to head
injuries.
Therefore safety for motorcyclists through
helmet-wearing has been considered a policy issue of
top priority by the Vietnamese Government. All
possible means, including education, publicity
campaigns, law enforcement, have been employed in
order to raise helmet-wearing levels. A real
breakthrough was made when Government resolution
No. 32 was endorsed, according to which, starting on
15 December 2007, helmet-wearing became mandatory
on all roads in Viet Nam. The three and a half months
since then represent a very short time, and I do not
have concrete figures yet about the improvement of the
traffic safety situation. However, as a witness of the
surprisingly strict observance of that resolution
throughout the country, I can assure the Assembly of

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

the visibly and significantly lower rates of deaths
among traffic accidents.
The credit for all of that goes to many players:
the Government, with its political will; the people, with
their increased awareness and improved sense of
compliance with the law; the private sector, with its
initial yet energetic involvement; and the people’s
organizations, with their innovative and flexible
participation.
Last but certainly not least, the foreign factor has
an extremely important role to play here. Over the past
years, we have worked closely with and received
valuable financial and technical assistance from many
international partners, among them the World Bank, the
Asian Development Bank, the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency and WHO, to name
but a few. Many non-governmental and civil society
organizations, including the Asia Injury Prevention
Foundation, Handicap International, the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
and its French and American member societies, have
been active in Viet Nam, bringing fruitful cooperation
and assistance to us. In the helmet-wearing campaign
alone, which I just mentioned, we have enjoyed
organic collaboration from many international
organizations and individuals, most notably the Global
Road Safety Initiative, the Asia Injury Prevention
Foundation, and movie star Michelle Yeoh, the
Goodwill Ambassador of the International Automobile
Federation.
Allow me to avail myself of this opportunity to
express the profound gratitude of the Vietnamese
Government and people to the international community
for its noteworthy contributions to addressing traffic
problems in Viet Nam. In this connection, I would also
like to express our appreciation and support to the offer
by the Government of the Russian Federation to host,
in 2009, the first global ministerial conference on road
safety, and to state that we look forward to positive
practical results from that major event.
As we look ahead, road traffic safety remains an
issue fraught with huge challenges, demanding
synergetic global efforts. We in Viet Nam are
committed to doubling our efforts in developing and
effectively implementing road safety programmes and
action plans. In doing so, we shall use the “World
report on road traffic injury prevention” and the draft
resolution on improving global road safety, to be

08-28848

adopted, I believe, by the Assembly at its current
session, as the framework within which to reach the
target of a 5 to 7 per cent reduction of deaths involving
traffic accidents by 2010, as outlined in Decision
No. 259 that our Prime Minister signed earlier this
month, on 4 March 2008. We again sincerely express
the hope that Viet Nam will continue to receive highly
needed cooperation and assistance from the
international community.
Mrs. Sahussarungsi (Thailand): I should like to
join the distinguished representatives who have spoken
before me in expressing my delegation’s appreciation
to the President for bringing the critical issue of global
road safety to the attention of the General Assembly at
its sixty-second session. I wish to commend Oman for
its long-standing dedication to global road safety. My
delegation also expresses appreciation to the
Government of the Russian Federation for taking the
lead by offering to host the very first high-level global
conference on road safety in 2009. That upcoming
high-level conference will indeed raise to new heights
the level of attention and awareness of the international
community with respect to the global road safety crisis.
This is rightfully deserved, since each year more than
1.2 million people are killed and 50 million injured on
the world’s roads.
It is my delegation’s firm belief that, despite the
devastating nature of this global epidemic, which kills
people on a scale comparable to that of malaria and
tuberculosis, road traffic deaths and injuries can be
prevented and scaled down with vigorous and sustained
efforts from all stakeholders at both the national and
international levels.
Road crashes are now the leading cause of death
worldwide for children and young people aged between
10 and 24. Alarmingly, more than half of road traffic
casualties worldwide are in the 15-44 age group, which
is the key wage-earning and child-raising group. The
World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention of
2004 projected that, by 2020, the crash death rate in
low- and middle-income countries will increase by
80 per cent if nothing substantial is done. The
multiplier effects of traffic deaths and injuries can be
disastrous and pose grave threats in terms of family
loss, human resources, and economic and social loss
for the countries as a whole. The economic burden for
developing economies from that crisis has amounted to
1 to 2 per cent of gross national product in most
countries each year. The annual cost of road traffic

17

A/62/PV.87

crashes in low-income and middle-income countries is
estimated at between $65 billion and $100 billion. That
is by no means insignificant, as those economic costs
could impact negatively on the social and economic
development efforts of many countries.
In that connection, I would like to commend the
World Health Organization (WHO) for its role as the
coordinator on road safety issues within the United
Nations system. The Secretary-General’s report in
document A/62/257, prepared by WHO, captures well
the progress made in improving global road safety in
various aspects, particularly the collaboration between
the United Nations regional commissions and other
United Nations agencies and international partners to
implement General Assembly resolutions 58/289 and
60/5, as well as the recommendations contained in the
World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention. Other
important and useful deliberations include the launch
of numerous awareness campaigns and advocacy
activities and the development of good-practice guides
on road traffic injury data collection and research. Such
multi-stakeholder participation and measures will
promote great success in our efforts to overcome the
global road safety crisis.
Thailand attaches great importance to the issue of
road safety and witnesses the loss of precious lives
each day. In 2003, road crashes in Thailand accounted
for 14,012 deaths and 79,692 injuries. The death toll
and injuries peaked during the annual new year
holidays in January and during Songkran, the
traditional Thai new year holidays, in April. The
majority of those injured are motorcyclists. About
30 per cent of road traffic crashes are alcohol-related.
The issue of road safety is therefore high on our
national agenda. The Road Safety Operation Centre
headed by the Deputy Prime Minister was established
in 2003 as the lead agency to oversee and coordinate
the efforts of various sectors on road safety in an
integrated manner to prevent and reduce road crashes
and to raise road safety standards through the
implementation of Thailand’s national strategy on road
safety.
The strategy encompasses the “five E’s”
components: first, law enforcement; secondly,
engineering focused on improving road conditions;
thirdly, educational information and participation;
fourthly, emergency medical services; and fifthly,
evaluation. The Centre also plans and implements the
plan of action and encourages cooperation from

18

Government
agencies,
private
organizations,
non-governmental organizations and civil society. The
successful key deliberations include the “Do Not Drink
and Drive” campaign, a campaign to encourage
wearing safety helmets, imposing mandatory
requirements for wearing safety belts and enforcing
speed limits, and engaging community participation in
public education and awareness. Through relentless
efforts from all sides, the number of deaths from road
injury per year fell from 14,012 in 2003 to 12,492 in
2007, and the number of casualties during the
Songkran festival holidays fell dramatically from 848
deaths and 52,058 injuries to only 361 deaths and
4,805 injuries in 2007.
Thailand believes that cooperation at the regional
and international levels on global road safety can
contribute greatly to the success of our common cause.
For that reason, Thailand has participated in and acted
upon recommendations from many forums, including
the United Nations resolutions, the World Report on
Road Traffic Injury Prevention, the ministerial
declaration on improving road safety in Asia and the
Pacific, as well as the Phnom Penh ministerial
declaration on road safety in the countries of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Thailand proclaimed 2004 as the Year of Road
Safety and organized various activities to complement
the WHO’s global road safety campaign. In April 2007,
Thailand organized United Nations Road Safety Week,
with a focus on young road users. Moreover, Thailand
joined other Asian Cooperation Dialogue (ACD)
members in commemorating ACD Road Safety Day on
25 April 2007, which also complemented the United
Nations Road Safety Week campaign. At the regional
level, ASEAN has developed the five-year ASEAN
Regional Road Safety Strategy and Action Plan (20052010), which will strengthen cooperation in the region
and promote the safer use of roads.
For many countries, the lack of financial
resources is a major obstacle to their efforts to increase
road safety. Mobilizing resources is a challenge that
requires greater attention from the international
community. In that regard, Thailand welcomes the
progress of the Global Road Safety Facility set up in
2006 under the World Bank, which has already
received funding from many sources to support road
safety implementation.

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

In conclusion, while global road safety remains a
challenge, considerable progress has been achieved at
the national and international levels. It is both a public
health and a development issue, so it requires
concerted efforts from all sectors of society and the
world community as a whole to tackle and help make
the use of roads safer for all.
Mr. Nikitov (Ukraine): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to align itself with the statement
made earlier by the delegation of Slovenia on behalf of
the European Union.
We would like to thank the Secretariat for the
report of the Secretary-General submitted under agenda
item 46, “Global road safety crisis”, which provides an
update on the status of implementation of the
recommendations made in General Assembly
resolution 60/5 on improving global road safety.
Ukraine hopes that the collaborative advocacy
efforts recently made at the international level have
served to increase awareness about road safety at the
national and international levels.
Rapid industrial development, based on progress
in technologies, is a characteristic feature of the
development that the world has seen in the last few
decades. Undoubtedly, the development of the
engineering industry is also a characteristic feature of
world development. As a result, the stock of cars in the
world is constantly growing.
The positive effects of this process on the
development of society are indisputable. However, it
also brings a substantial level of danger. As the use of
different means of transportation becomes more
widespread, the potential for human and material
losses due to accidents increases.

global problems of road safety are often missing as a
priority public health issue in either national or
regional policies. Limited investment in road
infrastructure also contributes to the increase in the
number of deaths and injuries resulting from road
accidents.
Therefore, we call on all involved parties to
expedite technical and financial assistance to
strengthen and improve cooperation in the area of road
safety, taking into account the needs of those most at
risk. The development of a robust road infrastructure
can also ensure wider employment opportunities,
training of staff and public health improvement. It will
increase the level of foreign investment in the
economy.
Turning to my country specifically, Ukraine is
facing the many challenges and threats of the global
road safety crisis. Recently we have observed a
significant increase in road traffic injuries as a result of
road accidents. I would like to inform the Assembly
that in response to this threat the President of Ukraine,
Mr. Victor Yushchenko, and the Government of my
country have initiated legislation designed to minimize
the number of road accidents and to reduce injuries and
loss of human life.
We will continue to spare no effort in increasing
the level of responsibility for violations of traffic rules
and regulations and in establishing an effective State
system on improving road safety. In this regard,
Ukraine welcomes the relevant provisions of the draft
resolution before us (A/62/L.43), and, as one of its
sponsors,
looks
forward
to
its
effective
implementation, especially at the level of the United
Nations regional commissions.

Deaths as a result of car accidents and road traffic
injuries constitute a significant and increasing threat to
the health of the world’s population. Until now, road
safety has not been part of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) or the Millennium
Declaration and often has not been included in the
programmes for sustainable economic development.

Mr. Sen (India): We thank the Secretary-General
for his note transmitting the comprehensive and useful
report of the World Health Organization (WHO) on the
global road safety crisis (A/62/257), prepared in
accordance with resolution 60/5 of 26 October 2005.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
delegation of Oman for its continuous efforts in
support of this agenda item.

There are obvious obstacles to achieving and
maintaining road traffic safety regimes. The low
technical capacities in many countries and the lack of
qualified specialists in this area slow down the
development and introduction of effective strategies
and programmes regarding road safety. As a result,

India attaches great importance to addressing the
problem of road traffic safety. India has one of the
largest road networks in the world, spanning more than
3.3 million kilometres. Road traffic has been increasing
by more than 10 per cent per annum since the turn of
the century. In addition, the share of road traffic in

08-28848

19

A/62/PV.87

total traffic has been growing steadily — currently,
65 per cent of freight and 86 per cent of passenger
traffic is carried by road. Compounding the problem is
the fact that, while our national highways constitute
only about 2 per cent of the road network, they carry
40 per cent of the total road traffic, resulting in heavy
traffic density.

WHO report correctly highlights the importance of
facilitating international cooperation in this regard.
Developing countries are the worst affected by the
impact of road accidents and the imperative for
increasing international cooperation to assist
developing countries to effectively address issues of
road safety cannot be overemphasized.

India is also conscious of the serious
development and national health impact of road
accidents. India has been working actively to enhance
road safety and to reduce the adverse consequences of
traffic accidents. As the WHO report recommends,
India already has a lead agency on road safety issues.
The Department of Road Transport and Highways of
India has been entrusted with the responsibility for
formulating policies for road safety. It develops road
safety standards in the form of a national policy on
road safety and by preparing and implementing the
annual road safety plan. Further, it collects, compiles
and analyses road accident statistics and takes steps
towards the development of a road safety culture in the
country by organizing various awareness campaigns in
collaboration with civil society.

Issues of capacity-building, technical assistance,
exchange of best practices, advocacy and awarenessraising are some of the areas where greater cooperation
is required, taking into account the needs of developing
countries. In this regard, we commend the efforts of
WHO and the United Nations regional commissions,
particularly the Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific.

India believes that there are three aspects of road
safety — engineering, enforcement and education, or
“the three Es” — and is taking action on all three
aspects. A special Committee on Road Safety and
Traffic Management was set up and its report is being
examined. India has joined the 1998 Agreement of the
World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle
Regulations in order to adopt international best
practices in safety regulations of motor vehicles.
Smart-card-based driving licences and vehicle
registration certificates are now being issued in many
parts of the country. Old laws and regulations are being
reviewed and updated.
Extensive public awareness campaigns, involving
non-governmental
organizations
and
other
stakeholders, are organized periodically. Annual Road
Safety Weeks are organized, with the nineteenth Road
Safety Week being held recently from 1 to 7 January
2008 under the theme “Drive to care! Not to dare!”
Awards are being given every year to institutions and
individuals who have done commendable work in the
field of road safety.
While many of the issues relating to enhancement
of road safety and efforts to reduce road safety injuries
are best tackled by national and local authorities, the

20

Mobilization of financial resources to assist
efforts of developing countries is also crucial. While
the WHO report identifies some funding facilities,
these are far from commensurate with the magnitude of
the problem and need to be scaled up urgently,
particularly with regard to country programme support.
We also need to be cognizant of the fact that it is not
always feasible to universalize standards that may have
been developed in one region, and specific
circumstances in various parts of the world must
therefore be taken into account.
Given this scenario, we strongly support calls for
an international conference on global road safety under
the auspices of the United Nations in order to enhance
international cooperation in this important field. We
warmly welcome and thank the Government of the
Russian Federation for its initiative in hosting and
financing the first global high-level (ministerial)
conference on road safety in 2009. We hope that this
initiative will provide the necessary impetus towards
the holding of a United Nations conference on global
road safety in the future.
Before concluding, I would like to express our
satisfaction that the United Nations Road Safety
Collaboration is “walking the talk” by improving the
fleet safety within the organizations that are
participants in this Collaboration, including the United
Nations. This is an innovative approach that could
perhaps be adopted by large corporations.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): We are very
grateful for this opportunity to add our voice in today’s
debate on this very special and crucial item. At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

transmitting the report contained in document
A/62/257, on the issue of global road safety. We would
also like to commend the efforts made by the
Permanent Missions of Oman and the Russian
Federation in the preparation of the draft resolution
(A/62/L.43) on global road safety. My country very
much appreciates the opportunity provided to us to join
the list of sponsors of the draft resolution.
We are very concerned that the rates of injury and
death caused by traffic accidents are rising in many
countries and leading to deaths among people in the
most productive age groups. Statistics showing that
there are more than 1 million deaths and 50 million
injuries annually as a result of traffic accidents led us
to address this problem at the international level
alongside such issues as the HIV/AIDS pandemic and
the question of victims of armed conflict. However,
despite the ominous statistics, there is a solution to this
problem. Many countries have successfully overcome
it by allocating more resources for the improvement of
infrastructure.
Some
interventions
require
governmental commitment alone — such as the
promulgation of relevant legislation pertaining to
personal responsibility for safe driving.
Kazakhstan fully shares the global concern about
the road safety crisis. We welcome the draft resolution
before the Assembly, which would lay a foundation for
further concerted actions by the international
community to decrease the death toll on the roads.
Our most recent national statistics are alarming.
In 2007, almost 24,000 people were the victims of
traffic accidents. Almost 4,500 persons died, and about
19,000 were injured. All five of the risk factors
referred to in the draft resolution contributed to those
terrible statistics. Our vast territory, small population
and uneven distribution of settlements — which makes
maintaining infrastructure incredibly expensive —
constitute additional negative factors.
Nevertheless, in his annual message to the people
of Kazakhstan, President Nursultan Nazarbayev
identified the development of road infrastructure and
the introduction of global road standards as priority
goals. The Government of Kazakhstan recently adopted
a national transportation strategy for the period 20062015 that includes an allocation of $26 billion in the
budget to improve road infrastructure.
We are also undertaking some measures to
combat the negative consequences of road accidents.

08-28848

Legislation to strengthen accountability for unsafe
driving and to improve the system of emergency care is
currently being revised by the Parliament of
Kazakhstan. Moreover, our country has established
partnerships with such entities as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe. Those
partnerships allow us to learn about successful
experiences and best practices.
We would like to express our full support for the
draft resolution, whose provisions are in line with
Kazakhstan’s commitment to making road safety a
contributing factor in our country’s sustainable
development. We also welcome the decision of the
Russian Federation to host, and provide the necessary
financial support for, the first global high-level
ministerial conference on road safety.
Ms. Carter-Foster (United States of America):
Every year, 1.2 million people around the world die on
the roads — over 3,000 each day, a toll comparable to
that of malaria or tuberculosis — and 30 to 50 million
are left injured and/or disabled. Most of those deaths
and disabilities occur in developing countries, where
the losses take a significant toll on familial and
national incomes, reduce gross domestic product by
1 per cent or more and exceed the funds received in
development assistance.
Losses due to road traffic injuries are
preventable. We should not take them for granted and
we should not accept road crashes and their associated
costs in human lives as the price we pay for mobility or
for economic growth and development. In the words of
the theme of the 2007 United Nations Global Road
Safety Week, “Road safety is no accident”.
The United States supports this draft resolution
(A/62/L.43), which calls for a ministerial conference
on global road safety to raise global awareness and to
elevate the issue of road traffic deaths and injuries and
their associated costs to an international dialogue on
specific actions all nations can take to minimize this
scourge around the world. Our nation has already done
much in support of the recommendations contained in
the World Report on Road Traffic Injury Prevention,
and we will continue to do more.
We have learned much through the years, in terms
of both human and technological advancements,
enabling us to reduce road injuries and deaths. Yet each
year 43,000 lives are lost on our nation’s roads.

21

A/62/PV.87

Through human and technological advancements, we
have learned much about effective strategies to prevent
crashes and reduce road injuries and deaths. We are
willing to share those lessons with others who might
benefit from our experiences in the United States and
around the world.

indiscipline and dangerous behaviour of users, all
increase the risks of human failing. Furthermore,
inadequate income leads to overuse and poor
maintenance of vehicles. Those are some of the factors
that greatly increase the risk of serious accidents in
countries of the South, like Benin.

Achievements in reducing road traffic deaths will
not come easily or quickly. It has taken the United
States decades to curb the rise in motor vehicle deaths,
which peaked in the late 1960s. It took time to build
safer roads and cars and to educate and train drivers
and pedestrians. United States Government agencies
such as the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and, most recently, the State Department
have worked to advance the progress of global road
safety efforts. In addition, non-government efforts, as
exemplified by the work of active and passionate
non-governmental
organizations,
have
been
instrumental in raising support for this issue.

Additionally, the chances of surviving a serious
car accident, one requiring urgent intervention, are
almost nil in certain countries like mine. That is due in
particular to the distance to hospitals, the absence of
any on-the-ground rapid response mechanisms, the lack
of qualified staff and many other aggravating
circumstances, which combine to seal the fate of
victims of road accidents.

Road safety impacts health, commerce,
transportation and trade. It is an important economic
development issue as well as a global safety concern. A
ministerial conference will set into motion the
collaboration needed by Governments, together with
the international community and including partners in
the non-governmental and private sectors, to reduce
deaths and injuries on the roads. Under the leadership
of the World Health Organization — working closely
with health, transport, education and other national
ministries, as well as the private sector — working
cooperatively, we can achieve greater success, to be
measured in thousands of lives saved.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President for
convening today’s meeting on improving global road
safety in order to take up the very informative report
(A/62/257) transmitted by the Secretary-General. This
is an important issue that affects the lives of people in
every country in the world. Road traffic engenders
dangers, particularly the accidents and the resulting
injuries.
In Benin, the state of the transportation
infrastructure, particularly the roads, quickly causes
wear and tear on vehicles. Irregular and inadequate
road signs and failure to meet technical standards for
the often dilapidated vehicles, along with lack of
respect for basic rules of the road due to the

22

Traffic on inter-State roads takes a heavy toll
among those who live alongside them. Innumerable
lives have been torn apart by the endless stream of
vehicles in transit.
Improving mobility for people and goods is an
essential element of our national growth strategy for
reducing poverty, adopted by the Government of Benin
last April. It includes a national strategy for improving
road traffic safety. The Government means to ensure
the proper maintenance of existing road networks, but
also to improve the management of road safety and to
protect against damage caused by traffic, taking into
account noise, air pollution and physical risk for the
users. We also seek to strengthen environmental
management and road safety through improved
policing of risky behaviour.
One can only welcome the attention that the
United Nations Development Group is giving to
improving road traffic safety. That is an area where
cooperation among the transport, health and safety
sectors can efficiently help to reduce the risks faced by
road users and promote accident and injury prevention,
as well as the treatment of injuries, as necessary.
Beyond awareness-raising activities, particular
attention should be given to promoting the necessary
investment to improve transportation infrastructure and
to strengthen the capacities of the health sector to deal
with emergency services and treat injuries. It is clear
that the implementation of a strict traffic control policy
by the security services is of crucial importance in
developing countries like Benin.
In this regard, we should welcome the creation by
the World Bank of the Global Road Safety Facility,

08-28848

A/62/PV.87

whose objective is to reduce death and injury from
road accidents in low- or middle-income countries such
as my own. We welcome the efforts by countries
contributing to this Facility and invite those that have a
vehicle-manufacturing industry to make regular
contributions.

This problem calls for local, national and
international leaders to adopt proactive road safety
measures, so that the increasing human mobility should
not come at the expense of human life itself. Such
measures can be effective only if backed by the
necessary political, social and economic capital.

The question of financing this Facility must be
examined as an essential issue at the high-level
conference on road safety. It would be important that
particular attention be given to road traffic in
developing countries as part of an integrated approach
to defining effective strategies for the promotion of
road safety. Equally important would be defining the
functional mechanisms for mobilizing the resources
required for the implementation of those strategies.

While technical measures are necessary to
address road safety, focus must also be given to the
human factor. People are prone to blame traffic
accidents on poor infrastructure, equipment or road
conditions. However, an overwhelming majority of
vehicular accidents and deaths are linked directly to
driver behaviour, such as excessive speed, aggressive
driving, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
and various forms of distraction.

My delegation aligns itself with the draft
resolution before the Assembly. We hope that its
adoption and implementation will allow us to ensure
the proper preparation and success of the world
conference planned for Moscow in 2009.

Moreover, not only drivers, but also pedestrians
should observe road safety rules and exercise due
concern and care for others on the road.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer for the Holy See.
Mr. Swanepoel (Holy See): My delegation would
like to thank the delegation of Oman for its leadership
on this important issue and the Russian Federation for
its generous offer to host a high-level meeting on road
safety next year.
Human mobility and the transport of goods date
back to the earliest periods of human history. The
advent of new technologies has ushered in an everincreasing national and international movement of
peoples and goods. At the core of this phenomenon is
the human person, for whom, as an inherently social
being, roads and vehicles are not merely means for
transporting goods, but are a vital element for fostering
greater social interaction across boundaries.
Nowadays road safety impacts not only peoples
in the developed world; it touches all, regardless of
geographic location or economic status. Unfortunately,
this global increase in movement has been
accompanied by a sad rise in vehicle-related accidents,
causing property damage, injuries and deaths. The fact
that over 3,000 people die every day and that a trafficrelated injury occurs nearly every six seconds
demonstrates how the need for greater road safety has
become an issue of international concern.

08-28848

As far back as 1956 and as recently as last year’s
document on road safety, the Holy See has constantly
sought to educate drivers and other road users on their
obligations and moral responsibilities, calling on them
to respect traffic rules, observe speed limits, wear seat
belts, avoid alcohol and, indeed, to take all road safety
precautions.
My delegation welcomes the adoption of this
resolution and looks forward to further discussions of
this topic. We offer assurances of the Holy See’s
continued commitment to help improve road safety
around the world.
The Acting President: In accordance with the
resolution 49/2 of 19 October 1994, I now call on the
observer for the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Schulz (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): It has been ten
years now since the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) devoted a
special chapter of its annual World Disasters Report to
road safety. That was the first international warning to
be issued, the first time that anyone had said to the
nations of the world: be aware, we are facing a major
new public health crisis that will very rapidly assume
the proportions of a disaster unless drastic, coordinated
action is taken immediately.
Today, in 2008, road crashes rank up there with
tuberculosis and malaria as major killers in global

23

A/62/PV.87

terms and are the leading cause of death among people
aged between 15 and 50, mainly in low- and middleincome countries. That is in spite of the fact that the
most important measures that need to be taken are
widely known. They are freely accessible and can be
downloaded from the Internet. They are presented in
the “World report on road traffic injury prevention”.
The question then is: why is progress not being made,
as would seem imperative?
To start with, there is the fact that a lack of
reliable data implies that the magnitude of the problem
remains vastly underestimated and, besides human
tragedy, the costs to societies and economies remain
largely uncalculated. It is not just a question of new
roads and new vehicles; it is also essential to ensure
that roads incorporate safety features and that road
users behave responsibly. Countries that have managed
to lower road mortality have all done so by
implementing the measures outlined in the world
report.

International advocacy for road safety has been
making good progress since 2004, and this debate is
evidence of some success. However, with rare
exceptions, thus far donor countries have not included
road safety in their international strategies for
development cooperation, even though they consider it
a priority challenge at home. There is certainly much
room for change in that respect.
The Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies and
their millions of volunteers are often the first to arrive
on the scene of a road accident and to assist the
victims. As witnesses, we urge all Governments to take
the magnitude of this problem very seriously and to
join in partnership to reverse the current deadly trend.
We highly commend the Sultanate of Oman for its
leadership in drafting this year’s draft resolution on
global road safety and very much appreciate and fully
support the idea of holding a global inter-ministerial
conference on road safety, to be hosted by the Russian
Federation next year.

It is those emergency measures, effective in any
context, that we have set forth in a “Practical Guide on
Road Safety: a Toolkit for National Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies”. That Practical Guide, which is
referenced in paragraph 19 of the report on improving
global road safety (A/62/257), will help not only the
National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, but
also the wider civil society in its work with the
Government in order to scale up efforts to further
improve road safety. The guide was jointly produced
with the Global Road Safety Partnership, which is
based at our IFRC Secretariat in Geneva.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.

That Practical Guide is a tool for action. It gives
20 clear recommendations and is available to the world
through the Internet in four languages on the
Federation’s
website:
www.ifrc.org.
It
also
acknowledges and commends the efforts undertaken by
the United Nations family to address the problem,
particularly the creation of the United Nations Road
Safety Collaboration, led by WHO, in which the IFRC
is also a partner.

I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.

Following that publication, we are now moving,
with the Global Road Safety Partnership, towards a
second phase, which will involve regional workshops
around the world. The first will be in Doha in mid-May
2008. That will also emphasize the special role
National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies can
play as auxiliaries to their public authorities.

24

The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/62/L.43, entitled “Improving global road
safety”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since its
introduction, the following countries have become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Andorra, Cape Verde, China,
Estonia, Kazakhstan, Mexico, Moldova, Montenegro,
Romania, Sri Lanka and Zambia.

Mr. Alves (Brazil): Brazil would like to join
other delegations and also sponsor this important
resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/62/L.43?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
62/244).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 46?
It was so decided.
The meeting was adjourned at 12.50 p.m.

08-28848
