more
ch he
e has
laced
1 the
have
r 1he
Uieir
iOld

UNITED

J’

NATIONS

SECURITY

IO be

OFFICIAL
with
I1 of
two
1 the
al to

RECORDS

THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

:gitiIIlsCS

rrent
have
It alt

i and
nian

2042””

MEETING:

NEW

28 OCTOBER

1977

YORK

e of
just

CONTENTS

51, I

rhillf

ivith
I the
:ting
dlcr

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2042)

Adoptioll

of the agenda

, . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . .. .
. . . . . . .

pay

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

The question of Sout11 Africsl :
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent Rt’presentative of Tunisia to
the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)
,,........,..,.,.~...,..,......~..,,.........

1

qpv.2042

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions Of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2042ND
Held in New York on Friday,

MEETING
28 October

President: Mr. Rikhi JAIPAL (India).

1977, at 10.30 a.m.

of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.

3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite the representatives of Ghana,
Mauritania, Somalia and the Sudan to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table when they wish to address the
Council.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2042)
1. Adoption of the agenda.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Boaten (Ghana),
Mr. Hussein
(Somalia)
and
Mr. Kane (Mauritania),
Mr. Medani (Sudan) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2420).

4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter dated 26 October
from the Chairman of the Special Committee against
Apartheid, Mr, Leslie 0. Harriman, which reads as follows:

The meeting was called to order at Il. 20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

“I have the honour as Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid to request the opportunity
to participate in the meeting of the Security Council
devoted to the question of South Africa under the terms
of rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.”

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Councit (S/12420)

5. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other appropriate United
Nations bodies in connexion with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. It seems appropriate for me,
therefore, if there is no objection, to extend an invitation,
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to the
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with decisions taken
by the Council at its earlier meetings, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Guinea, Guyana,
Lesotho, the Niger, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Togo,
Tunisia, the United Republic of Cameroon and Viet Nam to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Harriman (Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid) took the
place reserved for him at the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria),
Mr. Tlou (Botswana), Mr. Camara (Guinea), Mr. Jackson
(Guyana), Mr. Molapo (Lesotho), Mr. Poisson (Niger),
Mr. Garba (Nigeria),
Mr. Baroody
(Saudi
Arabia),
Mr. Kamara (Senegal), Mr. Kodjov f (Togo), Mr. Mestiri
(Tunisia), Mr. Oyono (United Republic of Cameroon) and
Mr. Dinh Ba Thi (Viet Nam) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber

6. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw the attention of
members to document S/l 2427, which contains the text of
a letter dated 27 October from the Permanent Represcntative of China to the Secretary-General.
7. The first speaker is the representative of the United
Republic of Cameroon. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

2. The PRESIDENT: Letters have been received from the
representatives of Ghana, Mauritania, Somalia and the
Sudan, requesting that they should be invited to participate
in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In
accordance with usual practice, I propose, with the consent

8. Mr. OYONO [United Republic of Cameroon) (inferpretation from flench): As other speakers have stressed
1

very nature which is intrinsically perverse.Thus,in addition
to illegal arrests and detentions of nationalist leadersand
their extermination in South African prisons,there have
beenassassinations
of pregnantwomen and children under
four years of age.

before mc, the debate which is currently taking place in the
Security Council was inaugurated over two decades ago,
Mr. President, by your country, India, whose anticolonialist and anti-aparthei(l policy has inspired so many
freedom fighters. The fact that this debate is taking place
under your presidency is certainly, for Africa and for all
peace-loving people, a factor of hope and a promise of
success for the deliberations of the Council.

16. That is why a people-regardedascrushedby centuries
of repression-which in the past had limited itself to
grumbling and complaining has now turned to desperate
revolt. The name of Soweto will from now on resoundasa
cry of anger from a peoplethat is determinedto reconquer
its dignity and freedom and to face, even empty handed,an
army of hangmen abundantly equipped with the most
sophisticatedweapons.

9. I need not recall all the fact here: the world press has
mentioned them in recent days and they amply justify the
request by the Chairman of the Group of African States,
the representative of Tunisia, for an urgent resumption of
the consideration of this problem. Suffice it only for me to
recall the moving and detailed statement delivered by our
brother, David Sibeko, Director for Foreign Affairs of the
Pan Africanist Congress of Azania, on 24 October last in
this roam/2036th meeting].

17. Need one be a prophet to predict that sucha situation
can lead only to a blood-bath? Can anyone really believe
that such an explosion of violence can continue without
endangeringpeaceand security in that part of the world?
That is why, in its resolution 31/6 D of 9 November1976,
the General Assembly requestedthe Security Council to
take urgent action under ChapterVII of the Charterand to
call for the application of military and economicsanctions
againstSouth Africa.

10. Mr. President, 1 thank you most sincerely, as well as
other membersof the Council, for having allowed me to
take the floor in these circumstancesfor the purpose01
expressingonce againthe seriousconcern felt by the United
Republic of Cameroon over the tragic deterioration of the
situation in southern Africa, and particularly in Azania.

18. We deeply deplore the Council’s inability to endorse
unanimously a resolution that could have ensured the
implementation of vigorous measures.
The negativevote 0f
three permanent members can be interpreted only as
encouragingPretoria not to changeits attitude of arrogance
and systematicnon-co-operation.

11. For centuries, a group of white adventurers at
Pretoria. having installed themselvesby force of armsand
devised, for the purpose of establishingand maintaining
their domination, a system of government and a political
philosophy which advocatesthe denial of all humandignity
to the millions upon millions of men whom they have
subjugated.

19. It is obvious that Vorster’s contempt for the unanimouscondemnations of the international community can
be explained only by his complete assurancethat he call
always count on being able to act with total impunity.
Indeed, does he not regard himself as the indispensable
bulwark in the southern part of our continent againstthe
socalled cncmies of the Western world, and doeshe not
believe that, for that reason,and since South Africa is il
Powerbelongingto that sameWesternworld, he canbe sure
of its solidarity or, more correctly, of its complicity, 110
matter what happens?

12. Need I recall that 17 long years have passedsincethe
Sharpeville massacres,which revealedto the world in all its
horrors the evil effects of that atrocious policy which has
nothing to learn from Hitler’s nazism? For 17 years the
Security Council hasbeenconsideringthis questionwithout
having been able to compel the racist leadersof Pretoriato
abandontheir degradingpolicy oTaparfheid.
13. It would obviously be unfair not to recognisethe
value of the anti-ujzzrtlzeid measuresand campaignundertaken by the international community- by States, by
specialisedagenciesand by the General Assembly We riced
only cite as proof of this the last two conferencesheld,
respectively, at Maputo and Lagos,with a view to awakcning international opinion as much aspossibleto the evilsof
that terrorist rCgimeand which resulted in the adoption of
a plan of action that will undoubtedly be effective if it is
resolutely applied.

20. The survival of the Pretoria rkgime and the cynical
persistence of racist Vorster in his ignoble policy 0f
aparfhcid
are entirely the result of the close political,
economic, military and other ties that certain States
Membersof the Organization havewith him.
21, South Africa prides itself on being a military Power
because,in the first place,it is so regardedby ~~OSC who,
disregardingthe reiterated appealsof the GeneralAssembly,
have equipped it with tnassive amounts of the most
sophisticatedweapons, to the point of elevating it t0 the
rank of a nuclear Power.

14. But the wave of repressive measuresthat has just
engulfed the people of South Africa clearly showsthat the
time for condemnationsand the expressionof pioushopes
haspassedand that if the Security Council truly wishesto
play the role assignedto it by the Charter it must finally
envisagethe adoption of more decisiveaction.

22. The reaction of the world to the most recentviolent
actions by Vorster seemto confirm that there hasbeen a
changeof attitude on the part of the countriesthat hitherto
had maintained that a dialogue with Pretoria was still
possible.

15. There is no longer any form of violence or abuse
which the Pretoria minority racist rCgimedoesnot use,not
only becausethis crushesany possibility of opposition but
also, and simply, becauseit is comnletely in accord with its
2

23. Speaking to the General Assembly on 13 October His
Excellency, Mr. Jean Keutcha, my Minister for Foreign
Affairs, said:

29. After the risingsat Soweto,put downin a blood-bath,
and the premeditateddeath of SteveBiko, Vorster andhis
clique have just thrown down a new challengeto the
international community. Indeed, in recent weeksSouth
Africa hasbeenthe sceneof gravedevelopments
which have
beencondemnednot only by someSouth African opinion
but even by those who, by force of circumstances,had
become accustomedto seeingin that country merely a
Passingmanifestationof a phenomenonthat would naturally disappear.The proponentsof apartheid, borne away
by the wind of history which makesmad those whom it
would destroy, stopat nothingtoday in order to stifle once
againthe few liberal movementsthat had been tolerated
and that would not accept barbarismand fascism,in a
word, apartheid raisedinto an institutional system.The
banningof 18 anti-apartheidorganizations,of the African
daily The World, the arrestanddetention without trial of
49 black leaders,the restrictivemeasures,
includinghouse
arrest, of white persons,including an editor and a clergyman, representthe clearestpossibleproof that nothing can
now stopthe menof Pretoria.

“We have followed with interest the efforts made
by . . . five Powers, even though any dialogue with men
who are racists to the core now seems to us to be a vain
hope.“’
Only 15 days later, events have proved how right he was.
24. It seems, then, that the Council has no recourse but to
adopt the draft resolutionswhich have beensubmittedby
the African membersand which include a truly minimum
numberof measures
likely to makeVorster understandthat
all those who have the task of safeguardinginternational
peace and security are genuinely determinedto preventthe
explosionof a crisiswhoseviolencewill be in proportion to
the great bitterness that has been accumulatingfor tenturies. Moreover, these draft resolutionsmeet the expectations of the international community, as expressedin
resolution3l/6 D, to which I referred a momentago.
25. My delegation is convinced that the Council is duty
bound to take a decision going beyond a simplearms
embargo-which would be a waste of time---sinceSouth
Africa is now manufacturing, under licence, all kinds of
weapons,aircraft, military helicopters, armouredvehicles,
spareparts, light weapons,logistical equipment, and so
forth, which it needs.The Council’sdecisionmust provide
for strict economic sanctionsagainstthe Pretoria regime.
Any recommendation,any threat, any platonic condemnation will only be ridiculed by and offer encouragementto
the supportersof apartheid.

30. The nearly universalalarm over thesedevelopments
comesrather late in the day. We saw the birth of the
system;we sawit growup; it wasgivenall the nourishment
neededto hastenits growth to maturity andpower; today,
peopleare becomingalarmed.This is strangelyreminiscent
of the history of nazism.Perhapsin the nearfuture we shall
seethe world, all illusionsfinally lost, taking up armsand
fighting asit had to do 40 yearsago.But how is the world
to bc strippedof its illusions.thussavingnot only precious
time but alsothe many humanlives that aresacrificedand
the humiliationsinflicted on a whole race? How arc we to
26. My delegationis alsoawarethat an econotnicembargo break the chain of hatred and death which has,been
strictly observedby all Member States would entail sonic elevatedinto an institutionalsystem?Africa and the world
real sacrificefor someof them. But we must remind them can brook no further delay. We have the proof that
dyed-in-the-woolracismis totally immoral.It bowsto no
that, if their procrastination continues and leadsto the
convention and, secretingits own venom, feeding on its
explosion of a violent crisis, the risks they will run will
most probably be much greater. Finally, we are convinced own crazed rush to destruction, it will be incapableof
that the preservationof peace,the defenceof freedomand stopping until the day when the whole world, at last
the struggle to safeguard human dignity--and all these understandingthe true intentionsof the monster,resolves
purposesare inscribedin letters of gold in the Charter-are to cut off its head.
more important than any material considerations.That is
why millions laid down their lives sonic 30 years ago. 31. The measuresfor which Vorster proudly assumes
responsibilityarenot new.They are dictated by a devious
Indeed,it wasthis noble causethat led to the birth of the
policy, which robesitself now in the principlesof antiOrganization.
communism,now in hypocritical huesof democracy,but
27. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the reprcsen- which deceivesonly thosewho wish to be deceived.For,
dative of the Niger. I invite him to take a place at the
after alI, how can one possiblybelievethat the Pretoria
Counciltable andto makehis statement.
crew arecapablefor aninstant of democraticfeeling?Social
democracyalsohad the samecolorationandin Germanyat
28. Mr. POISSON (Niger) (interpr’etatiorz ./km I’rc%~h):
the time did not fail to trumpet its admiration for
Mr. President,I shouldfirst of all like to congratulateyou
everything
that meantjustice and peace.At that time no
on the onerous task that you have been performing for
one wasconcernedwith examiningthe realmeaningof that
almosta month now asPresidentof the Security Council. justiceand of the peacewantedby Hitler. Perhapsthat was
Your country is a living symbol of democracy and of
‘the tactic that madeit possiblefor nazismto ripen it1 the
respectfor life. In your capacity asPresidentYOUare,with
sun of cowardice.Many leaders,by inadvertenceasit were,
your long and universally recognizedtradition of wisdom,a
accepted the good faith of the Nazi leaders.Meeting
living example of democracywhich we all much admire.1
followed meeting,alwaysalongthe line of retreat. until the
shouldalso like to thank the membersof the Councilfor
final consummationcameat Munich. Today, history seems
agreeingto give me their attention for the brief statement to be repeatingitself with minorvariations.
that I shallmakeon behalf of my delegation.
32. Is it not causefor astonishmentthat these same
nations, yesterday the victims of nazism,should today

1 Ofjkial
Recojyfs of’ the C;enetxl Assenrhl)!, Thir1.Psecond SW
sion, Plenary Meetings, 33rd meeting, para. 230.
3

outrage at recent events we at last feel some relief. The
boots of those who have taken sadistic pleasure in crushing
the black majority in Azania are beginning to trouble their
sleep and their conscience. There is unquestionably progress, which we hasten to welcome, while expressing the
hope that this progress will become more rapid so that the
death knell of the Fascist regime of southern Africa may be
tolled and finally the proud people of Azania may recover
its homeland and its human dignity.

show a reprehensible tolerance of a similar regime’? Is one
to believe that freedom, by changing context, has also
changed its meaning? Is one to believe that oppression and
State terrorism are hated and combatted, only according to
who the victim is, and not because of their inhuman and
anti-democratic essence? Whom are they trying to fool?
Can one fight epartheid by forging and consolidating its
economy, by arming its defenders? Africa has listened
patiently to the declarations of good intentions which are
contradicted every day by the deeds and by the gestures of
their authors.

38. The fight being waged by our brothers in Azania can
only culminate in the complete liberation of that last
bastion of colonialism. It would seem that other initiatives,
even African initiatives, we are told, indicate that the time
has come to shake to its foundations the world’s only
bastion where apartheid is tolerated and allowed to
develop, Thus certain nations historically responsible for
the past, which have become powerless in the face of the
cont.radictions of our time, are looking the other way and
leaving Africa to its fate, behaving like the fly on the
carriage wheel and encouraging a little salutary bloodletting as in the days of colonial wars. Every African ~110
dies for the good cause represents a step forward for Africa.
Every African who dies to serve the needs of a plan to
ensure a smooth passage from a past of humiliation and
exploitation is an insult to our future generations, particularly those of Azania.

33. The tragedy being enacted today by the black people
of Azania would not have reached its climax if the great
and medium-sized Powers had displayed the necessary
firmness that they should have shown towards the racist
minority. The international community has nevertheless
made endless appeals to that effect since 1946, the year
when, for the first time, the racial policy of South Africa
was considered by the United Nations. Did not a resolution
adopted by the General Assembly on 6 November 1962
even then call on Member States to break off diplomatic
relations with the Government of South Africa, to close
their ports to all vessels flying the South African flag, to
enact legislation forbidding their ships to enter South
African ports, to boycott all South African products, to
refrain from exporting products, including arms and munitions, to South Africa, and to refuse landing and passage
facilities to all aircraft belonging to the South African
Government or companies registered under South African
laws (resolution 1761 (XVII)]?

39. As we see it, we must wage our fight by respect for
and comprehensive implementation of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, in particular on the part of those
Members which still maintain relations with the apartheid
regime, by the strict application of a serious and effective
embargo-not only on weapons, since the factories and war
arsenals are already in piace and little has to be imported,
but on everything that can be used to fuel and oil the
machine of racist domination-by the adoption of a wide
variety of new measures that are needed to meet the
present situation at Pretoria.

34. Fifteen years later, we are obliged to note that that
resolution has been forgotten or deliberately ignored by
precisely those whom we expect to exercise decisive
influence on the situation in South Africa. Since that time,
they have so greatly tightened their links of economic and
military co-operation with the executioners of the Azanian
people that the racist bastion is today well on the way to
becoming a nuclear Power. They act as if Vorster’s
terrorism was less harmful to international security than the
aerial piracy that is currently agitating the capitals and
foreign ministries of the West. It is true that aerial piracy is
an attack on the society of civilized people, whereas
Vorster is crushing unknown and defenceless populations!

40. It is nevertheless curious, nothwithstanding the awareness of what are commonly called human rights, that the
stifling of the freedom of the press and of association in
South Africa should be the only measure capable of
unleashing a salutary wave of feeling in the world.

35. Everyone is careful not to be too optimistic, Will the
latest initiatives taken to sow the seeds of reason be
successful’? Tomorrow it will need only certain ship
movements to ignite once again the flames of anticommunism and thus to jeopardize the defence of these
populations, which for 20 years have been asking the
Council that justice should be rendered them,

41. My delegation, for its part, reaffirms its determination
to fight the abject apartheid regime and to associate itself
with all action undertaken to that end, In line with our
position, we give our full support to the four draft
resolutions fSj12309JRev.1,
S/12310/Rev.l,
S/12311/
Rev.1 and S/l2312/Rev.l]
submitted by the delegations of
Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius. In the
name of equity we call on all the other members of the
Council to do the same, This would be no more than a just
reply to the executioners of Azania.

36. Walvis Bay is the sentinel of the West! We have not
heard the last of the subject, It will surely return to block
the way and hinder other attempts to establish peace in
that part of Africa. Vorster’s crew are old hands at this
game and, unfortunately, in the future too, many countries
will, in the name of certain sordid interests, offer them the
understanding they need, and so the cycle will go on
indefinitely.

42. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Chairman
of the Special Committee against Apartheid. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
43. Mr. HARRIMAN
(Chairman, Special Committee
against Apartheid); Mr. President, while thanking you and,
through you, the other members of the Council for inviting

37. The Niger would sincerely like to be unblushingly
optimistic. When the American Government expresses its
4

me to participate in the discussion on this question, I must
say that the grave situation in South Africa does not call for
an exchange of pleasantries. I am in duty bound to express
myself on two important and significant points.

49. Twenty-five yearsago, in 1952,the.African and *aian
States brought the whole question of apartheid to the
General Assemblyand warned that it would causea threat
to international peaceand security.

44. The first is that the Security Council is considering the
situation in South Africa under the presidency of India, and
we recall that it was India which first brought the problem
of racial discrimination in South Africa to the attention of
the United Nations in 1946. I take this opportunity to pay
a tribute to that great leader of peace and human dignity,
Mahatma Gandhi, who started the struggle at the level of
the international community. His experience of humiliation
and brutalization led him to launch a new era of thought
and action which transformed India and reverberated
throughout the world, particularly in the empires of Britain
and France. Even today his teachings and his words still fire
the hearts of many. Gandhi remains a constant source of
inspiration to non-violent passive resistance all over the
world. We are aware of the important part his teachings
played in shaping the non-violent protestations in the
recent history of the United States, where every man, be he
black or white, is equal and free before the law and where
his dignity and liberty are guaranteed and enshrined in the
Constitution.

50. In August 1946, gold minersin South Africa, protesting against their exposure to a deadly lung diseaseand
appalling living conditions and following the teachings of
Gandhi in conducting peacefuldemonstrations,were brutalized and killed by the racists.

45. In the wake of the early resistance to apartheid, the
leaders of the oppressed people of South Africa embraced
the ideas of Mahatma Gandhi. But soon the); were to learn
that apartheid spelled violence. They learned that peaceful
protestations generated nothing but escalating brutality and
forceful reactions from the racists, They learned over the
years that passive resistance spelled detention, torture and
cold-blooded murder in racist gaols and massive killings of
children and women in the streets’ of their motherland.
Recent events in South Africa have indicated that the
option of peaceful resistance is closed.
46. The second significant aspect is that the Security
Council resumed its discussion of the question of South
Africa on 24 October, United Nations Day. The outcome of
this debate will be a test of all Member States, especially
those which by their privileged status have special responsibilitles under the Charter, The outcome of this debatewill
indicate to the whole world, and especially the suffering
massesin South Africa, how our bcl,ief in the aimsand
objectives enshrined in the Charter is translated into
meaningfulaction. The outcome of this debatewill show
how far we asMembersare willing to go, as statedin the
Preambleof the Charter, “to savesucceedinggenerations
from the scourgeof war, which twice in our lifetime has
brought untold sorrow to mankind”.
47. Whether or not a racial conflagration breaksout in
southernAfrica will dependlargely on the actionsinitiated
in the Council. In this connexion, I direct this statement
and the messageit contains to someof the permanent
membersof the Council,
48. For too long, too little action hasbeenundertakenby
the Council on the resolution of the problem of South
Africa, It is not that we are obliviousof the issues,it is not
that we are unaware of the measures
to be taken, nor are
we unappreciativeof the peacefulefforts of the oppressed
in South Africa or the consistentbrutality of the racists.

5 1. In 1960 there wasSharpeville.Peacefulprotest against
passlaws wascountered with force sostrongthat it left 67
people dead and hundreds injured, Again the Security
Council discussedthe situation and recognized that it
might, if continued, endanger international peace and
security.
52. Fifteen years ago, on 6 November1962, the General
Assembly, in its resolution 1761(XVII), Sponsored
by
Nigeria among others, called for sanctionsagainst South
Africa and requestedthe Security Council to take action.
The next year, the Council itself recognized,unanimously,
that the situation in South Africa was “seriously disturbing” international peaceand security. There is little doubt
that this expressionwascoinedby British diplomats.
53. In the many years which have sincepassed,the racists
have maintained the statusquo and we have continued to
utilize the euphemism“seriously disturbing”. They have
intensified their brutality, they have further entrenched
their reign of terror, they havecommittedother new crimes
against the millions of black people and their leaders in
South Africa. Many more peoplehave been murdered in
gaol. We have had Soweto. The terrorists at Pretoria have
gone on armedrampagebeyond the bordersof the country.
While the United Nations hasadoptedscoresof resolutions
which yield little positive action, business
goeson as usua1
in South Africa. Trade and investmentsflow in and out of
South Africa. Friends of the racistscontinue to reap huge
profits from neo-slavery in South Africa. With help from
their friends, the racists are on the verge of acquiring
nuclear weaponry. All these things have, in no small
measure, gone a long way towards undermining the
credibility and the authority of the Organization which
tends to remain unresponsiveto the urgent problenls of
South Africa.
54. The United Nations has an inescapableduty and
obligation to eradicateapartheid in South Africa as it is a
serioushindrance and a menaceto international peace and
genuine international co-operation.All MemberStates Wal
to the principles of the United Nations must join in all
necessaryaction under ali the relevant provisionsof the
Charter for the elimination ofapartheid.
55. In March of this year /198&h meeting], 1 Ilad the
occasion in this chamber to express the concern. the
commitment and the consideredviews of the Special
Committee on the situation in South Africa. At that time*
some delegations requestedtime and the support of the
African Group to undertake measureswith a view to
dchieving a peaceful solution to the problem of South
Africa. They felt that the racistsat Pretoriamight listen to
their words of wisdom.

“F

56. I need not dwell in any detail today on the developments since that time, especially on the new wave of
repression launched by the apartheid regime since last
week, with the banning of I8 organizations and three
newspapersand the arrestsof numerouspeople.The facts
are well known. The developmentsof the last four daysare
hut the frightened and panicky manifestationof a paranoid
dictator and his gangof terrorists. Even the Westernpress
has pointed out that the Vorster r@gimehas tried to
suppress,and thereby drive underground, all vestigesof
political activity and expression by the black people of
South Africa. The oppressedblack peoplewho constitute
four fifths of the population of the country are left with no
alternative whatsoever but to concentrate on underground
activity and armedstruggle.

throw the gauntlet at its protectors, especiallythe United
States. The racist spokesmen
have even gone to the length
of declaring irrelevant recent pronouncementsmade at
variouslevelsin the AmericanAdministration.
64 The action that is required of the international
community is to me and to the Committee which I
representvery clear. What is requiredis what hasbeen said
heretime and again: the will to act.

65. Two months ago,Nigeriahad the honour andprivilege
of acting as host to the World Conference for Action
againstApartheid, with the participation of Governments,
organizationsand leadersfrom all over the world. All the
participants pledgedseparateand collectiveefforts to bring
about the elimination of apartheid. The Conference
57. The apartheid r&gime has gone utterly mad and is
adopted, by consensus,the LagosDeclaration for Action
calling a so-calledgeneralelection of “whites only” on 30
against Apartheid,2 which laid down guidelinesfor the
November to get a mandateto defy the world and increase following action: the application of a mandatory and
repression. It plans to establish a secondbantustan on
comprehensivearms embargoagainstSouth Africa under
6 Decemberon the bordersof the Republicof Botswana.It
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations; the
is frantically expanding its armed forces and hasdoubled ending of all assistanceor co-operation enablingSouth
the period of service for its national servicemenfrom 12 to
Africa to obtain nuclearcapability; the taking of economic
24 months. In its budget for 1976/77, it has allocated and other measures,suchas the cessationof loansto and
$US 2 billion for the armed forces alone. Yet both this
investments in South Africa; a dismantling of existing
mobilization and the invasions of neighbouring African
investments; the provision of greater assistanceto the
States have been described as no threat to international
oppressedpeople of South Africa and their liberation
peaceand security.
movement.
58. After the seriesof deaths of patriots in detention in
the past year, culminating in the brutal murder of Steve
Bike. there is every reason to fear for the safety and the
lives of the peopleimprisonedby the apartheid rkgime.

66. The SpecialCommitteeagainstApartheid considersit
necessaryto emphasizethat nothing lessthan full imple.
mentation of the LagosDeclarationand nothing lessthan
mandatory measuresin accordancewith ChapterVII of the
Charter would meet the requirementsof the presentgrave
situation in South Africa. WChope that all membersof the
Council will rise to the occasionand accept the challenge
flung down by the Vorster rCgime.

59. After all the threats and acts of aggression
by the
apartizcicl rCgimeagainstindependent African Slates, there

is certainly grave danger of a wider threat to the peacein
southern Africa.
60. The Security Council must act now with determination and without any further equivocation of euphemisms,
Every day that meaningfulaction is delayedwill meanmore
killings and graver dangersto peace.

67. We recall with appreciationthe consistentsupport of
the non-aligned and socialistStates, of the Soviet Union
and China, for the strugglesfor liberation in Africa. We call
on the Wcstcrn countriesto live up to their professionsSo
that there can he universaland decisive action, which is
indispensableif WCare to avert a holocaust, to eliminate
racist oppressionin South Africa and to free Africa at hSb

61. It seemsclear that the terrorists at Pretoria--.and1am
using these words very advisedly--who are holding 20
million oppressedpeople in that country ashostages-again 68. The Western membersof the Council, especiallythe
I choose my words advisedly--are prepared for war. I a111
permanentmembers,mustshowin no uncertainterms that
llappy that other ad /ZOL’committeesof the United Nations Vorster, in his paranoia,is not defendingWesterncivilizaare seized of thesecIuestionsof terrorism and the taking of
tion or upholding the sacredprinciples of Christianity, as
hostages.
he claims. Vorster must be told in no uncertainterms, in
the clear languageof internationalaction, that the threat of
62. To approach an unnatural and irrational situation like
communism,the duty of protecting the Caperoute and his
the one in South Africa with idealismwill not take us far.
so-calledcustody of Westerncapitalismare all figmentsof
We have noted recent protests and condemnation by the
hiswild imagination.
Western Powers, hut there has so far been little action.
There has beenan effervescenceof protestations,wordsand
69. The SpecialCommitteeagainstApartheid helicvesthat
declarations which are only the superficial crust around a
the narrow road to a peacefulsolution to apartheidhaslong
weak core. Such statementsoffer little mileage.
been closed. To Member States that were left behind we
offer no apologies.All WCaskof them now isto take action
under the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. We
63 Since it came to power in 1948. the apartheid r&$lne
believe that the Lagos Declaration, as I said earlier,
hasbeen coddled by the Western Powers.and spoiledwith
generoussuppliesof arms,investmentsand loans,The spoilt
child of the West has now dared t.o fling a challengeand to
2 United Mtions publication, fhlcs No. E.77.XIV.2, sect. X.
6

indicates all possible avenues for meaningful action against
apartheid.

the enslavement of the majority. Many of these companies,
for instance, manufacture materiaI for the repressive
apparatus of South Africa, and we cannot agree to their
continuing operations just because they marginally increase
the wages of African workers or give them opportunities to
USCthe same dining rooms as whites,

70. The struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa
is a just one. It is a struggle not only for their inalienable
right to self-determination, freedom and equality; it is a
struggle for humanity; it is a struggle to rid mankind,
in the
twentieth century, of slavery. The Special Committee
against Apurtheid is solidly behind them in whatever means
they employ, until their victory is won.

77. As Chairman of the Special Committee against ApartIzeiu’, I could not but speak as emotionally as I have done. I
thank you, and I hope my statement did not transgress the
code of behaviour of the Council,

71. We propose that the Security Council should, as a first
step, condemn the South African rCgime and give it a
serious warning, endorse the Lagos Declaration for Action
against Apartheid, invoke Chapter VII of the Charter,
impose a mandatory embargo on all supplies of military
equipment, spare parts and licences for the manufacture of
such equipment for South Africa, stop all transfers of
fissionable material or nuclear technology to South Africa,
prohibit all loans to and investments in South Africa and
set up a watchdog committee to supervise the implementation of these measures.

78. The I’RESIDENT: I thank the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apurthcid for the kind words he has
addressed to me and for the kind references hc made about
my country and about Mahatma Gandhi.
79. The next speaker is the representative of Mauritania,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
80. Mr. KANE (Mauritania) (interpretatim ,fion? Finch):
The year 1977 will. without any doubt. go down in the
history of Africa as one of the most alarming and most
decisive turning points and as the year which held particularly cruel surprises in store for our people, with irrepdrable losses and terrible human suffering. This year will also
surely be remembered as one in which the entire world was
witness to a frenetic intensification of the Calvary which has
been imposed in various parts of the continent of Africa on
populations whose only sin was to wish to live in freedom
like all the other peoples of our planet.

72. We should like to emphasize further, in this connexion, that an arms embargo would not be effective at this
time unless it covered existing contracts for the supply
of
mililary equipment to and for the manufacture of such
equipment in South Africa.
73. We know that some countries have recently entered
into contracts for the supply of large quantities of military
aircraft, submarines and corvettes, and have offered licences
for the assembly and manulrrcture of such cquipmcnt.
Imposing an embargo limited to future contracts would be
like closing the gate after the horse has escaped; it would be
deceiving ourselves and public opinion.

8 1. While in every respect the conditions to which the
African peoples were subjected during the colonial period-conditions contrary to morality. law and justice-have little
by little been eased in certain parts of the continent thanks
to the advent of independence in some of our countries, the
particularly cruel fate still visited on millions of human
beings, particularly in the southern part of Africa, is
testimony which daily casts a darker shadow on our pride
and brings discredit on all the principle which represent the
very foundation of the Organization.

74. Furthermore, in this same context. 1 wish to cmphasize that the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute has a catalogue of the licences issued recently by
one Western country which now claims that it wants to join
in an arms embargo and which I hope will be dragged into
accepting a mandatory arms embargo.
75. Moreover, I wish to emphasizc that economic sanctions and an arms embargo are closely related, as we have
often pointed out, to an embargo on foreign loans and
investments which have enabled South Africa to increase its
military expenditures. Those who have argued that more
investments in South Africa would lead to greater and more
effective control and to the dismantling of apartheid should
now understand what we have been talking about for years:
that the more investments there have been in South Africa
over the years, the more its military expenditures bavc
increased and the greater have become South Africa’s
repressive measures and the development of the machinery
for carrying out such measures.

81. The Security Council’s meeting today to consider the
explosive situation in South Africa has been preceded by
many others since the beginning of the United Nations. IT
the Council, for over a quarter of a century, has been
unwilling to take the ultilnatc decision incumbent on it by
virtue of the powers vested in it by the Charter, and above
all because of the wishes expressed by the near totality of
the membership of the Organixation, the South African
rCginie, t’or its part, abcttcd by that implicit support, has
created situations which are a challenge to the Organization
and a grave affront to morality, justice and law.
X3. Thus, once again the Council has bclbre it this
situation that has been a matter of constant concern to the
international community and that is an affront to African
dignity and pride. And it is particularly fortunate that, at
the moment the Council is seized of this situation, fate has
decided that it should be a son of the third world, the
representative of India, who is presiding over its proceedings. I therefore venture to avail myself of this opportunity

76. 1 wish to refer to the proposals made in Western
countries for the adoption of codes of conduct for business
companies in order to improve the working conditions of
Africans. While we welcome any amelioration of the
conditions of African workers, we cannot accept any
proposal that condones investment in apartheid society and
7

-African also died following beatings in prison, and, on 25
September, 20,000 South African brothers and sisters
carried to his last rest comrade Steve Biko, coldly murdered
by the Vorster regime. The whole world is still wondering
about the motives that led the South African police to
commit that appalling crime. Steve Bike was undoubtedly a
patriot; he was also a visionary. But his patriotism and his
vision were wedded to a philosophy of moderation,
compassion, generosity and forgiveness.

to address to you, Mr. President, my most sincere congratulations. Since we are already familiar with your talents and
skills and especially with the tact and sense of justice with
which you have always approached the problems facing the
Organization, my delegation is already assured that, under
your presidency, the Council will achieve brilliant successes
that will further enhance the prestige of the third world and
be in the highest interests of our peoples.
84. A few moments ago I talked about the many series of
meetings held by the Security Council on the situation in
southern Africa. The most recent series was that held from
21 to 31 March following the particularly explosive events
that took place in Azania and of which the whole world
was witness. The gravity of those events, after the massacres
of Sharpevillc and Soweto, should have prompted the
Council to consider firm and unequivocal measures to
constrain South Africa to put an end to its policy of
genocide.

88. Such, then, is the regime which for more than a
generation has been the subject of Security Council
meetings and which today still flaunts before the world an
evil philosophy that has been rejected and condemned by
the whole international community.
89. For more than 30 years, South Africa has played on
certain peoples’ sympathy by posing as the defender of
Western civilization. In the seven months since the Council’s meetings in March, we have noted the positions of
countries which felt that the time had not yet come for
mandatory sanctions. Perhaps those countries-and we have
no reason to doubt their sincerity-felt
that their responsibilities under the Charter required them to show more
caution and moderation. But today more than ever it is
fitting to remind those countries that time is passing and
that in South Africa women, children and old people are
being murdered every day and South African prisons are
bursting with detainees who are freed only by death. We
say to them also that 30 years is the life of an entire
generation and that the children of Sharpeville and Soweto
and the Azanian people will never forgive silence on the
part of the United Nations, for it would represent veritable
complicity and support for the Vorster regime. Lastly, we
say to them it is high time that words were backed by deeds
and, while the Azanian people have been given many
promises, they nevertheless continue to suffer the dictatorship of the South African regime, for want of a decision by
the United Nations and especially the Security Council.

85. The States of the non-aligned countries put forward
several draft resolutions at that time containing various
practical proposals which, if they had been accepted, would
unquestionably have helped to avert the unprecedented acts
of violence which we have recently witnessed in South
Africa and the indiscriminate massacres in which the South
African Government has indulged and is still indulging. If
those measures were not taken by the Council, it was
because of certain considerations, the most important of
which are the following: first, because certain permanent
members of the Council had indicated their disagreement
and felt that it was necessary to continue being cautious
and that the measures requested should be adopted only
after all chances of a peaceful solution had been exhausted;
next, because those same countries had given firm promises
to the non-aligned countries regarding their determination
to do everything in their power to induce South Africa to
return to the path of justice and law, Certain statements to
that effect were even made here with a view to dispelling
the legitimate pessimism of the non-aligned countries and
the liberation movements, The South African Government’s
willingness to change was eloquently maintained.

90. Today the situation in South Africa has reached the
point of no return. The Vorster regime which has been
caught in a thousand and one contradictions will never
make honourable amends. It is for that reason that world
opinion is increasingly demanding concerted and effective
action against the proponents of apartheid. This development, wh.ich has had a certain impact on the policies of
Governments, can be perceived through the media, which
have, to their credit, accurately described the tragedies that
have been visited upon the peoples of southern Africa
throughout this year.

86. Approaches were made to the Vorster Government
after those meetings by the five Western Powers. Despite
our pessimism regarding the possible success of those
de’marches, we followed the course of the negotiations with
sustained interest, in the conviction that five Powers would
spare no efforts to bring the South African Government to
reason. But once again the mountain has laboured and
brought forth a mouse. Contrary to all expectations,
whereas the five Western Powers had created all the
conditions for an honourable way out for the South
African Government, that Government, in violation of the
most elementary rules of courtesy and decency, was in May
already engaged in acts of violence whose cruelty and
cynicism fiIled the entire international community with
indignation.

91. I have taken certain excerpts from the newspaper Le
Mmde which, in its editorial of 21 October last entitled
“Vorster avoids the issue”, made the following comments:
“The wave of repressions, on a scale unprecedented
since the banning in 1960 of the African National
Congress, unleashed on 19 October by the Pretoria
authorities is felt as a double challenge. Domestically, the
brutal hardening of the regime has aroused the anger and
bewilderment of all those who were still looking for a
movement towards reform. Abroad, the escalation Of
Pretoria’s authoritarianism. is a direct affront to the

87. Among the odious acts committed in May, at least one
deserves to be highlighted. I refer to the arrest on 27 May
of a black 59-year-old former trade unionist arrested under
the Internal Security Act. He died in a Cape prison after
being tortured in captivity. On 6 July, another South
8

feelings of the international community, which is already
hostile to a rBgime that, posing as a ‘defender of Western
civilization’, shows SO little regard for the elementary
principles of democracy.

try againstthe theory and practice ofepartheid, eminently
qualify you to steerthe affairs of the Council.
96. The fight againstapurtheid is not new to the international community, and a sizeablenumber of Statesin this
community have come to accept with complacency the
excessesof the Vorster rCgimeas typical of that Fascist
Government
which holds its black majority in terror and in
subjugation.But the shockingeventsin South Africa in the
last week are sofundamentalto humanrights anywhere and
alsoconstitute sucha subversionof someof the principles
of the Charter, that my Govcmment deemsit necessary
that we should also add our voice to those who have
condemned unequivocally the dehumanizing acts of the
South African Government.

“The strong and immediate American reaction seems
fraught with menace for the South African Government.
In deploring an unfortunate action which is ‘bound to
affect relations between Washington and Pretoria’, the
State Department, already irritated by Vorster’s inflexibility, has given to understand that it is contemplating
retaliatory measures against a too-stubborn ally. In
choosing strong measures, the Vorster Government makes
even less likely the ‘initiation of a process’ that could lead
to the ‘progressive transformation of South African
society’ so desired by the Carter Administration.

97. As membersof the Council are aware, Ghana has,
since its birth in 1957, been totally opposedLoqxutheid.
Since becominga Member of the United Nations, we have
participated actively in the struggleagainstczpurtheidand its
practitioners. Indeed, our opposition to this racially discriminatory system is so basic to our own historical and
philosophical experience, that our determination to fight
for its eradication is one of the cardinal points of OUT
foreign policy. Wewould therefore not be true to the world
around us nor to ourselvesif we allowed this opportunity
to slip without contributing to the common effort against
apartheid.

l‘ . . .
“By choosing to avoid the issue, Mr. Vorster is in
danger of forcing Washington and its Western allies”--and
I do mean “its Western allies”-“to
have recourse more
rapidly than previously intended to the economic pressures they dislike, since it is the only way to bring to its
knees an increasingly isolated regime whose remaining
support comes mainly from military dictatorships . . .”
92. This is an admission which indicates eloquently the
changes which have taken place since the beginning of the
year, changes which, if followed by specific action, will not
only restore the prestige of the Security Council but also
strengthen the respect and esteem enjoyed by the various
States that make up the Organization. However, this change
can be given practical effect only by the adoption and
implementation of the draft resolutions placed before the
Council by the non-aligned countries. An embargo on arms
shipments to South Africa and, above all, economic
sanctions are, without any doubt, the essential prerequisite
to any successful action by the Council against the hateful
regime of South Africa. But if, unhappily, the hopes that
the people of Azania place in the Council should be once
again disappointed, then we must expect a dark future for
southern Africa and a serious threat to international
peace
and security.

98. Our distrust of Vorster and his colleaguesis so
complete that we have often wondered why others have
persistedin their reluctanceto give the necessarysupport to
the United Nations to deal effectively with the South
African rCgime.Wehave on severaloccasionsparticipated in
debates in the Security Council, as well asin the General
Assembly, which have all addressedappealsto South Africa
to desistfrom its crimesagainstthe black majority. As we
all know, those appealshave had no significant effect on
the thinking and policies of the South African leadership.
So, gradually, the excessesof the racist regimeagainstthe
black majority have multiplied; from Sharpevilleto Soweto,
it has been a horrifying catalogueof atrocities againstthe
defencelessmajority, only becausethey demandto exercise
their inalienablerights.

93. I am convinced that the Council will have the wisdom
this time to learn a lesson from the past and at last act in
justice and equity. The people of Azania can rest assured
that their victory is certain, because subjection, domination
and exploitation can never be the final destiny of any
people.
94. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the reprcsentative of Ghana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table andto makehisstatement.
95. Mr. BOATEN (Ghana): Mr. President,1 Wish, first of
all, to expressto you the gratitude of my Governmentand
my delegationfor affording me the opportunity to address
the Security Council today on the question of South
Africa. It is significantthat the debatein the Council on the
current South African situation is taking pkICe under Your
presidency,for your personaldiplomatic qualities,coupled
with the well-known uncompromisingstand of Your coun9

99. Although we are convinced that the South African
rdgime hasnever intended and doesnot intend to uphold
the lofty principlesenshrinedin the Charter, we have been
tolerant enough to give those Member States who had
hopesof Vorster and his Government a chanceto induce a
changein the South African situation, asthey thought they
could, But the recent banning of the black nationalist
organizations in that country, the closing down of nationalist newspapersand the imprisonmentof blacksand other
persons have proved beyond reasonabledoubt that the
hopes expressedby somemembersof the Council during
earlier debates on the same question have been grossly
misplaced,The international community, therefore, has an
inescapableduty to halt the seriousdegenerationin the
political and socialsituation of that country.
fO0. It would be pointless,at this stage,to recall all the
resolutions
on apartheid adopted by the Council.
Similarly,
it would
constitute
a wasteof the valuable time
numerous

indications are it will, unless its progress is slowed dowI1
considerably.

of representatives to re-catalogue all the evils of crpartheid.
For we do not believe that there is one single tnember of
the Council who would today want to defend that
pernicious system nor the recent actions taken under it.
What is required, therefore, is a critical evaluation of the
South African regime’s performance up to date and the
marshalling of our collective political will to deal decisively
with a r6gime that has shown, in words and in deeds, its
unparalleled propensity to bring the world to the brink of
conflict and chaos. It is in consideration of the serious crisis
now hanging over the African continent, and indeed the
international community, that we must, in all sincerity,
take decisive action to protect nat only the majority of
men and women in South Africa but also the peace and
security of our international community from being unduly
disturbed.

105.

In

Inaking

these

recortnmendatillIlS,

dlC

GhatU

(hV-

ernnlent is Ilot unIlli~ldfl~I of the efforts
Of h2 five WeStelI
powers to bring about some change in the pditiC2l Siklahl
in

Sout]lertl

Africa

aS a Whole.

However,

WU

CtK

Of

he

fit’111

opinion that, unless Vorster is brought tu feel the full
weight of the Organization’s authority,
IlO ~~leillliQ?fill
&;mge call be hoped for in the entire ro#Jn. I;or, Vdlethr
our efforts are direcled at the situation in Namibia,
Zimbabwe or Azania itself, we must :IIWZ~YS remember that
Vorster is the key to whatever solution iS fUI’ttld~l~Cd
I:1111
sure
that the Western members of the Council would
confirm
this.
TJierefore,
we must
be prepared to tackle
Vorster and his Fascist rdgime in order to expect meaning
ful change throughout southern Africa.

101. It is the view of the Ghana Government that, tragic
though the cvcnts or the last week have been, the
international situation is now excellent for an inlroduction
of those measures that our political and morid ConscietlCe
has dictated all along If we let this moment slip, posterity
will forever condemn us for the pusillanimous manner in
which we have handled the destinies of millions of our
brothers and sisters in South Africa. We further believe that
Ihe time has come when we should together search out
collective conscience to determine whether it is wiser to
bargain the political future of South Africans for the
doubtful economic gains that now identify us with the
gross violations of the rights and aspirations of millions of
South Africans whose remaining hope is our Organization.

106. Finally, my delegation would
like to remind the
Council that, under Article 14 of the Charter, it is charged
with the duty to ensure prompt and cfl‘cctivc action by the
United Nations for the maintenance of internationa] ~C~ICC
and security and that it cannot afford lo ,jettison this sacred
responsibility for narrow economic atld treaty 3dV3tltages.
Human rights are one and indivisible in all parts o(‘ tile
world
and Lhcy should be upheld even in the case of the
cxploitcd and politically starved people of hznni:l. In the
discharge of this sacred duty, the Western Powers l’ace :I test
of the vatidity of their civilization. That is, whcthcr it
sl~ould
be ,judgcd by its own enligh~cncd values. or hy its
tolerance (ltf fumcwrkz
of a vicious doclrinc of racial
superiority which it had decisively rejected through an
unprecedented war only 37 years ago.

102. In this regard, the Ghana tiovernment would like to
note with appreciation the encouraging words of I’rcsident
Carter and other distinguished leaders around the world
who have expressed. in unequivocal terms, the inadmissibility of Vorster’s recent actions and who have agreed that
the present situation calls for tougher action against those
responsible for such massive lratnpling down of the rights
of Azanians.

107. The choice is clear, the time is ripe and millions ol
people arc watching the exercise of our nudiurity with
kcenncss and with hope. We cannot afford Lo fail yet again.
For our part, we renew the assurance of the Ghana
Government to the Council, to the entire United Nations
membership and indeed Lo the whole world 1ha1 we will
extend our fullest support and co-operation in introducitlg
mandatory sanctions and other ilppNlp~iiltC
nicasurcs
against South Africa under Chapter VII of the (‘hartcr, in
order to meet our commitment not only to the ,i\L~ttliil~t
peoples but to the ideals of our sacred Charter.

103. What action, therefore, do we envisage in expressing
our condemnation of the acts perpetrated by the South
African rkgirne? My delegation recommencls, in this regard,
that the Council should introduce, as a matter of extreme
urgency, the following measures, irltc’r aZifz, under Chapter
VII of the Charter: first. ii mandatory embargo on all salt
of arms, including spare parts and machinery, to South
Africa; secondly. a suspension of all economic and cultural
tics with South Africa, including the recruitment of
immigrant labour for that country; thirdly, an effective
application
of the oil em bargo; fourthly, a suspension of any
further help in the nuclear programme of South Africa.

108. Mr. IZICIHAKD (United Kingdom): This is the secotld
time Lhis year that wc have met to consider devclopnicnts
ill South Africa. On this occasion, we mccl iI1 lhc shadow
that has been cast by Mr. Bike’s death. He is not the first
black South African detainee to die in prison.
Isut
he W;IS
one Of LllC most proniincnt
of that IIC‘W gorleratiorl
of Soulll
African who demand an early dismantling ofapar’thcid and
who are ready to suffer for their beliefs. Press reports
indicate that Mr. Biko may have died of brain tl;lmage otld
internal injuries. We await the results 01‘ the official autopsy
and of the inquest begun yesterday, and we expect them to
revcal, without ec~uivocation, precisely how Mr, ljiko died.
Nor is it enough for the Government of South Africa LO
reject world interest as a flagrant interference in its internal
affairs It can hardly be sllrpriscd
if t]ic
inLcrnntioCll
community detnands public assurances on this point, wltc11
approximately 70 prisoners have, so the (;overnment says,
died “by accident” while in cuslody in the last I8 months.

104. The Ghana Government has deemed it ativis;jble
to
recommend such actions under Chapter VII of tile Chaflel
because it considers the latest acts of the Vorster rbgime a
threat to international peace and security. No doubt that
rCgime is emboldened to act in the manner that we all
witnessed last week because of its increasing military and
nuclear strength, of which various South African leaders
have openly boasted in the past months. WC dread,
thcreforc, what the politics of South Africa wor~ltl become
if that republic should join the nuclear club, as al]
10

109. We also meet in the shadow of the recent bannings of
South African citizens and organizations and the closures 01
South African newspapers. My Government’s attitude to
these events is very simple. The South African Government
asks us to bclievc that it is a staunch defender of Western
civitization. I reject that proposition totally The values
which my country holds dear are not defended by the sort
of actions that we saw last week. On the contrary, they are
undermined and weakened But on their argument, our
reply would be that South Africa must then expect to be
judged by Western standards.By those standardsthey are
found wanting. We have condemnedthe denial of free
speechand personalliberty elsewherein the world, We
condemn it, likewise, in South Africa My ForeignSccretary, Mr. Owen, said last week that the silencingof the
voicesof those who speakfor the majority in South Africa
could only be a tragic setback, that it would makemore
difficult the task of those who, like him, advocated a
peacefulevolution of South African society.
110. What must surely alarm us all, irrespectiveof our
Government’s policies, is the growing polarization of
opinion in South Africa. The South African Governmentis
withdrawing behind the barricades. In doing so, it is
deliberately, almostcapriciously, cutting itself off from the
majority of its own population. Extremism is growing on
both sidesand those in the middle who advocateat leasta
start to the dismantlingof presentbarriersspeaknow with
a lonely and muted voice.

113. My Foreign Secretary said last May that “to downgrade or back off from our condemnation of qpartkeitl will
undermine our credibility and weaken our ability to press
for peaceful, democratic transition to independenceclsewhere in southern Africa”, It would be nai’ve, however, to
believe that we can conduct complex negotiations on these
issuesiii a situation
where
South Africa has decided to
isolate itself totally from the international community.
WC have to look at developmentsin all of southern Africa
and we have to assess
how best to make progresstowards
our objectives.
114. Many Members of the Organization would argueindeed, some do and have--[hat South Africa should bc
totally ostracized. The problem, however, that all of us
have
to face
is that
a sizeablepart of the white population
of South Africa positively invites-1 would almost say,
welcomes-such ostracism. For historical reasonswith
which everyone here is familiar, my own country is more
aware than most of the attitudes of the South African
white population. We do not want white South Africans to
drive themselvesinto a mental fortress from which they will
be unable to escape.Isolation breedsfurther isolation and a
mindlesscontempt for outside opinion. We remain of the
belief that we should be ready to speak and listen to the
South African Govcrnmcnt and to all South Africans. Only
in that way can we hope Co impress ~lpvil
the white
community the imperative need for quick, early and
far-reachingchange.

111. Our objective is, I hope, well known. Wewant to see
a society in South Africa in which all the inhabitants. I 15. The least that the Sourh African Government can
now do is to rescindthe recent closuresand arrests;but it
irrespective of their race, colour or creed, can freely
participate in the country’s institutions and in the creation must do more than that. t 1 must now begin to take serious
Cosmetic changesare not
of a non-racial society. We want a peacefulanddemocratic steps to dismantle apzrrkid.
enough, and Britain will not accept that they are enough.
transformation, rather than a disintegrationinto violence. I
us 01‘condoning
or
believe that conflict can still be averted, but only if the White South Africans sometimesaccuse
encouraging
violence
in
southern
Africa.
This
is
not
SO.
We
South African Government begins to change
its present
policies. We are therefore ready to LISC the political and are opposedto all forms of violence, but it really should
economicinfluence at our disposalto urge and encourage not surprisewhite South Africa if the humiliation cngendered by inslitutioIinlizet1 racism-for such it is---drives
changewithin South Africa, but not to useit merely asa
people in increasingnumbers to desperateaclion. Thoseof
punitive measure.It follows from this that our responsewill
in each instance be carefully judged. f:or many years, 11s who believe in contact and a graduated responseto the
Britain has observed a voluntary arms embargoagainst situation in South Africa rather than in isolation and
revenge have a niajul responsibility for seeking those
South Africa. WCdo not co-operate in the nuclear field.
changeswhich alonecan avert a terrible tragedy in southern
Three years ago, we sought Ihe agreement of British
Africa, This rcspunsibility is one which Britain dUCS not
companiesoperating in South Africa to observea cudc of
business
conduct. The EuropeanEconomicCommunity has seek to avoid and in which we arc prepared to piap 0~11
part, Our response,as I have indicated in this statement.to
now publishedits own code, one of the main purposesoi
as it is toclay and the sort of resolution that
which is to encourage the growth of free, non-discrimi- tile sittlatioll
natory trade unionismand the equaltrea\tmcntof workers, WCs]lould like (o seethe Security Council adopt is, I hqx,
a11indication of our acceptanceof‘ that responsibility.
irrcspcctiveof their mce.
112. We have, tliereforc. carefully consideredour responsibilitiesin tlic light of recent events.WChave cometo the
conclusionthat the acquisitionby South Africa of armsand
related material in the current situation doesconstitute a
threat to the maintenance of inlernational pcacc and
security. The United Kingdom will therefore accept and
vote
in favour of a mandatory armsembargounderChapter
VII of Ihe Charter. We expect. also. that States not
Members of the Organi/.ation will take immediate and
Similaraction.
11

1 16. The t’l<I-{SILENT: The good oxample
set by the
representative of the United Kingdom in making his
statement this morning will, I hope, be cmulatcd by the
remainingmembersof the Council this afternoon. and I am
referring in particular to the representatives of Canada,
France. the Fcdcral liepublic of (;ermany, the Uiiitcd
SLnfes

atId

Indi:l

-

-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBI,ICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may he obtained
throu;hout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Sertion. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LE.5

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: IJnited
Nations.
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Los publications
des Nations
Units sent cn vcnte dans les librairies
et les agenres
dc5positnires
du mondc cntier. Informer-vow
aupr&s de votre libraire ou ndressez-vow
h : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Gcn&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicarioncs
de las Nacianes
Unidns est,in cn vonta en librerias
y cases distribuidorns
en tadas pnrtes
dul mundo.
Consultt!
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones
1Jnida.s.
Seccirjn de Vcntas. Nucva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

77-70001-October

1978-2200
