S/2017/861*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace
and security
I. Introduction
1.
Over the past 17 years, the women and peace and security agenda has become
an essential component of global affairs and a tool necessary for strengthening the
effectiveness of United Nations efforts in conflict prevention and resolution and
humanitarian action. It is a prerequisite for the fulfilment of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Across the three pillars of the United Nations — security,
human rights and development — the women and peace and security agenda
contributes to transformative change. The past two decades have produced
sufficient, credible evidence that women’s meaningful participation measurably
strengthens protection efforts, accelerates economic recovery, deepens
peacebuilding efforts and leads to more sustainable peace. Growing research in
recent years also points to the direct relationship between gender equality on the one
hand and resilience to and prevention of conflict on the other. Despite the evidence
supporting the transformative power of this agenda, the clear and detailed road map
provided through the recommendations of the 2015 global study on women, peace
and security, the 2015 peace and security reviews 1 and the increased need for an
effective solution to growing global challenges, the actual implementation of the
women and peace and security agenda continues to fall short.
2.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the presidential statement dated
26 October 2010 (S/PRST/2010/22), in which the Security Council requested annual
reports on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), resolution 2122 (2013), in
which the Council called for updates on progress made across all areas of the
women and peace and security agenda, highlighting gaps and challenges. It includes
updates on the status of implementation of the resolution since the issuance of the
previous report (S/2016/822), reflecting indicator data 2 and highlighting trends. It
also provides an update on progress made pursuant to resolution 2242 (2015), which
was adopted following the conduct of three peace and security reviews in 2015,
with a focus on how the effective implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda directly contributes to preventing conflict and sustaining peace. It
__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons on 27 October 2017.
1
S/2016/673, S/2015/446, S/2015/490, and Radhika Coomaraswamy, Preventing Conflict,
Transforming Justice, Securing the Peace: A Global Study on the Implementation of United
Nations Security Council resolution 1325 (United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), 2015).
2
For the indicators, see S/2010/498, annex.

17-18255* (E)

271017

*1718255*

S/2017/861

offers a set of core, overarching and catalytic recommendations that speak to the
most fundamental challenges.
3.
The report is based on data and analysis provided by entities of the United
Nations system, including peace operations and country teams, and inputs from
Member States, regional organizations and civil society.

II. Overview of progress
4.
In the previous report (S/2016/822), all stakeholders were called upon to
recommit to action across five key areas: (a) bringing women’s participation and
leadership to the core of peace and security efforts; (b) protecting the human rights
of women and girls during and after conflict; (c) ensuring gender -responsive
planning and accountability for results; (d) strengthening gender architecture and
technical expertise; and (e) financing the women and peace and security agenda.
Each of these areas remains a priority today, and progress on each is discussed
herein.
5.
I am heartened by the level of reflection within the international community
since 2015 on what preventing conflict and sustaining peace mean in practice and
by efforts to bring inclusivity, equality and human rights to the centre of those
discussions. However, our actions — especially in today’s changing world —
remain inadequate. The twin resolutions on sustaining peace (Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262) underscore the
importance of women’s leadership and meaningful participation in the prevention
and resolution of conflict and peacebuilding, recognize the need to increase the
representation of women at all levels of decision-making and call for strengthened
partnerships with civil society, including women’s organizations and women’s peace
activists. To be effective, however, preventive measures need to move beyond
addressing the imminence of crisis and must tackle the structural and root causes of
crisis, including inequality.
6.
Commitments become meaningful accomplishments, changing lives and
transforming societies, only upon implementation. Efforts for peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights therefore must be linked not only in
words but in practice. Women peacebuilders have long carried the message of
conflict prevention, calling for an end to war and acting as informal mediators and
first responders. Nearly two decades ago, the movement for a stronger global focus
on conflict prevention and inclusive decision-making in the context of complex
global challenges of peace and security became the force behind the women and
peace and security agenda. Today, evidence continues to show the foresight of this
agenda, demonstrating that the sustainability of peace depends directly on the
consistency of women’s engagement in peace processes, politics, governance,
institution-building, the rule of law, the security sector and economic recovery, and
that the levels of gender equality and the security of women are among the most
reliable indicators of peace.
7.
Since taking office, I have pursued a transformative organizational shift
towards a coordinated, robust and holistic approach to conflict prevention, rooted in
gender equality, through the ongoing reform of the Organization’s peace and
security architecture and development and management systems along with efforts
to increase gender parity and address sexual exploitation and abuse. Crucial
strategies for integrating and bolstering gender equality in the conflict prevention
work of the United Nations include guaranteeing women’s meaningful leadership
and participation, strengthening technical expertise in the area of gender equality,
investing in gender and conflict analysis and ensuring adequ ate financing for gender
2/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

equality and women and peace and security programming. I am committed to
ensuring the increased visibility and promotion of this agenda at every opportunity.
In July, the Deputy Secretary-General led a joint high-level mission of the United
Nations and the African Union to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo — the first-ever mission of its kind to focus on women, peace, security and
development. 3 The findings of the mission were conveyed to the Security Council
the following month, and I welcome the request of Council members to make the
conduct of such missions a more regular practice.
8.
At the United Nations, we have begun to undertake initiatives that respond to
the 2015 high-level reviews. The women’s peace and humanitarian fund 4 is
supporting programmes on the ground. The Security Council now holds regular
expert meetings on women and peace and security and invites representatives of
civil society to participate in country-specific briefings. Gender equality is given
prominence in other peace and security agendas, including on preventing violent
extremism and human trafficking and on youth, peace and security. I am encouraged
by the proliferation of initiatives on inclusive mediation and national
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the tireless pursuit of justice, dignity
and support for survivors of conflict-related sexual violence. These are all signs of a
growing chorus in the international community of those who are appalled by the
persistent and archaic political marginalization of women in decision -making on
peace and security issues and who are determined to find solutions to the suffering
unleashed by the recent wave of conflict and humanitarian crise s.

A.

Implementing the women and peace and security agenda in peace
processes and in efforts to prevent the emergence and relapse of
violent conflict
9.
On 13 September 2017, I announced the creation of a High -level Advisory
Board on Mediation, which will provide me with advice on mediation initiatives
around the world. The Board is composed of 18 current and former global leaders,
senior officials and renowned experts, 9 of them women. As the United Nations
commits to a surge in diplomacy for peace, my mediation and conflict prevention
initiatives will build on ongoing work, such as that carried out by the joint
programme of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Department of Political Affairs on building national capacity for conflict prevention,
that supports conflict analysis and seeks to increase the inclusivity of mediation
processes as well as technical assistance, capacity-building and resources, where
needed, with a view to achieving equal representation of women among national and
local mediators. In my 2018 report on women and peace and security, I intend to
place a special emphasis on assessing the quality of participation and re presentation
of women in peace processes, including in the various institutions tasked with
implementing peace agreements. I urge Member States to contribute information
and analysis in this regard. Although such data can be challenging to track, it is
essential for the improvement of strategies for sustaining peace.
10. The United Nations must support measures that increase women’s participation
in peace processes at all levels. At this time, inclusive processes should be the rule,
not the exception. While global data on women’s participation and influence in
peace processes show improvement over time, the data available for 2016 indicate
some concerning trends and expose ongoing barriers to the meaningful participation

__________________
3
4

17-18255

See S/PV.8022.
Formerly the Global Acceleration Instrument for Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian
Action, as per a decision of its Funding Board in September 2017; see www.wphfund.org.
3/29

S/2017/861

of women in mediation, ranging from women’s overall participation in mediation to
requests for and inclusion of gender expertise in such processes to consultations
with civil society and the inclusion of gender-sensitive provisions in peace
agreements. This non-linear progress highlights the need to translate good practice
into standard practice and to ensure that effective mechanisms are established to
ensure the meaningful measurement of results.
11. Women continue to be underrepresented among delegations to peace processes
led or co-led by the United Nations and as chief negotiators, despite the existence of
a normative framework for women’s meaningful and equal participation and an
evidence base supporting the link between women’s participation and the durability
of peace agreements. The number of women who have served as chief mediators
remains low, although in 2016 several women appointed to senior roles assumed
mediation-related and good offices functions. 5
12. In 2016 there was a slight decrease in women’s overall participation among
delegations to peace processes led or co-led by the United Nations compared with
the previous year. Of the 9 processes tracked, 6 senior women were represented in 11
delegations, compared with in 8 processes and 12 delegations in 2015 and 9
processes and 17 delegations in 2014. Similar to previous years, not every
negotiating party included senior women delegates. Where women were
represented, they were in the minority, a trend that is evident in all peace processes.
For instance, at the 2016 Myanmar Union peace conference, a peace process not
co-led by the United Nations, only 7 women were included in a 75 -member
delegation.
13. There were also fewer requests for gender expertise for those processes. In
2016, such expertise was requested and provided in only four of seven (57 per cent)
applicable mediation processes led or co-led by the United Nations, 7 a decrease
from 89 per cent in 2015, 67 per cent in 2014 and 88 per cent in 2013. Of the
processes that did not request specific gender expertise in 2016, two included longterm engagements with the same parties for which the United Nations has provided
gender expertise in previous years. 8
14. While the improved capacity of staff and senior leadership does not replace
dedicated gender expertise, the Department of Political Affairs has since 2011 been
building that capacity and promoting overall awareness of gender -specific
commitments, thereby providing the tools and strategies necessary for gendersensitive mediation, including through the recent publication of Guidance on
Gender and Inclusive Mediation Strategies, which offers practical strategies and
tools to assist in the design of inclusive mediation strategies and the incorporation
of gender-sensitive provisions in thematic areas of peace agreements. In add ition,
all mediation support teams backstopping ongoing peace processes led or co -led by
__________________
5

This includes women holding positions of Deputy Special Representative (5), Special
Coordinator (1) and Deputy Special Advisers (3) supporting mediation -related processes and
good offices, including in Cyprus, Lebanon, Libya and West Africa.
6
In 2016 the United Nations served as the lead or co -lead mediator in 11 mediation processes, 2 of
which were established to settle border and name disputes, processes for which data are not
tracked, and 9 of which were active. The active processes relate to: Cyprus; the Geneva
International Discussions; Equatorial Guinea and Gabon; Guyana and Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of); Libya; the Sudan (Darfur); the Syrian Arab Rep ublic; Western Sahara; and Yemen.
7
As two negotiations take place at the Minister/Head of State level to settle border and name
disputes, the provision of gender expertise and the consultations with civil society organizations
are not directly applicable.
8
Expertise was previously requested in the long-term engagements of Western Sahara and the
Geneva International Discussions.
4/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

the United Nations in 2016 included women, an accomplishment maintained since
2012.
15. Inclusive mediation processes require consultation with diverse stakeholders,
including women’s organizations. Yet while consultations with civil society were
carried out in 100 per cent of peace negotiations led or co -led by the United Nations
in 2014 and 2015, the figure dropped to 86 per cent in 2016, when such
consultations were conducted in only six of seven processes. 9 Several of the
consultations, however, illustrate the willingness and capacity of civil society to
participate in consultations despite extremely difficult contexts. For example, the
Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria continued to work
with the women’s advisory board and established a civil society support room.
Through those mechanisms, the Special Envoy and senior advisers have consulted
more than 130 representatives of over 500 civil society organizations. Between 30
and 40 per cent of participants in those consultations were women, and their
representation increased steadily. While consultations are important for ensuring
that the perspectives of Syrian society are represented at the talks being held in
Geneva, they do not constitute direct participation and meaningful inclusion of
women in negotiating parties’ delegations to peace talks, as called for in Security
Council resolution 2242 (2015). In Colombia, under its current mandate to verify
the ceasefire and laying down of weapons by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia — People’s Army, the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
facilitated dialogue between women’s organizations and members of the monitoring
and verification mechanism, building confidence in the process among local
communities.
16. After consistent increases between 2010 and 2015, the percentage of signed
peace agreements containing gender-specific provisions declined in 2016, 10 when
only half of the six signed agreements 11 contained such provisions, as compared
with 70 per cent in 2015. The average number of gender-specific provisions
contained in peace agreements in 2016 was inflated because the comprehensive
Colombian peace agreement contained more than 100 such provisions. 12 Although
causal data are not available, women’s participation and leadership in mediation
efforts and gender expertise have a significant impact on the inclusion of gendersensitive provisions in peace agreements, as demonstrated by the Colombian
example.
17. One positive trend has been the initiation of national and regional networks of
women mediators. In March 2017, the African Union established the African
Network of Women in Conflict Prevention and Peace Mediation, also known as
“FemWise”. Led by Italy, the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network is expected
to be launched before the end of 2017, building on the Initiative on Mediation in the
Mediterranean. Emerging networks, along with existing ones such as the Nordic
Women’s Mediators Network, provide a resource for linking knowledge and
capacity across mediation efforts locally and globally. I stress the importance of
ensuring synergy and collaboration among such networks to promote mutual
learning, information-sharing, sustainability and use of the expertise and resources
__________________
9

In the Darfur (Sudan) process, no consultations with civil society took place in 2016.
For the purpose of data collection, the Department of Political Affairs includes cessation -ofhostilities or ceasefire agreements and comprehensive and partial peace agreements under the
term “peace agreements”. These are signed by at least two parties to a conflict intending to end
or significantly transform a violent conflict so that it may be addressed in a more constructive
manner.
11
Concluded in Afghanistan, Colombia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
12
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is the only other country that signed a peace agreement
with at least one provision on conflict-related sexual violence in 2016.
10

17-18255

5/29

S/2017/861

they provide as we strive to achieve the equal and meaningful participation of
women as mediators, and requested my Senior Adviser on Policy to support efforts
in that regard.

B.

Protecting and promoting the rights and leadership of women and
girls in mission and humanitarian settings
18. The world is facing a protection crisis. At the end of 2016 there were more
than 65.5 million forcibly displaced individuals worldwide. 13 Durable solutions
must be developed that address the root causes of violence and conflict, ensure
meaningful and equal participation of women and support the efforts of instituti ons
to meet the needs of all, especially those who are most at risk and the hardest to
reach. Effective collaboration will require intensified action across a broad range of
areas. Sexual and gender-based violence must be addressed outright and as early
warning indicators of conflict and violence, and gender -sensitive protection
environments must be ensured.
19. I am deeply concerned about all forms of gender-based violence, including
violations against women’s human rights defenders, who stand at the fron t lines to
protect and promote the rights of women and girls and gender equality overall.
Alarming accounts of threats and violence continue to emerge across regions, with
individuals or groups targeted for speaking out against violations and for
challenging traditional notions of family and gender roles in their societies. The
repression of human rights, particularly the right of women to the enjoyment of
freedom of speech, assembly and other fundamental rights, is an early warning sign
of impending conflict. 14 Similarly, new research has demonstrated a correlation
between rates of violence against women and outbreaks of conflict, further
underscoring the need to consider the security of women and girls in conflict
prevention efforts. 15 I urge Member States to develop and institutionalize protection
mechanisms for defenders of women’s human rights, publicly condemn violence
and discrimination against them and acknowledge their critical contribution to peace
and security.
Addressing conflict-related sexual violence
20. While progress towards the prevention of and response to conflict has
multiplied over the past decade, conflict-related sexual violence continues to be
perpetrated across diverse situational and country contexts. Dynamic investments
must be made to address the root causes of conflict-related sexual violence,
including the broad and interconnected dimensions of pre -existing sexual and
gender-based violence and the stigma experienced by survivors of sexual violence
and their children, both of which are of critical importance in the context of
conflict-related displacement and population movements, as well as the abduction,
trafficking, return and reintegration of women and girls.

__________________
13

See Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UN HCR), “Global trends:
forced displacement in 2016” (Geneva, 2017).
14
For information regarding the correlation between high levels of repression and impending
conflict see Martin Smidt and others, The Global Conflict Risk Index (GCRI): Manual for Data
Management and Product Output, ver. 5 (European Union, 2016); and Patrick Regan and Daniel
Norton, “Greed, grievance, and mobilization in civil wars”, Journal of Conflict Resolution,
vol. 49, No. 3 (2005).
15
Jocelyn Kelly, “Intimate partner violence and conflict: understanding the links between political
violence and personal violence” (forthcoming and cited as a background paper) in “Pathways for
Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict — Main Messages and Emerging
Policy Directions”, World Bank, Washington, D.C., 2017.
6/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

21. In 2016, the Human Rights Council investigated and received reports of sexual
and gender-based violence in the Syrian Arab Republic, Eritrea, Libya and South
Sudan. 16 The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) completed a comprehensive mapping
exercise that documented widespread sexual and gender-based violence and other
human rights violations in the country since 2003. 17 I am encouraged that many
parties are collaborating with my Special Representative on Sexual Vio lence in
Conflict to develop time-bound commitments to address such violations. For
example, remedial action taken by Côte d’Ivoire resulted in the removal of its armed
forces from the list of parties credibly suspected of committing conflict -related
sexual violence (see S/2017/249, annex).
22. In my latest report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2017/249), I brought
to the Council’s attention 19 situations of concern and an updated list of 46 parties
to conflict credibly suspected of committing or instigating rape and other forms of
sexual violence in situations of armed conflict. 18 In some settings, such as South
Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic, sexual violence continues to rise to alarming
levels. In others, such as Nepal and Sri Lanka, impunity for sexual violence
continues to send an unacceptable message to perpetrators that their crimes will go
unpunished. I reiterate that parties that are listed repeated ly in my annual reports on
conflict-related sexual violence cannot participate in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and I urge Member States and the Security Council to ensure that
sanctions regimes have the mandate and capacity to address such viola tions.
23. Investment in resources for survivors must span legal and essential services,
addressing distinct vulnerabilities for those forcibly displaced and others. This
necessarily includes access to mental health and psychosocial support, shelter,
livelihood support, justice and reparations, and sexual and reproductive health
services, including the treatment and prevention of HIV/AIDS and sexually
transmitted infections and the safe termination of pregnancies resulting from rape,
without discrimination and in accordance with international human rights and
humanitarian law. Examples of such survivor-centred programmes include the
integrated multisectoral gender-based violence prevention and response programmes
of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) in Myanmar and the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in
creating and enhancing medical referral systems for sexual and gender -based
violence in nine countries, which gave more than 485,000 refugees and other
persons of concern access to health care. More than 60 countries, international and
regional organizations and non-governmental organizations have united through the
Call to Action on Protection from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies. I
welcome efforts to address the stigma associated with conflict-related sexual
violence, such as the Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and principles on tackling stigma, launched
this year.
Promoting gender-responsive protective environments
24. I am pleased that progress has been made on gender-specific recommendations
for peace operations and their transition emanating from the 2015 peace and
__________________
16

Eritrea (A/HRC/32/47), Libya (A/HRC/31/CRP.3), South Sudan (A/HRC/31/49), Syrian Arab
Republic (A/HRC/31/68, A/HRC/33/55, A/HRC/31/CRP.1, A/HRC/32/CRP.2).
17
See MINUSCA and others, “Report of the mapping project docume nting serious violations of
international human rights law and international humanitarian law committed within the territory
of the Central African Republic between January 2003 and December 2015” (May 2017).
18
That report should be read in conjunction with the eight previous reports on conflict-related
sexual violence, which provide a cumulative basis for the inclusion of parties in the annexed list.
17-18255

7/29

S/2017/861

security reviews. The Departments of Political Affairs, Peacekeeping Operations
and Field Support continued their efforts to build staff capacity and senior -level
accountability on gender and on women and peace and security. Actions included
the elevation of the head of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department
of Field Support Gender Task Force from the Director to the Under -SecretaryGeneral level, the establishment of a “gender in peacekeeping” dashboard to support
senior leadership in monitoring progress across peace operations and targeted se nior
leadership training on women and peace and security commitments. Those
initiatives have contributed to improved accountability in the implementation of
women and peace and security mandates across peacekeeping operations. In
addition, as mandated by the Security Council in its resolution 2242 (2015), specific
training on gender-sensitive reporting was delivered to more than 200 staff members
across missions and at Headquarters. I plan to include infor mation on the results of
those measures in the next annual report.
25. Provisions on women and peace and security are included in police and
military concepts of operations and military force operations orders, 19 and gender is
increasingly integrated into national predeployment training, military exercises and
courses on peace operations. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support have strengthened the gender components of their core
predeployment training curriculum, and revisions of department-wide policies and
guidance on gender equality are under way, with the United Nations Police Gender
Toolkit already extensively used by field missions.
26. Although women’s representation among uniformed components of
peacekeeping operations contributes to mission success, 20 women are deployed at
remarkably low levels. As at 31 December 2016, women constituted 7.4 per cent of
military observers and staff officers. Women’s overall representation among military
troops, however, remained at 4 per cent. Women constituted only 10 per cent of all
police officers, with 17 per cent among individual police officers and only 7 per
cent among formed police units, similar to the level in 2015. 21 However, despite the
low numbers, women are being deployed as contingent commanders, and several
missions now have female police and military peacekeeper networks and military
gender advisers.
27. Increasing women’s participation in national uniformed services may
contribute to an increase in the number of women deployed in United Nations
missions. Targeted outreach has increased the awareness of women officers of
opportunities within the military component. For example, since 2015 more than
240 female military officers have completed two -week training courses, hosted by
China, Kenya and India, with support from the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), to boost their readiness
for deployment in peace operations. In 2017, Finland ran its first gender-balanced
United Nations military observer course. In 2016, the Police Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations trained 750 female police officers from
seven police-contributing countries, 358 of whom passed the Assessment for
Mission Service test, 218 of whom were subsequently deployed. This number
represented 32 per cent of individual female police officer deployments in 2016.
28. In line with the 2016 United Nations peacekeeping defence ministerial
commitments, the Office of Military Affairs of the Department of Peacekeeping
__________________
19

As at mid-2017, 100 per cent of military concepts of operations and military force operations
orders and 93 per cent of police concepts of operations included women and peace and security
provisions — a level reached in 2015. These data are tracked systematically.
20
See, e.g., A/70/357-S/2015/682, para. 82.
21
The latest data are available from www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/resources/statistics/gender.shtml.
8/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

Operations has designated 300 posts for women only. It is a promising sign that the
rank range for women military observers has expanded and the length of the tour of
duty has been reduced to six months for women officers with young families. I
welcome the proposal of the Military Adviser for Peacekeeping Operations to
deploy mixed patrols and female engagement teams, as is done by Kenya and
Zambia, as they will lead to better understanding of the needs of local communities.
29. I am encouraged by the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to develop a curriculum for senior female police officers in preparation for
peacekeeping duties.
30. Stronger efforts are needed by all actors, however, to reach the global target of
15 per cent women military observers and staff officers being deployed by
December 2017 and 20 per cent female police by 2020, agreed upon at the 2016
United Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference. I have requested the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support,
UN-Women and the Executive Office of the Secretary-General, together with troopcontributing countries, to develop a dedicated strategy to significantly increase the
number of women peacekeepers and police in peacekeeping missions. I urge my
leadership group to take measures to address the structural barriers that limit
women’s meaningful participation in both the uniformed and civilian components of
peacekeeping and urge Member States to look at ways of operationalizing the
request of the Security Council in its resolution 2242 (2015) that incentives be
adopted.
31. The gains for women and peace and security and gender equality made during
the life of a mission must be safeguarded during transition as the transformative
changes that ensure non-recurrence and regression into conflict. While enhanced
protection functions and the designation of focal points on conflict -related sexual
violence in the human rights components of peace operations have strengthened the
monitoring of human rights violations targeting women and improved the
coordination of monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements, robust and
relevant gender analysis is an essential component of this result. The United Nations
is committed to accelerating efforts to integrate gender -responsive conflict analysis
and expertise in mission planning, mandate development, implementation, review,
budget analysis and all mission transitions and drawdowns. Analysis that re lies on
high-quality disaggregated data should be included in all conflict prevention work
and efforts by the United Nations, other international organizations, national actors
and civil society.
32. The new generation of United Nations country teams must ensure partnership
with civil society and the full integration of gender expertise, guaranteeing careful
prioritization and the strategic repositioning of gender -related issues in missions to
Governments and country teams. The proposed multi-partner trust fund for Liberia,
for example, aims to bridge the financing gap as the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) withdraws next year and should from the outset strive to allocate
a minimum of 15 per cent of all funding for gender equality and women’s
empowerment. Such efforts may prove to be an example for future mission
drawdowns.
Addressing sexual exploitation and abuse
33. In 2016, 145 new allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse were made
against United Nations staff, 80 against uniformed personnel and 65 against
civilians, including staff from departments and offices of the Secretariat, agencies,
funds and programmes. Those 145 allegations involved at least 311 victims, nearly
all of them women and girls. Of the cases reported, 103 occurre d in the context of
17-18255

9/29

S/2017/861

peace operations, and 73 of 80 allegations against uniformed personnel involved
members of the military. Of the allegations related to field missions, 69 per cent
were received from MINUSCA and the United Nations Stabilization Mission i n the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). Of those, 57 per cent involved
sexual abuse in the form of non-consensual sexual activities with an adult or any
form of sexual activity with minors.
34. Detailed information on allegations received in 2016, including against
non-United Nations forces operating under a Security Council mandate, is provided
in my report on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse,
along with recommendations for intensified action ( A/71/818). I welcome the
Security Council’s unprecedented step of adopting resolution 2272 (2016) on sexual
exploitation and abuse. Those violations, apart from destroying lives, seriously
damage and jeopardize the good work of peace missions and the Organization.
35. Eradicating sexual exploitation and abuse is a priority and one of my first
orders of business. As part of a new comprehensive strategy (see A/71/818), I have
committed to putting victims’ rights at the forefront of United Nations efforts and
am working tirelessly to end impunity for such crimes. I recently appointed the
first-ever victims’ rights advocate, and a trust fund was established in 2016 to
support services for victims. Over the past year, under the umbrella of the Special
Coordinator on Improving the United Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse, the United Nations upgraded and aligned tools across the system, including
the development and implementation of a victim assistance protocol, the
harmonization of investigation standards and complaint mechanisms and the
implementation of a standardized reporting form across the United Nations system.
36. As eradicating sexual exploitation and abuse can be achieved only in
partnership with Member States, at my high-level meeting on the prevention of
sexual exploitation and abuse, held on 18 September 2017, I launched several
initiatives that demonstrate this partnership. I introduced my circle of leadership, in
which Heads of State and Government pledged to stand with me to end impunity, to
strengthen measures to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse, to respond rapidly
and decisively to credible reports and to meet the needs of victims quickly and
appropriately. I also launched a voluntary compact with Member States to
strengthen commitments to address sexual exploitation and abuse. I welcome the
outcomes of the United Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial Conference,
hosted by the United Kingdom in September 2016, at which more than 60 countries
pledged to adopt measures to tackle sexual exploitation and abuse perpetrated by
United Nations peacekeepers.
Promoting gender equality and women and girls’ empowerment in
humanitarian action, including guaranteeing access to essential services
37. As at 30 June 2017, 141.1 million people were in need of humanitarian
assistance, an increase from 125.3 million in 2015, as cycles of conflict and
unprecedented natural and climate change-related disasters continued to have
devastating effects, including massive forced displacement. 22 Gender inequality
compounds the ubiquitous conflict and emergency-related obstacles to safe access to
food, water, sanitation, hygiene, health care, education, employment, housing, legal
identity, resources and more. Factors such as sex, age, disability, marital status,
sexual orientation, gender identity, race and ethnic, religious and political identity
can lead to further discrimination. Women’s knowledge, community networks and
leadership capacity continue to be underutilized, lessening the effectiveness of many
humanitarian efforts.
__________________
22

10/29

See www.unocha.org/sites/unocha/files/GHO-JuneStatusReport2017.pdf.
17-18255

S/2017/861

38. Lack of access to health-care services, including sexual, reproductive and
HIV-related services, has a devastating impact on women and girls, particularly in
emergency-affected settings. Data continue to show disturbing gaps, including in
maternal mortality rates, which are almost twice as high as the global ratio in
conflict and post-conflict countries. 23 Non-discriminatory holistic health care and
other services, including sexual and reproductive health care and mental health and
psychosocial support, must be delivered to women and girls in accordance with
international humanitarian and human rights law.
39. Examples of such efforts in the most challenging settings include a network of
maternal health clinics in South Sudan supported by the International Organization
for Migration and medical and psychosocial assistance for survivors of gender based violence provided by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) in
Somalia. The International Planned Parenthood Federation, through Australia’s
contributions, responded to 71 humanitarian crises, reaching over 890,000 people
with crucial sexual and reproductive health services in 2016. Too often, insufficient
resources and wavering political support undermine the effectiveness of holistic
health services in these humanitarian settings. I recognize the efforts of Member
States to bridge this funding gap, including through the She Decides initiative.
40. Conflicts and emergencies also limit or end girls’ access to education. The
gender gap in the global adjusted net enrolment rate in primary and secondary
education widens significantly in conflict and post-conflict countries, and girls in
conflict countries are almost two and a half times more likely to be out of school
than those in non-conflict settings. 24 A basic human right, education helps protect
girls and young women from violations, including human trafficking and early and
child marriage. Yet less than 2.7 per cent of humanitarian funding is devoted to
education. 25 I encourage efforts to fill those gaps, including such private
partnerships as the Instant Network Schools programme and Education Cannot Wait,
the first global fund to prioritize education in humanitarian contexts, which aims to
raise $3.85 billion by 2020 to educate 75 million children living in crisis -affected
countries.
41. Statelessness and unequal nationality laws drive conflict and instability and
have a disparate impact on women and girls. In 26 countries, 8 of which are affected
by conflict, 26 women do not have the right to confer their nationality to their
children. I am alarmed by the grave situation in Myanmar, where the Rohingya are
systematically denied their right to citizenship and targeted for violence, including
sexual and gender-based violence. 27 In many countries hosting Syrian refugees, it
remains a challenge to register children whose fathers are missing, including
children born to survivors of rape, heightening their risk of statelessness. 28 I
welcome such initiatives as those carried out by UNHCR in Chad, where more than
6,000 returnees from the Central African Republic have undergone biometric
registration and nationality verification through a European Union -funded
programme supporting returnees and helping to prevent statelessness. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) worked to address
protection risks among internally displaced women arising from their forfeiture of
__________________
23

See S/2016/822, para. 32.
See http://gem-report-2016.unesco.org/en/gender-review/.
25
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), “Aid to education
is stagnating and not going to countries most in need”, policy paper No. 31, May 2017.
26
Burundi, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Somalia, the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic.
27
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, “Interviews with Rohingyas
fleeing from Myanmar since 9 October 2016”, flash report, February 2017.
28
S/2017/249 and General Assembly resolution 70/291.
24

17-18255

11/29

S/2017/861

identity documents, which was a prerequisite to their receiving space to which to
relocate.
42. Against the deterioration of humanitarian situations and the increase in related
protection concerns globally, the implementation of the 2016 New York Declaration
for Refugees and Migrants (resolution 71/1) and the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction 2015-2030 (resolution 69/283, annex II) is critical, as is the
redoubling of efforts to act on the commitments made at the 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit (see A/71/353), including by facilitating women’s leadership
and participation in humanitarian action, preventing and responding to gender -based
violence in crisis and ensuring universal access to sexual and reproductive rights.
Implementing the women and peace and security agenda in efforts to prevent
and counter terrorism and violent extremism
43. Terrorist and violent extremist groups have continued to carry out attacks
against civilians, with the subjugation and exploitation of women and girls a
common element across the agendas of the various groups. Because of this, the
advancement of gender equality is key to stemming abuse, exploitation and
recruitment by violent extremist and terrorist groups. The international community
must remain steadfast in ensuring that its responses are consistent with international
law and that the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda,
with its emphasis on conflict prevention and the meaningful participation of women,
is integral to its response.
44. Women play critical roles in crisis prevention, working with governments and
communities to build resilience. Member States and United Nations entities must
improve and increase their collaboration with civil society, financing projects that
address the root causes of violent extremism and terrorism and the gender
dimension of the recruitment strategies of extremist and terrorist groups. This was
exemplified by the consultations of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) Human Rights Unit with civil society to understand the
various perspectives on violent extremism and identify existing efforts to resist
patriarchy, violence, extremist narratives and instrumentalization by government
actors, providing a blueprint for further action, programmi ng in the area of women
and peace and security and a direct link to preventing violent extremism.
45. At the same time, some women actively support terrorist groups, ideologically
and operationally, and use their voices to legitimize violent extremist narr atives.
The most recent figures suggest that women make up at least 20 -30 per cent of
foreign terrorist fighters, with the participation of women growing to an
unprecedented level. 29 While the participation of women in terrorist activities is not
a new phenomenon, it is now recognized within the global framework for the
prevention of violent extremism and for counter-terrorism that gender-sensitive
analysis and responses are necessary for effectively achieving both aims.
46. Terrorist and violent extremist groups also manipulate gender norms and
stereotypes to carry out recruitment and attacks. For example, Boko Haram has been
increasingly reported to use women and girls to carry out its suicide attacks. 30 As a
result, in Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria, almost one of every five suicide
__________________
29

See Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, “Implementation of Security Council
resolution 2178 (2014) by States affected by foreign terrorist fighters”, a compilation of three
reports (S/2015/338; S/2015/683; S/2015/975) (2016).
30
See S/2017/563 and S/2017/764, and Jason Warner and Hilary Matfess, “Exploding stereotypes:
the unexpected operational and demographic characteristics of Boko Haram’s suicide bombers”,
(Combating Terrorism Center at West Point, 2017).
12/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

bombers is a child and three quarters of all child suicide bombers are girls. 31
Terrorist and violent extremist groups also utilize sexual and gender -based violence,
including human trafficking, sexual slavery, forced marri age and forced pregnancy,
to terrorize communities and generate revenue, as highlighted in resolution 2331
(2016).
47. I recognize the progress made through the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2242 (2015) and the Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
(A/70/674) and the 2016 review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy (A/70/826 and A/70/826/Corr.1). Member States are increasingly
encouraged to engage women’s leadership and incorporate gender into policies and
strategies for preventing and countering violent extremism and terrorism. I welcome
efforts by Member States to initiate human rights -based and gender-sensitive
approaches to the rehabilitation and reintegration of returnees and victims, released
prisoners and suspects who qualify for alternatives to prosecution. I am encouraged
by the efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate in supporting women’s leadership and participation and the
efforts of the Union for the Mediterranean, with UN -Women and UNDP, to
contribute further to the evidence indicating the extent to which political
marginalization and human rights abuses drive women and men into violent
extremist groups.
48. I commend efforts to strengthen networks of women’s civil society
organizations operating in contexts of violent extremism and terrorism and to ensure
that their perspectives feed into broader work on prevention and response, including
that of the Women’s Alliance for Security Leadership in support of innovative civil
society-led efforts to prevent violent extremism. 32 The Global Solutions Exchange,
launched in 2016, provides an encouraging example through its support to high level dialogue between civil society and governments on preventing violent
extremism. Several countries and organizations are implementing training and
education for women as mothers, educators, law enforcement personnel and
religious leaders to prevent radicalization and recruitment. 33 However, as the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights has advised (A/HRC/31/65), such
interventions must not “securitize” women’s rights or reinforce gender stereotypes
that limit women’s agency or exacerbate gender inequality — which can, in turn,
drive radicalization and violence and heighten the risks faced by women and girls.

C.

Building inclusive and peaceful societies
49. Women peace activists of diverse ages and backgrounds are at the forefront in
sustaining peace and they require support and access to maximize their vital
contributions to peacebuilding. The forthcoming progress study on youth, peace and
security, mandated by the Security Council in its resolution 2250 (2015), is already
finding evidence, through research and consultations with young people around the
world, of the unrecognized role of and multiple forms o f discrimination against
young women as peacebuilders. A United Nations-World Bank study stressed that
high levels of gender inequality and gender-based violence in a society can be

__________________
31

United Nations Children’s Fund, “Beyond Chibok”, April 2016.
Sanam Naraghi Anderlini, “Uncomfortable truths, unconventional wisdoms: women’s
perspectives on violent extremism and security interventions”, Women’s Alliance for Security
Leadership, brief No. 1, March 2016.
33
Naureen Chowdhury Fink, Sara Zeiger and Rafia Bhulai, eds., “A man’s world?: Exploring the
roles of women in countering terrorism and violent extremism” (Hedayah and the Global Center
on Cooperative Security, 2016).
32

17-18255

13/29

S/2017/861

associated with increased vulnerability to civil and inter -State war. 34 Research on
“masculinities” is also contributing transformative recommendations towards more
gender-equal and peaceful societies. 35 I note the Peacebuilding Commission’s role in
sustaining peace and the need for Member States to ensure strong implementation of
the gender strategy adopted in 2016 and the inclusion of gender considerations into
the Commission’s work.
Economic recovery and access to resources
50. Women’s economic empowerment has a positive effect on overall post -conflict
recovery and economic growth. However, large-scale investment in post-conflict
economies often focuses on infrastructure, extractive industries and commercial
agriculture, where women are underrepresented or excluded. Instead, recovery
targeting women often focuses on small-scale and local initiatives, including
community loans, revolving credit and revenue -generating cooperatives. While such
efforts can be meaningful, they should not preclude women’s access to large -scale
economic recovery and must actively resist any move to return to the status quo of
discrimination of women with respect to access to economic resources, property,
inheritance, land tenure and ownership and natural resources. The United Nations,
Member States and other stakeholders must ensure that post -conflict economic
recovery responds to the needs of all sectors of society and that women hold
leadership positions relevant to the design and implementation of post -conflict
recovery plans.
51. The Sustainable Development Goals 36 and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda 37
commit the international community to development and financing frameworks that
integrate the fundamental principles of gender equality and non -discrimination.
Both agendas go beyond women’s right to equal participation in the economy,
addressing also foreign direct investment, illicit financial and arms flows and the
collection and intersectional disaggregation of data, with the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda also highlighting the need for gender-responsive budgeting. I acknowledge
women’s efforts to ensure accountability for the crimes of transnational corporations
and the proactive efforts of the United Nations, along with Member States and civil
society, to transform gender inequality through economic recovery. In 2016, for
example, UNDP increased the monetary benefits received by women from
temporary employment in the context of early recovery programmes by more than
$16 million compared with 2015, with women receiving 47 per cent of benefits in
countries where disaggregated data are available, an increase from 46 per cent in
2015 and 38 per cent in 2014. 38
Governance and women’s participation in elected and non-elected bodies
52. Significant challenges concerning the inclusiveness of the electoral process
remain, particularly in conflict and post-conflict settings. Structural barriers to
women’s participation in political processes persist at all levels, with ongoing
__________________
34

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive
Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., World Bank Group, 2017).
35
Shereen El Feki, Brian Heilman and Gary Barker, eds., Understanding Masculinities: Results
from the International Men and Gender Equality Survey — Middle East and North Africa (Cairo
and Washington, D.C., UN-Women and Promundo-US, 2017).
36
Resolution 70/1.
37
Resolution 69/313, annex.
38
Covering Afghanistan, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Iraq, Lebanon, Mali, Mauritania, South Sudan, the Sudan, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine, Yemen and the State of Palestine. The indicator measures
monetary equivalent of benefits.
14/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

challenges with respect to the investigation and prosecution of violence and assaults
on or harassment of women elected officials and candidates for political office.
Increasing women’s participation and representation in governance and decision making, including in national legislatures and local councils, is not only called for
under the women and peace and security agenda, but also directly contributes to
sustaining peace. Women’s representation is consistently and positively linked to the
durability of peace and perceptions of good governance. 39
53. As at 1 July 2017, only 17 countries had elected a woman Head of State or
Government, including one post-conflict country, Liberia. 40 During the past year, the
global proportion of parliamentary seats occupied by women has increased slightly,
from 22.9 per cent in July 2016 to 23.6 per cent in July 2017. However, the
proportion in conflict and post-conflict countries has stagnated in the past two years
at 16 per cent. The use of legislative quotas has promoted women’s representation,
especially where they are enforced. In countries where such quotas are applied, 41
women occupied 22.5 per cent of parliamentary seats, compared with 10.7 per cent
in those where they are not. For example, in Somalia in 2016, following the partial
implementation of a temporary special measure stipulating that 30 per cent of
representatives to the House of the People must be women, representation jumped to
24.4 per cent, compared with 14 per cent following the 2012 process. Women’s
representation in non-elected positions also remains below gender parity; a review
of public administrations in 13 conflict and post-conflict countries showed that
women held an average of 21.3 per cent of decision -making positions. 42
54. In 2016, the Department of Political Affairs, UN -Women and UNDP undertook
efforts to improve the trends described above, providing technical assistan ce for
gender-sensitive electoral processes and continuing systematic efforts to ensure that
all United Nations electoral assistance policies and activities are gender sensitive.
Peace operations led by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations continued t o
support initiatives to promote women’s political participation in different contexts,
including in the Central African Republic and Haiti. The Electoral Assistance
Division of the Department of Political Affairs, supported by United Nations
partners, has continued to ensure that gender is mainstreamed in all United Nations
electoral policy documents and that all needs-assessment reports include genderspecific analysis and recommendations.
55. In addition to the improved efforts to curb the negative tren ds described above,
the international community must remain ready to effectively measure progress.
National statistical systems can increase their effectiveness by increasing and
improving the collection of data necessary to populate baselines for Sustaina ble
Development Goal indicators relating to the proportion of seats held by women in
national parliaments and local governments (5.5.1(b)) and to proportional
__________________
39

See, for example, Sarah Shair-Rosenfield and Reed Wood, “Governing well after war: how
improving female representation prolongs post-conflict peace”, in Journal of Politics, vol. 79,
No. 3 (July 2017);and Thomas Carothers, “Democracy support strategies: le ading with women’s
political empowerment” (Washington, D.C., Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2016).
40
In the present report, conflict and post-conflict countries include countries or territories in which
a political, peacebuilding or peacekeeping mission operated during 2016, or concerning which
the Security Council was seized and which had been considered by the Council at a formal
meeting during the period from 1 January to 31 December 2016, or that had received
programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund in 2016.
41
Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burundi, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Guinea, Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Libya, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Sudan and the Sudan.
42
Reported by UNDP, “Global initiative on gender equality in public administration” (New York,
2014), drawing on 13 countries for which data are available: Afghanistan, Burundi, Colombia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Lebanon, Mali, Nepal, Nigeria, Sri Lanka, Tajikistan, Uganda, the State of
Palestine and Kosovo.
17-18255

15/29

S/2017/861

representation in public institutions (16.7.1). At present, no global baselines for
these indicators exist, hindering possibilities for further research on and recognition
of the contributions of local-level women leaders, including in conflict-affected
settings.
Promotion of women’s roles in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control
56. The past year saw the continued use of heavy and unconventional weapons,
including chemical and explosive weapons, in civilian areas, with grave impacts on
civilian populations, particularly in the Syrian Arab Republic. I reiterate the
importance of focusing on the gender-specific effects of armed violence and the
promotion of the role of women in disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control to
understand how illicit arms flows and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons feed a continuum of violence. Even after the conclusion of formal peace
agreements, unresolved root causes of conflict and illicit financial and arms flows
often fuel gang activity and alarming rates of everyday violence, including femicide.
57. On 7 July 2017, 122 Member and observer States voted to adopt the Treaty on
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (A/CONF.229/2017/8), a historic achievement
resulting from decades of anti-nuclear-weapon campaigns, which engaged many
women-led organizations and networks. At the Sixth Biennial Meeting of States to
Consider the Implementation of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held
in June 2016, States noted the impact of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons on the realization of Sustainable Development Goal 5 on gender equality.
58. Both the Treaty and the Programme of Action call for the equal and effective
participation of women and men. Under the Treaty, States commit to supporting
women’s participation in disarmament and gender-sensitive victim assistance. The
third United Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of
the Programme of Action, to be held in 2018, presents an opportunity to continue
progress and to underscore the importance of gender considerations in the control of
and reporting on the proliferation of small arms and light weapons, the need for
broader participation of women in disarmament and the mandatory inclusion of
gender considerations in all funding applications for the United Nations trust
facility supporting cooperation on arms regulation.
59. Data on and analysis of the control of illicit small arms and light weapons
often fail to capture progress towards gender-specific commitments. However, the
revised reporting template for the Programme of Action will contribute to
accountability through the provision of data.
60. In its resolution 2122 (2013), the Security Council called for women’s full
participation in gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
and in security sector reform. I welcome the Council’s efforts to address those
requirements in recent country-specific resolutions and call upon all peace
operations with such components to ensure robust gender dynamics in the planning
and implementation phases. 43 Data from disarmament and community violence
reduction initiatives implemented by the United Nations in five field missions 44 in
2016 indicate that 26 per cent of participants in programmes for the reintegration of
ex-combatants and youth at risk were women, up from 12 per cent in 2015 and the
same share as in 2014. I acknowledge initiatives to enhance women’s participation
__________________
43

See, for example, resolutions 2295 (2016) (Mali), 2301 (2016) (Central African Republic), and
2344 (2017) (Afghanistan).
44
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), MINUSMA, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), and UNAMID.
16/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

in the area of mine action. For example, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) trained victims of explosive
incidents and persons with disabilities, half of whom were women, to provide risk
education in their communities.
Rule of law and access to justice
61. Structural inequalities, poverty and discrimination hinder the access of women
and girls to justice and security as well as to transitional justice processes. A gender responsive legal and judicial system constitutes one of the building blocks of a
resilient society. Transitional justice mechanisms and rule of law institutions in
transition and conflict contexts should be supported in addressing inequality and
responding to the most urgent needs of women affected by conflict, should ensure
accountability for sexual and gender-based violence, should ensure the fair
administration of both formal and informal justice processes and should implement
specific steps to promote women in leadership positions. National justice systems
must be strengthened to facilitate the investigation and prosecution of sexual and
gender-based crimes consistent with international standards and in compliance with
the principles of non-discrimination. Moreover, in the prosecution of members of
terrorist and violent extremist groups, consideration must be given to the gender related nature of crimes and indeed the full body of international criminal law,
including crimes against humanity and genocide, and not be limited to only the
terrorist crimes themselves.
62. As judges and commissioners in transitional justice and rule of law
institutions, women remain unequally represented. As at 1 July 2017, women
comprised 27.7 per cent of commissioners on United Nations -supported truth
commissions; in Tunisia, 5 of 11 commissioners were women; and in Mali, 5 of 25
commissioners were women. Women are also underrepresented in the recently
established national criminal tribunals for conflict-related crimes, such as the
Specialist Court for Kosovo, where 5 of the 25 judges appointed to the chambers are
women. I encourage the Special Criminal Court in the Central African Republic to
institute proactive recruitment strategies so as to ensure gender parity in staffing at
all levels. 45
63. The Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections arrangement of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNDP, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UNHCR, UN -Women and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has significantly improved
gender mainstreaming in United Nations assistance to Member States on the rule of
law, worked to ensure the inclusion of gender perspectives in joint assessments,
planning, programming, resource mobilization and the rapid deployment of
expertise and supported an overall culture in support of an integrated approach to
women’s access to justice programming. During the reporting period, the
arrangement has supported the development and implementation of joint rule of law
programmes with dedicated components to develop women’s capacities and meet
their needs in the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Liberia, Mali, Somalia, the Sudan (Darfur), the State of
Palestine and Kosovo. 46 A significant percentage of the budget of these joint
multi-year rule of law programmes has been allocated to enhance women’s access to
justice and to support survivors of sexual and gender -based violence in the Central
African Republic (16 per cent), Mali (20 per cent), Somalia (27 per cent) and the
__________________
45
46

17-18255

See MINUSCA and others, “Report of the mapping project”.
References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of resolution 1244 (1999).
17/29

S/2017/861

State of Palestine (20 per cent), in line with the seven -point action plan for genderresponsive peacebuilding (A/65/354-S/2010/466).
64. In 2016 and 2017, Member States have made several notable contributions
towards ending impunity. In 2017, Senegalese officials arrested a Guinean
lieutenant, Aboubacar Diakité, for his role in crimes of sexual violence in Guinea,
and officials in the Democratic Republic of the Congo arrested Ntabo Ntaberi
Cheka, a rebel leader, for the mass rape of civilians in the country. UNDP has
worked in Afghanistan to establish specialized courts to handle sexual and gender based violence crimes and in Timor-Leste to support a mobile court initiative,
bringing justice to those who are the hardest to reach. Moreover, MONUSCO
worked to bring perpetrators of serious crimes, including crimes of sexual violence,
to justice through prosecution support cells. In 2016, the Team of Expe rts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict continued to strengthen the capacity of
national rule of law and justice actors, and UN -Women and Justice Rapid Response
deployed 19 experts on sexual and gender-based violence to participate in
investigations and accountability processes, including to all United Nations
commissions of inquiry. I encourage Member States to continue to provide gender
expertise in credible investigations of rape and sexual and other forms of violence in
line with international human rights standards.
65. Holistic, survivor-focused initiatives further contribute to enhancing access to
justice. In Mali, for example, the Peacebuilding Fund has supported a multisectoral,
survivor-centred approach to facilitating access to justice, resulting in an increase in
the number of cases of sexual violence brought to court in the regions of Gao and
Timbuktu, from 1 per cent to almost 14 per cent. In Somaliland, UNODC, in
cooperation with the World Health Organization and UNFPA, piloted a global tool
to bridge gaps between medical services and justice processes for survivors of
sexual and gender-based violence, fostering coordination between the medical and
legal systems. In Jordan, UNHCR supported the deployment of specialized lawyers
in women’s and girls’ safe spaces in refugee camps, leading to improved access to
justice for survivors of violence.
66. National authorities and civil society are also working with the United Nations
to prevent and address sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence in Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Guatemala, Iraq, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone, the Sudan and other countries. Such
efforts include legal reform, legal assistance programmes, community security
programmes, specialized services for victims and survivors of violence, awareness raising campaigns and rehabilitation programmes. In Darfur, support was provided
for the opening of a child-friendly family visiting bay in a women’s prison, and in
Kyrgyzstan, the participation of women in local public safety meetings led to the
prioritization of sexual and gender-based violence in crime prevention plans.
67. UN-Women and the European Union jointly support gender-sensitive
transitional justice in Colombia, Mali, Nepal, the Philippines and Kosovo,
championing the participation of conflict-affected women and deploying gender
advisers to transitional justice mechanisms. In Liberia, UNDP and OHCHR
partnered with the Independent National Commission on Human Rights to
strengthen the transitional justice process, commonly known as the Palava Hut
programme, and increase the number of women participants. Cambodia and
Germany have cooperated on a reconciliation project that involves working with
survivors of forced marriage carried out during the rule of the Khmer Rouge to tell
their stories through cultural activities and providing psychological support
services.

18/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

D.

Initiatives to monitor implementation and advance results
National accountability for commitments to women and peace and security
68. As at 31 August 2017, 68 countries or areas 47 had adopted national action
plans on women and peace and security, and several other plans were in
development. However, a closer analysis reveals that more than 20 national action
plans have already expired or will expire soon. Moreover, of the national action
plans adopted to date, only 12 have an allocated budget, and others have gaps in
implementation, meaningful civil society inclusion and conflict prevention,
particularly with respect to disarmament. I note efforts by Jordan and Nepal to
examine the budgeting for their national action plans and urge Member States to
integrate women and peace and security commitments into all national planning
tools and instruments and to adopt and implement comprehensive national action
plans and other frameworks on women and peace and security, with indicators to
monitor progress and track allocations. I encourage countries with expired or
expiring national action plans to take this opportunity to assess progress and
strengthen policies, laws and programmes.
69. Currently 13 countries are implementing their second national action plan, a nd
7 are implementing their third. Of all current national action plans, 48 (72 per cent)
have monitoring frameworks with progress indicators, and 18 (27 per cent) have
designated implementation budgets, reflecting a slight increase from 25 per cent in
2016. These second- and third-generation plans are integrating emerging priorities,
such as migration, climate change and violent extremism. In Nigeria, for example,
the second national action plan expanded the concept of security to include issues of
violent extremism, trauma and healing, disarmament and demobilization, and local
or zonal action for further localization. At least seven national action plans have
specifically highlighted women’s roles in conflict prevention as a critical element of
the women and peace and security agenda. 48
70. The Women, Peace and Security National Focal Points Network, launched by
63 Member States last year in an initiative of Spain, had its inaugural meeting in
April 2017 in Alicante, Spain (see S/2017/485). The meeting included more than
100 national focal points, government actors and civil society representatives from
61 countries discussing innovative uses of national action plans, including
eliminating structural barriers to gender equality and preventing violent extremism,
and civil society engagement in the design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of such plans.
71. Transforming the international, regional and national commitments set out in
resolutions on women and peace and security into local action can further ensure
that local needs and priorities inform national, regional and global policy
development. Currently, 15 countries are implementing the localization programme

__________________
47

Afghanistan, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Canada, the Central African Republic, Chile, Côte d ’Ivoire, Croatia, Czechia,
Denmark, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, the
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia, Lithuania, Mali, Montenegro, Nepal, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, the Re public of Korea,
Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Sudan, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor -Leste, Togo,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and N orthern Ireland, the United States
of America, the State of Palestine and Kosovo.
48
Those of Italy, Kenya, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Sweden, Tajikistan and the United Kingdom.
17-18255

19/29

S/2017/861

facilitated by the Global Network of Women Peacebuilders. 49 Moreover, national
policies designed to promote gender equality in foreign policy and international
cooperation, such as the adoption by Sweden and Canada, respectively, of a feminist
foreign policy and a feminist foreign assistance polic y, further demonstrate
leadership and a commitment to address the root causes of gender inequality.
72. I welcome the use of human rights monitoring and reporting mechanisms to
address Member State accountability for violations of women’s human rights,
including in conflict and post-conflict settings. In 2016, the special procedures
mechanisms of the Human Rights Council sent a total of 526 communications. Of
those, 79 were sent to conflict and post-conflict countries, 50 with 5 pertaining to
women’s rights violations. The communications regarding rights violations included
allegations of killings, sexual violence, harassment and threats against women
human rights defenders and judges, denial of food, politically motivated
prosecutions and abductions of women and girls for sexual exploitation.
73. In 2016, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
continued to engage States regarding the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda and its general recommendation No. 30 on wo men in conflict
prevention, conflict and post-conflict situations. Also in 2016, three of the four
concluding observations addressed to conflict and post-conflict countries referenced
both the agenda and general recommendation No. 30, the same percentage a s in
2015. 51 The Committee’s concluding observations for 10 non-conflict countries in
2016 referenced the women and peace and security agenda. 52 In 2017, the
Committee adopted general recommendation No. 35 on gender -based violence
against women (CEDAW/C/GC/35), updating general recommendation No. 19,
which draws an explicit link between gender, discrimination and conflict -related
violence against women. I welcome the Arria formula meeting convened by Spain
and Uruguay on 5 December 2016, which brought together members of the
Committee and the Security Council to discuss the linkages between human rights
and the women and peace and security agenda, in which the Committee was urged
to recommend concrete actions to Member States for the implementation of
women’s human rights in conflict prevention and in conflict and post -conflict
situations, including recommendations to non-conflict countries regarding
extraterritorial obligations under the Convention on the Elimin ation of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. I encourage Member States to use the universal
periodic review as an opportunity to enhance accountability for women’s human
rights obligations and commitments to the women and peace and security agenda.

__________________
49

Armenia, Burundi, Colombia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Georgia, Kenya, Nepal,
Liberia, the Philippines, the Republic of Moldova, Sierra Leone, Serbia, South Sudan, Uganda
and Ukraine.
50
See footnote 40 for an explanation of conflict and post -conflict countries considered in the
present report. Communications were sent to Afghanistan, Burundi, Colombia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti,
Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Mali, Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Ukraine, Yemen and the State of Palestine.
51
Burundi (CEDAW/C/BDI/CO/5-6), Mali (CEDAW/C/MLI/CO/6-7), and Myanmar
(CEDAW/C/MMR/CO/4-5). Haiti was also considered by the Committee, but without reference
to women, peace and security (CEDAW/C/HTI/CO/8-9). See footnote 40 for an explanation of
conflict and post-conflict countries considered in the present report.
52
Armenia (CEDAW/C/ARM/CO/5-6), Canada (CEDAW/C/CAN/CO/8-9), Estonia
(CEDAW/C/EST/CO/5-6), Germany (CEDAW/C/DEU/CO/7-8), Ireland (CEDAW/C/IRL/CO/6-7),
Jordan (CEDAW/C/JOR/CO/6), the Netherlands (CEDAW/C/NLD/CO/6), the Philippines
(CEDAW/C/PHL/CO/7-8), Rwanda (CEDAW/C/RWA/CO/7-9) and Turkey
(CEDAW/C/TUR/CO/7).
20/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

74. In 2016, four conflict and post-conflict countries underwent the universal
periodic review 53 and engaged on issues relating to women and peace and security,
including sexual violence, women’s political participation and the adoption of
national action plans. In total, 10 of the 14 countries reviewed in 2016 received
questions, comments, and recommendations to address legacies of conflict or
violence through the women and peace and security agenda. 54
75. National human rights institutions are also a critical link in the chain of
accountability for women human rights violations and contribute to the prevention
of human rights violations and conflict altogether. As at 31 July 2017, of the 31
countries and territories reviewed for the present report, 17 had n ational human
rights institutions accredited with A or B status and two had an ombudsperson
institution. This is an increase of one institution and one ombudsperson over the
past year. Nine of those bodies have specific units, departments or committees
dealing with issues relating to women’s rights and gender equality.
Regional efforts to enhance implementation
76. At a time when the causes and effects of conflict regularly spill across borders,
regional efforts for the coordinated implementation of commitments to women and
peace and security are increasingly important, and I welcome opportunities for
enhanced collaboration in this regard. As at 31 August 2017, 10 regional
organizations had adopted dedicated implementation frameworks, 55 including
regional action plans, on women and peace and security, with one new plan adopted
in 2017 by the Southern African Development Community. Regional organizations
provide important platforms for increased cooperation. For instance, in 2017 the
African Union Commission and UN-Women, with support from Germany, launched
the African Women Leaders Network, bringing together approximately 80
participants from across Africa to enhance women’s leadership for a more
sustainable, inclusive and peaceful continent.
77. The data available on women’s representation and leadership in regional
organizations indicate signs of stagnation. As at December 2016, 27 per cent of all
senior posts — at Headquarters and in the field combined — in reporting
organizations were occupied by women, only a slight increase over the 25 per cent
reported for 2015, with mixed results across organizations. I encourage all regional
organizations to enhance efforts to increase the representation of women in
leadership positions within and outside their organizations.
Actions by the United Nations
78. I recognize that the United Nations must do more internally to advance the
women and peace and security agenda, moving forward with efficiency,
accountability and a renewed commitment to gender equality and women’s
representation. Currently, reporting demo nstrates uneven progress in several areas,
including gender parity and architecture and resource tracking and allocation for
gender equality. Entities with strong specific gender policies and plans in place
consistently outperform others (see, e.g., E/2017/57 and E/2017/57/Corr.1). I am
__________________
53

Haiti, Somalia, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic.
Haiti, Mozambique, the Niger, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of Moldova, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan, Swaziland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Timor -Leste
and Uganda.
55
The African Union, the Economic Community of West African States, the European Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the League of Arab States, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Pacific Islands Forum, and the Southern African
Development Community.
54

17-18255

21/29

S/2017/861

pleased that several new initiatives already show signs of progress. I intend to
introduce system-wide efforts to align and strengthen processes for the collection
and analysis of gender statistics and data disaggregation to help inform
policymaking and translate into planning, programming and reporting.
Representation
79. Achieving gender parity is one of the vital steps towards the realization of a
United Nations where gender equality is at the foundation of its work, where
operational effectiveness is enhanced and where our own standards are predicated
on gender balance. I am personally committed to implementing the concrete
measures outlined in my system-wide strategy for gender parity. Gender balance,
including the valuing of diverse experience, must guide the composition of panels,
fact-finding and assessment missions and other time -bound activities.
80. As at 31 December 2016, women made up 23 per cent of all senior -level (P-5
to Under-Secretary-General) staff in peace operations led by the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. However, only 13
per cent of Under-Secretaries-General were women, with even lower representation
among special envoys. Of all active peace operations, 23 per cent were heade d by
women, compared with 25 per cent in both 2015 and 2014, and 18 per cent in 2010.
In terms of deputy heads, the proportion of women stood at 35 per cent, an increase
from 18 per cent in 2015, 24 per cent in 2014 and 15 per cent in 2010. Of the 27
resident coordinators serving in conflict and post-conflict countries at the end of
2016, 9 (33 per cent) were women, a slight increase from 29 per cent in 2015.
Beyond peace operations, the proportion of Professional posts occupied by women
in conflict and post-conflict duty stations remained below 50 per cent in all entities
that reported data for 2016 except UN-Women, where women held 64 per cent of
such posts and 75 per cent of senior-level posts. The goal should be equal levels of
representation across the board.
Expertise
81. I recognize the continued need for determined implementation of the United
Nations gender architecture, as well as the importance of gender advisers and
women protection advisers. Dedicated technical expertise translates into norm ative
commitments and concrete actions through strategic planning, analysis, budgeting
and programme design and implementation — all critical considerations for budget
negotiations taking place in the Fifth Committee for the integration of women and
peace and security as a cross-cutting issue, as called for in Security Council
resolutions 2122 (2013) and 2242 (2015). I am concerned that the drive for costeffectiveness in peace operations too often leads to decreased financial support for
gender equality and women and peace and security capacity, including cuts in
dedicated gender posts and reduction of their seniority levels, as seen in MINUSCA,
UNMIL and the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti. I have
therefore asked all relevant departments of the Secretariat, including the
Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Political Affairs, to undertake an
analysis of their institutional capacity for gender mainstreaming and present a plan
for strengthening it.
82. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support have a dedicated workforce of 70 gender experts and a gender focal point
mechanism in peacekeeping operations and Headquarters. As at 31 December 2016,
8 of 16 peacekeeping missions had gender units led by gender advisers 56 reporting
__________________
56

22/29

UNAMID, United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, UNMIL, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, MINUSCA, MINUSMA, MONUSCO and MINUSTAH.
17-18255

S/2017/861

to my Special Representative or Head of Mission, and 2 had gender focal points. 57
The Senior Gender Adviser post in MINUSMA, however, remains unfilled.
83. In 2016, there were 23 full-time gender advisers deployed to 8 of the 12 field based missions led by the Department of Political Affairs, an increase from 6 out of
13 missions in 2015. 58 In addition, in 2016, two gender advisers served as part of
the offices of special envoys of the Secretary-General. 59 There was a substantial
increase in the overall number of gender focal points across special political
missions, from 39 in 2015 to 50 in 2016.
84. I welcome efforts by both Departments to increase the visibility and
responsibility of gender advisers and units within peace operations and at
Headquarters, including by locating senior gender advisers in the offices of my
Special Representatives. The responsibility for implementin g the women and peace
and security agenda in missions lies primarily with the heads of mission, but the
presence of gender advisers should support gender mainstreaming in the work of all
mission staff to enable more gender-responsive United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. We need to continue our efforts to
implement resolution 2242 (2015) to enhance cooperation among the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Political Affairs and UN-Women,
including by ensuring that they provide field-based gender advisers and other
mission officials with full policy, substantive and technical support for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and successive resolutions, making full
use of respective comparative advantages.
85. In 2016, 20 international and 5 national women’s protection advisers were
deployed to peace operations in the Central African Republic, the D emocratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Mali, Somalia, Sudan (Darfur) and South Sudan. 60
However, as at 30 September, 10 of 27 posts for women’s protection advisers
remained vacant, including those in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan; the post for Darfur has been cut.
86. In addition to the Department of Political Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, many other United Nations entities with a presence in
conflict and post-conflict settings provide expertise on women and peace and
security. For example, as at 31 December 2016, UN -Women had a country presence
in 25 conflict and post-conflict countries and was implementing peace, security and
humanitarian activities in 58 countries. Of the UNDP o ffices in such settings, 77 per
cent have gender focal teams led by a senior manager, and the World Food
Programme has 177 gender focal points. In 2016, 71 of the 131 United Nations
country teams (54 per cent) had inter-agency working or theme groups with a focus
on gender. Of those, 21 out of 28 country teams (75 per cent) active in conflict and
__________________
57

The United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.
58
The United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea -Bissau, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon.
59
Namely, the Offices of the Special Envoys for the Great Lakes region and for Syria. As at
30 September 2017, the Office of the Special Envoy for Yemen had also recruited two gender
advisers. Of the 25 gender advisers across field-based missions led by the Department of
Political Affairs (23) and offices of special envoys (2), three are at the D -1 or P-5 level and six
are at the P-4 level.
60
In accordance with A/70/357, they carry out their responsibilities, including the establishment of
and coordination on monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict -related sexual
violence, from within human rights components or in cooperation with them.
17-18255

23/29

S/2017/861

post-conflict settings had such groups, an increase from 64 per cent in 2015. With
proper leadership support from all country team entities, clear mandates, dedica ted
coordination capacity, resources and active participation by its members, those
groups can serve as an important means for promoting coherence and providing
strategic advice to country teams and technical support to host Governments.
Work of the Security Council
87. In 2016, there were several important innovations in the work of the Security
Council in the area of women and peace and security: the convening of an informal
group of experts, the inclusion of a woman civil society representative in a countryspecific briefing 61 and the adoption of the first-ever resolutions devoted solely to
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse (2272 (2016)) and human trafficking and
sexual violence and their intersection with violent extremism (2331 (2016)).
88. In its resolution 2242 (2015), the Security Council expressed its intention to
convene meetings of relevant Council experts as part of an informal expert group on
women and peace and security to facilitate a more systematic approach to its work
in this area and enable greater oversight and coordination of implementation efforts
(see S/2016/1106). With Spain and the United Kingdom as co-chairs and
UN-Women as its secretariat, the informal expert group convened nine meetings in
its inaugural year, on Afghanistan, 62 the Central African Republic, 63 Iraq, 64 Mali 65
and a thematic update on sexual violence in conflict by women protection advisers
from several missions. 66 In each meeting, senior peace operation and country team
leadership briefed Council experts on women and peace and security concerns and
discussed potential follow-up actions by the United Nations and the Council. The
sharper focus and timeliness of the information and analysis have already had an
impact. For example, following an informal expert group briefing on Yemen, the
Council issued a presidential statement that included a recommendation from the
group calling upon the parties to ensure at least 30 per cent representation of women
in peace negotiations and calling upon the United Nations to report regularly on
consultations with women leaders and women’s organizations in line with resolution
2122 (2013) (S/PRST/2017/7). I extend my gratitude to the current co-chairs,
Sweden and Uruguay, for consolidating and expanding the programme of work of
the informal expert group.
89. In 2016, 38 of 77 resolutions adopted by the Security Council (49.4 per cent)
referenced women and peace and security, and of the 19 presidential statements
issued, 11 (57.9 per cent) included such references. The percentage of resolutions
referencing women and peace and security has declined, from 64 per cent in 2015,
60.3 per cent in 2014 and 76.5 per cent in 2013. However, a study of resolutions
that focused narrowly on mandate renewals for 25 country situations, 10 thematic
issues and counter-terrorism found that 74 per cent of those resolutions included
gender-related language and that the quality and specificity of such references had
improved in general across all situations. 67
90. It is crucial for the Security Council to maintain its focus on the women and
peace and security agenda for all country-specific situations and themes. Yet,
__________________
61

See S/PV.7824.
See S/2016/673, S/2016/1059.
63
See S/2016/672, S/2016/1105.
64
See S/2016/683, S/2016/1104.
65
See S/2016/682, S/2016/1103.
66
See S/2016/1107.
67
See Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, “Mapping women, peace and security in the
UN Security Council: 2016”, 13 June 2017. Available from www.womenpeacesecurity.org/
resource/mapping-women-peace-and-security-in-the-un-security-council-2016/.
62

24/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

inconsistencies remain and I note that gender equality and women and peace and
security issues continue to be neglected in emerging or deteriorating crises or when
discussing counter-terrorism or the deployment of troops. Fewer than 20 per cent of
all adopted resolutions contained references to the importance of and the need to
ensure freedom for civil society, women’s groups and women human rights
defenders. 68
91. In 2016, 154 reports were submitted or transmitted by the Secretary -General to
the Security Council. All 38 periodic reports on peacekeeping operations and all 26
periodic reports on special political missions contained references to women and
peace and security. While analysis shows some improvement, 69 I call upon my
Special Representatives and principals of United Nations entities to continue their
efforts to enhance the quality of gender and conflict analysis in their reporting to the
Council, including in sections on political developments and conflict dynamics.
This includes improved disaggregation of data and targeted efforts to bring in the
perspectives of women peacebuilders.
92. Greater attention to women and peace and security should also be evident in
the work of the Security Council’s subsidiary bodies. As at 30 September 2017, 7 70
(53 per cent) of 13 sanctions regimes contained sexual and gender-based violence as
part of their designation criteria. In its resolution 2242 (2015), the Council
committed to ensuring that the relevant expert groups for sanctions committees had
the necessary gender expertise. This expertise is represented in six sanctions
regimes by international humanitarian law experts, while two sanctions regimes, for
Libya and for Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al -Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, have no such expertise.
The public sanctions monitoring reports contain few references to women and peace
and security issues. 71 The Secretariat is currently developing a training module for
experts on those issues. It is important that subsidiary bodies be mandated and have
the capacity to integrate women and peace and security considerations within its
analysis, reporting and decisions. I urge Council members to give priority and
visibility to the rights of women in the designation criteria of sanctions regimes and
consider adopting thematic sanctions regimes to address such global threats as
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, human trafficking, targeted abductions
and killings of women and girls and gross violations of women’s rights.
93. I reiterate the importance of elevating the visibility of women and peace and
security during all visiting missions of the Security Council. In 2016, the Council
undertook five field missions: to Burundi and Ethiopia in January; to Mali, GuineaBissau and Senegal in March; to Somalia, Kenya and Egypt in May; to South Sudan
and Ethiopia in September; and to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Angola in November. Four 72 of five terms of reference of the missions and three 73 of
four of the briefings following the missions contained references to women and
peace and security.
94. In 2016, women’s civil society representatives briefed the Security Council
during three open debates on women and peace and security: in March on the role of
__________________
68

Ibid.
Ibid.
70
These are the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Somalia,
South Sudan, Sudan, and ISIL (Da’esh) and Al -Qaida sanctions regime.
71
See S/2017/326. Some references were also included in S/2016/73 (Yemen), S/2017/639 (Central
African Republic), S/2016/805 (Sudan), and S/2017/22 (Sudan).
72
See S/2016/215, S/2016/456, S/2016/757, S/2016/948, but not S/2016/55.
73
See S/PV.7647, S/PV.7696, S/PV.7819, but not S/PV.7615. There was no Security Council
meeting on the mission to South Sudan and Ethiopia.
69

17-18255

25/29

S/2017/861

women in conflict prevention and resolution in Africa; 74 in June on human
trafficking and conflict-related sexual violence; 75 and in October on the
implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. 76 I welcome the
facilitating role the NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security plays in
this process to ensure that civil society speakers are selected by civil society. In
2016, the Council invited, for the first time, a woman civil society representative to
address it in a country-specific meeting on Liberia. 77 In the following months, six
more women civil society representatives and one representative of an independent
national human rights institution briefed the Council on country situations. 78 I urge
Council members to build on this good practice and continue to invite women from
civil society organizations to country-specific meetings to bring in more diverse
perspectives and analysis of needs, priorities and solutions.
95. I encourage the Security Council to request regular briefings from the UnderSecretary-General/Executive Director of UN-Women and my Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, including on findings from relevant field missions,
and to make greater use of the gender-related findings of commissions of inquiry
supported by OHCHR and of the information and analysis generated by the
meetings of the informal expert group and human rights treaty bodies, including the
Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
96. I call upon members of the Security Council to systematically use information
on women and peace and security in deliberations and negotiations and to address
specific questions to field leadership during all consultations. I urge the Council to
ensure that all mission mandates reflect a stronger emphasis on women and peace
and security and that sufficient resources and expertise are provided to facilitate the
consistent delivery and monitoring of progress.
Financing the women and peace and security agenda
97. Conflict and related emergencies unravel years of developmental progress,
disproportionately affecting women and compounding existing inequalities.
Moreover, gender equality programming and expertise are often among the first to
face budget cuts, and many entities still lack dedicated systems for measuring
funding devoted to gender equality. There remains a dire need to reprioritize
spending patterns, effectively coordinate funding instruments and explore
innovative forms of flexible financing.
98. Overall, the use of gender markers for the programmatic work of United
Nations entities operating in conflict and post-conflict settings has grown. The
Peacebuilding Fund again exceeded the minimum 15 per cent target in 2016 and
allocated 19.2 per cent of funds to gender equality and women’s empowerment as a
principal objective — attributable in part to improved gender mainstreaming and the
innovative Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative. The Peacebuilding Fund, for the
first time, directly supported civil society organizations, thereby bolstering
partnerships and increasing constituencies for gender-sensitive and sustainable
peace. The Peacebuilding Fund business plan (2017-2019) builds on those successes
and raises the Fund’s target from 15 to 30 per cent for allocations related to gender
equality.
__________________
74

See S/PV.7658.
See S/PV.7704.
76
See S/PV.7793.
77
Liberia (S/PV.7824).
78
Afghanistan (S/PV.7896), Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/PV.7903), Lake Chad Basin
(S/PV.7861), Somalia (S/PV.7873), South Sudan (S/PV.7906), and Yemen (S/PV.7954).
75

26/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

99. In the case of UNDP, allocations to projects with gender equality as a principal
objective stood at only 4.5 per cent, as in 2015, 2014 and 2013, which remains
lower than the 6 per cent achieved in 2012. However, when taking into account
UNDP projects with gender as a significant cross-cutting dimension, the figure is 46
per cent, which is above the 31 per cent observed the previous year. While UNHCR
currently does not implement a tracking system, an analysis o f information available
through its results-based-management system indicates that approximately 11 per
cent of the total operating budget for 2016 was allocated to activities having gender
as a significant objective. 79 In 2016, up to 83 per cent of the humanitarian
expenditure of UNICEF contributed to improving gender equality. UN -Women
allocations to promote gender equality in peace, security and humanitarian action
continued to increase in response to growing needs, reaching $71.42 million in
2016, of which $58.85 million went to peace and security programming and
$12.57 million to humanitarian interventions.
100. The share of sector-allocable official development assistance (ODA)
supporting gender equality must also be increased. In 2015, 19.4 per cent of all
sector-allocable ODA was allocated to conflict and post-conflict countries, of which
40 per cent targeted gender equality. Only 5 per cent of the gender -focused sectorallocable ODA allocated to those countries was marked as having a principal focus .
I welcome the commitment of Canada to ensuring that 15 per cent of all bilateral
international development assistance will be targeted specifically for gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls by 2021/22 and encourage all
Member States to set similar targets for the financing of gender equality. I welcome
the new Spotlight Initiative, a joint effort of the European Union and the United
Nations, which will invest €500 million to eliminate violence against women and
girls, and encourage others to support that effort.
101. Political commitments can translate into increased funding allocations from
pooled financing mechanisms and, most importantly, increased programming
resources for women and peace and security. The women’s peace and humanitari an
fund, established after the 2015 high-level review, is an important mechanism with
which to address funding gaps for women peacebuilders and the only dedicated
mechanism for providing support to women and peace and security efforts. To date,
the fund has supported women’s organizations in Burundi, Colombia, Jordan and the
Solomon Islands and the Pacific. Despite notable results, resource constraints have
limited country access to the fund, with 19 of the 23 countries eligible for support
yet to receive funding.
102. I welcome other trust funds in contexts affected by conflict that are integrating
good practices on gender mainstreaming. In the countries under consideration in the
present report, 25 multi-partner trust funds have been established since 2010.
Almost all (23 out of 25) mention gender in their core documents. However, only
three, the funds on Afghanistan, Colombia and Somalia, mention use of a gender
marker. The international security and stabilization support strategy trust fund in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the joint peace fund in Myanmar are both
developing systems to ensure gender marking and the allocation of sufficient
resources to gender equality programming.
103. I call upon Member States to increase their funding for women and peace and
security, including through domestic budget allocations, more gender -focused aid in
conflict and post-conflict settings, direct support to civil society and the United
Nations system and increased contributions to special funds, such as the women’s
peace and humanitarian fund, the United Nations trust fund in support of actions to
eliminate violence against women, the United Nations fund for gender equality and
__________________
79

17-18255

This covers all UNHCR operations, not just those operating in conflict and post -conflict settings.
27/29

S/2017/861

the multi-partner trust fund of United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict and the Spotlight Initiative. Given the Peacebuilding Fund’s track record in
financing and driving innovation with regard to gender -responsive peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, I call upon all donors to the Fund to maintain and increase
their contributions.
104. I call upon all multi-partner trust funds in conflict-affected and fragile settings,
building on the good practices noted above, to adopt and implement my target of
allocating a minimum of 15 per cent of all funding to gender equality and women’s
empowerment as a principal objective. Resource tracking must be accompanied by
improved monitoring to ensure that increased funding for programmatic activities
translates into better results for women and girls. I encourage donor countries and
development banks to use targets, such as 15 per cent, to direct adequate financing
towards gender equality, including targeted funding with respect to the women and
peace and security agenda.

III. Concluding observations and recommendations
105. Each day that passes without a deepened resolve to prevent and cease conflict
compounds the human suffering and environmental degradation described in the
present report. Yet, the road to sustainable peace, the reinstatement of the rule of
law, renewed public trust and strong guarantees of fundamental human rights is
often long and daunting. While each context necessitates unique and creative
solutions, all require the equal and meaningful participation and leadership of
women, which has a demonstrated catalytic impact on the sustainability and
effectiveness of peace processes, economic development and social prosperity.
106. Since 2000, the women and peace and security agenda has gained significant
normative strength. Each pillar has been further operationalized for action with the
three peace and security reviews of 2015, the 2016 World Humanitarian Summit, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the 20 -year review and appraisal of
the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and through
dedicated regional and national policy frameworks and action plans. The Security
Council has provided strong direction through its eight resolutions on women and
peace and security and has mandated targeted action in country-specific and
thematic resolutions, including for emerging areas. Human rights treaty bodies are
also integrating the agenda into its monitoring. The frameworks and tools for
implementation are in place. At this stage there is a need to shift from the ad hoc
inclusion of women and peace and security and small-scale, project-based initiatives
towards ensuring that women and peace and security is part and parcel of systemic
change, including large-scale, transformative programmes and approaches to
preventing conflict and sustaining peace.
107. Throughout the present report, I have highlighted my own commitments to
implement the women and peace and security agenda, including by placing gender
at the centre of my prevention platform and surge in diplomacy. My support for a
transformative organizational shift towards a coordinated, robust and holistic
approach to prevention includes commitments for mediation, for ending sexual
exploitation and abuse and for gender parity across the Organization and at the most
senior levels, including among heads and deputy heads of mission and special
envoys. I commit to further addressing those areas where the United Nations is
furthest behind in the representation and meaningful participation of women,
including, for example, peacekeeping, where I have requested a dedicated strategy
from the United Nations in consultation with troop-contributing countries to meet
our outstanding targets.

28/29

17-18255

S/2017/861

108. High-quality gender and conflict analysis that relies on data that is
disaggregated by gender, age and other relevant criteria must be included in all
conflict prevention efforts. After 17 years of implementation, however, gaps in the
availability of meaningful data remain, and gender and conflict analysis is
inconsistently utilized. Ongoing global efforts to gat her data and populate key
indicators of the Sustainable Development Goals and improve the disaggregation of
data by gender, age and other variables must be accelerated. Such efforts will
contribute to improved understanding of impacts and outcomes, as well as the
identification of critical gaps. I strongly encourage Member States, with the support
of United Nations and other actors, to build measurement and evaluation capacity to
ensure women’s meaningful leadership and participation across the areas covere d in
the present report, including, for example, in mediation, peace processes,
peacekeeping forces and governance; the design and development of humanitarian
action and economic recovery; and other areas. I further encourage Member States
to monitor gender equality indicators at the national level. These are strong
indicators of resilience, and a sudden downward shift in women’s rights is highly
correlated with greater risk of conflict.
109. Improving women’s access to meaningful leadership and participat ion in peace
efforts begins with strengthened collaboration with civil society organizations,
especially women-led organizations, and women peacebuilders. Women’s peace
activists have not only played an essential role in the creation of the agenda, but
continue to carry the weight of implementation and remain the foremost experts in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace. However, as highlighted in the present
report, violence against women’s human rights defenders persists, space continues
to shrink for civil society in many parts of the world and limited opportunities for
direct financial and technical support to civil society organizations remain the norm.
110. Member States and United Nations entities must invest in locally driven
solutions and increase collaboration, funding and direct support to civil society
organizations, including local women’s organizations. Implementation cannot
succeed without meaningful financial investment, targeting areas where evidence
demonstrates impact. As highlighted throughout the report, the persistent funding
gaps highlighted in Security Council resolution 2242 (2015) remain and, in some
areas, have continued to widen, despite clear evidence that gender equality and
women’s empowerment leads to peaceful, just and inclusive societies. All
commitments to implement the women and peace and security agenda, including
national action plans and existing funding instruments, for example, cannot be
effective without the necessary resources.
111. I call upon Member States to exercise global leadership and greater political
will by championing the women and peace and security agenda in policies at home
and abroad, fully translating symbolic commitments into practice. Gender equal ity
and women’s empowerment are prerequisites for preventing conflict, a powerful
tool for sustaining peace and essential to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, particularly Goals 5 and 16. To address the root causes of
gender-based violence and inequality, we must end impunity and guarantee the full
range of human rights, including economic, social and cultural rights, for all
women, regardless of age, disability, marital status, sexual orientation, gender
identity, race, ethnicity, religion and political affiliation. On women and peace and
security, I expect the United Nations to lead and inspire by example.

17-18255

29/29
