A/61/PV.109

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-first session

109th plenary meeting
Monday, 17 September 2007, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Al-Khalifa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Bahrain)

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Sir John
Compton, Prime Minister of Saint Lucia
The President: Before proceeding to the items on
our agenda, it is my sad duty to pay tribute to the
memory of the late Prime Minister of Saint Lucia, His
Excellency Sir John Compton, who passed away on
Friday, 7 September 2007.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I request the
representative of Saint Lucia to convey our
condolences to the Government and the people of Saint
Lucia and to the bereaved family of His Excellency
Sir John Compton.
May I now invite representatives to stand and
observe a minute of silence in tribute to the memory of
His Excellency Sir John Compton.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silence.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Philippines, who will speak on behalf of the
Asian States.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): We mourn today the
loss of a great leader in John George Melvin Compton,
Prime Minister of Saint Lucia, which has left a pall not
only over the Government of Saint Lucia but also over
the people to whom he has dedicated his life-long work
and service.

Governing Saint Lucia for more than a quarter of
a century, Sir John Compton’s political life was an
epitome of dedication, commitment and loyalty to his
country and people, of patience and persistence over
tribulation and of triumph over seemingly
insurmountable odds and challenges. His policies and
vision led Saint Lucia into a new age of development.
Resisting colonialism, denouncing social stratification,
fighting for the interests of the working class and
developing a strong market economy are the hallmarks
of Sir John’s leadership.
His larger-than-life presence was felt not only
within Saint Lucia but beyond its shores as well. He
was one of the driving forces of Caribbean integration
and initiated the Eastern Caribbean Common Market,
the forerunner to the Organization of Eastern
Caribbean States. Truly, he has left on imprint on more
than the sands of Saint Lucia, one which cannot be
washed away by the tides.
But as we mourn Sir John’s passing, we also pay
tribute to the Government and people of Saint Lucia
for steadfastly and resolutely holding on to the gains
and legacy of Sir John’s leadership. On behalf of the
Asian Group, I express my sincerest condolences to the
Government and people of Saint Lucia and wish them
solace in their sorrow and hope in Sir John’s new life
in the beyond. Truly he has achieved immortality.
The President: I call now on the representative
of Montenegro, who will speak on behalf of the
Eastern European States.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

07-50762 (E)

*0750762*

A/61/PV.109

Mr. Kaludjerović (Montenegro): On behalf of
the Eastern European Group, I have the sad duty to pay
tribute to the memory of an exceptional person who
passed away on 7 September 2007 — Sir John
Compton, Prime Minister of Saint Lucia.
Sir John, a distinguished leader of Saint Lucia for
more than forty years, cleverly and prudently changed
the political, economic and social milieu of his country
in a number of ways. Sir John was dedicated to the
advancement of the standard of life of his compatriots
and was a man of great energy for and devotion to his
own country. He fought to achieve independence for
his country and succeeded in 1979, after which
St. Lucia became the member of the United Nations.
But Sir John, being the founding father of his
nation, was also a man ready to fully accept the rules
of democracy. He left his Premier’s post after losing
elections, and afterwards returned to the premiership
several times. His last term began at the age of 80, in
2006, when he won the elections and became Prime
Minister for the fifth time.
He was a vocal advocate of Caribbean unity. His
role in the creation of the regional common market,
which is now the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
and the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States was
of the utmost importance. Sir John also greatly helped
in the establishment of the Caribbean Development
Bank, the West Indies Associated States Council of
Ministers and the Eastern Caribbean Common Market.
All this makes us know and honour him for his
commitment to multilateralism, and in particular to
regional cooperation and integration.
Sir John Compton will be remembered for his
wisdom and dedicated service to his country and the
Caribbean region and as one of the most notable
leaders of the contemporary world. His death has
profoundly distressed us all, and on behalf of the
Eastern European Group, I would like to express our
sorrow to the Government and the people of Saint
Lucia and to his family, friends and colleagues.
The President: I call next on the representative
of Paraguay, who will speak on behalf of the Latin
American and Caribbean States.
Mr. Loizaga (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour to address the General Assembly on behalf
of the Latin American and Caribbean Group as we pay
a posthumous tribute to The Honourable John

2

Compton, who was Prime Minister of Saint Lucia for
several terms.
Sir John Compton, whose career took him beyond
the borders of Saint Lucia, began his public life in
1953, joining the Labour Party upon returning to the
country after having studied economics at the
prestigious London School of Economics. His talent
and his adherence to his ideals in support of those most
in need enabled him to become a very important
political figure not only in Saint Lucia, but also
throughout the Caribbean region.
Sir John Compton, who was Saint Lucia’s first
Prime Minister after it had gained its independence in
1979, will rightly be remembered for his role as father
of the nation and for his efforts in leading his country
towards modernity through the adoption and
implementation of economic and social reforms.
Sir John Compton was an outstanding political
figure in the Caribbean and will also be recognized for
having been a leader and promoter of the regional
integration process leading to the establishment of the
Caribbean Community and its institutions. His death is
a loss not only for Saint Lucia and the Caribbean as a
whole, but for all of us who constitute that regional
group.
The Group of Latin American and Caribbean
States joins in the expressions of condolence to the
people and the Government of this fraternal Caribbean
country.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Switzerland, who will speak on behalf of the Group
of Western European and other States.
Mr. Baum (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
have the honour and the sad duty to address the
General Assembly today on behalf of the Group of
Western European and other States to pay tribute to the
late Prime Minister of Saint Lucia, His Excellency Sir
John Compton, who died on 7 September.
Saint Lucia mourns the passing not only of its
Prime Minister, but of its founding father. Sir John
Compton studied law in the United Kingdom, became
an attorney and soon launched a political career
leading him to a position of the highest responsibility.
He led his country five times — first beginning in
1964, under British administration, and then starting in
1979 as Prime Minister of an independent State. Saint
Lucia owes its existence and its development to him.

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

Over more than five decades, he contributed to the
development of his country’s infrastructure, propelling
it into modernity. Throughout his life, he was an ardent
advocate of Caribbean regional integration.
Permit me, on behalf of the Group of Western
European and other States, to express my sincere
condolences to the authorities and the people of Saint
Lucia. At this difficult time for them, our thoughts are
particularly with the family and loved ones of the late
Prime Minister.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the United States of America, as host country.
Mr. Wallace (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I would like to express our
deepest condolences on the death of Saint Lucia’s
Prime Minister, Sir John Compton.
Sir John led his Caribbean island nation into
independence in the 1970s. Both in and out of public
office, he contributed greatly to the development of his
country and of the Caribbean region. The nickname
bestowed on him by his fellow Saint Lucians, “Daddy
Compton”, demonstrates his popularity and the
affection with which he is regarded.
We honour the passing of Sir John and offer our
condolences to his family and his countrymen.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Saint Lucia.
Ms. Joseph (Saint Lucia): I wish to express to
you, Madam President, the warm appreciation of the
Government and the people of Saint Lucia for this
opportunity to pay tribute to our late Prime Minister,
The Right Honourable Sir John George Melvin
Compton, who passed away on 7 September 2007. I
also wish to thank the representatives of Member
States who have spoken so eloquently today with
words of condolence, as well as encouragement, at this
most difficult time as the people of Saint Lucia mourn
the passing of their Prime Minister. Saint Lucia is
heartened by the many expressions of condolence and
support that have been received from the international
community on the passing of Sir John George Melvin
Compton.
Sir John Compton was one of the most
formidable political leaders in the Caribbean and a
towering figure in the political evolution of Saint
Lucia. After graduating from Saint Mary’s College in

07-50762

Saint Lucia, he left for Curação to work in an oil
refinery, as many Saint Lucians of the period did. He
later emigrated to the United Kingdom in the 1940s to
pursue higher education, completing his studies in law
and economics at the University of Wales and the
London School of Economics. He was called to the bar
in 1951.
Sir John Compton returned to Saint Lucia that
same year, joining the emerging struggle against
colonialism in the Caribbean, where the process of
self-determination was evolving in earnest. By 1954,
he had won his first seat in the Legislative Council, as
an independent candidate, representing the sugarproducing constituency of Micoud-Dennery, and was
appointed to the Executive Council. In 1956, he joined
the country’s first mass political party, the Saint Lucia
Labour Party, serving as its deputy leader, and
intensified his involvement as a union activist.
In 1957, Sir John Compton personally confronted
the sugar plantocracy on behalf of the workers, who
had been refused the right of union representation.
Following weeks of intense labour strife, which had
also spread to the banana industry, the factories finally
came to the negotiating table, and the rights of the
union to collective representation were finally
recognized. He was subsequently appointed Minister
for Trade and Production.
By 1964, Sir John Compton had become the
second Chief Minister of Saint Lucia as head of the
newly formed United Workers Party, and in 1967 he
became the first Premier of Saint Lucia when the
country moved from colonial status to free associated
statehood with Britain. At independence, in 1979,
Sir John Compton became the first Prime Minister of
our country. Elections that year resulted in a brief
change of government, and he returned to power in
1982, again serving as Prime Minister until 1996, when
he demitted office voluntarily with the intention of
retiring from active politics. Ten years later, he was
back, achieving an impressive victory at the polls and
assuming once again the mantle of leadership as Prime
Minister of the country. Prime Minister Compton
presided over the economic and social transformation
of Saint Lucia for a period of more than three decades,
laying the basis for the country’s long-term
development.
Throughout his tenure, Prime Minister Compton
was a strong advocate for Caribbean integration and

3

A/61/PV.109

was very active in the affairs of the Caribbean
Community. He also played a seminal role in the
establishment of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean
States as a mechanism for integration for most of the
smaller island countries of the Eastern Caribbean
following their independence.
Sir John Compton had a strong commitment to
the development of the people of Saint Lucia and of
the Caribbean region. He was always as comfortable
with the ordinary St. Lucian, the so-called man on the
street, as he was with leaders of international stature or
with royalty. It was not uncommon that, on the one
hand, he would participate in a vigorous debate in
Parliament or hold discussions with visiting heads of
Government, and then on the other, quickly jump into
his well-worn truck and drive himself to his farm in the
interior of the country to tend to his bananas, no
different from any ordinary farmer.
Perhaps it is that humility and his recognition of
the broader picture that are the true legacy of Sir John
George Melvin Compton. To that end, his favourite
poem, If, by Rudyard Kipling, sheds considerable light,
in its last verse, on the nature and character of the man:
“If you can talk with crowds and keep your
virtue, Or walk with kings — nor lose the
common touch,
If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you;
If all men count with you, but none too much,
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,
Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,
And — which is more — you’ll be a Man, my
son!”
Indeed, Saint Lucia has lost a most honourable
son and the Caribbean Community has lost one of its
esteemed heads of Government. The legacy left by the
Right Honourable Sir John George Melvin Compton
will serve as a guiding light for future generations of
leaders of our country and of our region.
The President: I call on the representative of
Zimbabwe, who will speak on behalf of the Group of
African States.
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): On behalf of the
African Group, I would like to express our deep

4

condolences to the people and Government of Saint
Lucia on the passing away of Sir John Compton, the
Prime Minister of Saint Lucia.
Sir John Compton, an outstanding and longserving statesman who led his country for more than
four decades, was an icon in Saint Lucia and the
Caribbean region. He had a strong commitment to the
development of the people of Saint Lucia and the
Caribbean Community. The Africa Group would like to
join the Government and the people of Saint Lucia and
the family of Sir John Compton in their moment of
grief. It is on that note that I wish his soul to rest in
eternal peace.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters
Report of the Open-ended Working Group on the
Question of Equitable Representation on and
Increase in the Membership of the Security Council
and Other Matters related to the Security
Council (A/61/47)
Draft resolution (A/61/L.69/Rev.1).
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a joint debate on agenda items
9 and 111 at its 72nd to 75th plenary meetings on
11 and 12 December 2006.
Under this agenda item, the report of the Openended Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters related to the
Security Council is contained in document A/61/47,
which has been distributed this morning in the Hall.
I would like to draw the attention of Member
States the mistake contained in sub-paragraph (d) of
paragraph 21 of the report. It has also been brought to
my attention that, in the French text, the changes in
sub-paragraphs (c) and (d) of paragraph 21 were
inadvertently omitted. The two sub-paragraphs should
read as follows:
“(c) Urges the Working Group to exert efforts
during the sixty-second session, aimed at
achieving general agreement among Member
States in the consideration of all issues relevant
to the question of equitable representation on and

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

increase in the membership of the Security
Council and other matters related to the Security
Council;

consult with all of us throughout is deeply appreciated,
not only by myself but, I would say, by all the
delegations in this Hall.

“(d) Decides that the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership
of the Security Council and other matters related
to the Security Council should be considered
during the sixty-second session of the General
Assembly so that further concrete results may be
achieved, including through intergovernmental
negotiations, building on the progress achieved so
far, particularly at the sixty-third session, as well
as the positions of and proposals made by
Member States.”

We also wish to pay tribute to your facilitators,
who were among the best of us who serve at the United
Nations. We thank them for their patience, their
availability to us and the work that they have put
before us.

All these corrections will be reflected in the final
version of the draft decision on the Working Group’s
report.
In connection with the item, the Assembly has
before it a draft decision contained in paragraph 21 of
the report of the Open-ended Working Group, as orally
corrected. The Assembly also has before it a draft
resolution issued as document A/61/L.69/Rev.1.
We shall now proceed to consider the draft
decision contained in paragraph 21 of the report of the
Open-ended Working Group, as orally corrected.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation of
vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
The Assembly will now take action on the draft
decision contained in paragraph 21 of the report of the
Open-ended Working Group on the Question of
Equitable Representation on and Increase in the
Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters
related to the Security Council. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft decision, as orally
corrected?
The draft decision, as orally corrected, was adopted.
The President: I now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
position.
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking you, Madam President, for your leadership
on this very important and fundamental reform of the
United Nations. The manner in which you guided our
work on this issue and in which you were available to

07-50762

I will join the consensus today, but without any
enthusiasm. Indeed, we have come a long way with
draft decision on equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council and
related matters. South Africa and 27 other countries
wanted a results-oriented element, based on
governmental negotiations, to be reflected in the draft
decision. However, we are satisfied that the draft
decision takes into account some of our concerns by
referring to the achievement of further concrete steps
as we continue this important and fundamental reform
of the United Nations.
We are also satisfied that the proposals made by
Member States will be considered, because these
proposals are inevitably based on important elements
that need to be discussed. We are satisfied too that, in
spite of resistance by many, we have now agreed that
we would have intergovernmental negotiations, just as
we do on many other issues in this body.
Under the aforementioned circumstances, namely
the progress that we have made, I wish to inform the
Assembly that we, the sponsors of draft resolution
A/61/L.69/Rev.1, will not pursue the matter at this
stage.
I must also say that South Africa and others are
proud that a number of small States from Africa, the
Caribbean and the Pacific stood firm and tall in spite of
the unprecedented pressures we all faced, including the
kind of dismissive language that is seldom heard in
intergovernmental negotiations. Those delegations,
some of which were becoming sponsors even this
morning, stood firm because we believe that this issue
of the reform of the Security Council is important. We
are committed to pursuing it during the sixty-second
session of the General Assembly, until all Member
States agree that it is the best way to go forward.
Once again, allow me to thank you, Madam
President, on behalf of many of the delegations that
sponsored draft resolution A/61/L.69/Rev.1, for all the

5

A/61/PV.109

work you have done. We know that this is the last day
that we will see you on the podium. We wish you all
the best and we want you to know, as you leave this
place, that you have really moved this issue forward.
We are determined to move it even further forward in
the coming session.

with a view to producing concrete results during the
next session of the General Assembly. I would like to
call upon other delegations to participate in the
negotiations in the same spirit, so that we may
accomplish jointly this challenging task of making the
Security Council more effective.

Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express my
deep appreciation to you, Madam President, for the
leadership you demonstrated throughout the sixty-first
session of the General Assembly in raising the
momentum for Security Council reform. The efforts to
move forward made by the five facilitators and two
ambassadors under your guidance were also greatly
appreciated. We would like to commend you
particularly on your tireless efforts, which made it
possible to adopt the report of the Open-Ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters Related to the
Security Council (A/61/47) by consensus. Without your
commitment, that could not have happened.

It was a real joy to work with you, Madam
President. Your commitment and dedication to
advancing the process and seeking a consensus were
indeed gratifying. I wish you well in your next
endeavours.

We witnessed heightened interest in Security
Council reform during last week’s consideration of the
matter by the Open-Ended Working Group. In the
course of that process, the momentum towards the
early realization of such reform has been further
strengthened, which augurs well for the next session of
the General Assembly.
The issue of Security Council reform has been
discussed over the years in the General Assembly. We
believe that there is now broad agreement to move to
the
next
stage
of
consideration,
namely
intergovernmental negotiations. It has now been
decided that the Open-Ended Working Group will
continue its work, and that the question of Security
Council reform will be considered again at the next
session. Japan sincerely hopes that concrete results will
be achieved during the sixty-second session of the
General
Assembly
through
intergovernmental
negotiations.
Japan continues to maintain its basic position on
Security Council reform, which includes the expansion
of both categories of membership, so as to make the
Council more representative, effective and transparent,
with enhanced effectiveness and legitimacy.
With that in mind, our delegation is ready to
engage actively and constructively in the forthcoming
intergovernmental negotiations in a flexible manner,

6

Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil welcomes the
adoption of the decision on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and related matters. We are glad
that the decision, adopted by consensus by the
Assembly, recognizes that the next stage of our
consideration of this important issue will be a process
of results-oriented intergovernmental negotiations,
building on proposals made by Member States that
contemplate an expansion in the number of both
permanent and non-permanent members. This was long
overdue.
Brazil expects that this process will enable us to
complete the reform of the Security Council during the
sixty-second session of the General Assembly. We will
engage actively and constructively with all interested
countries in this urgent endeavour. We invite all
delegations to approach the forthcoming negotiations
in the same spirit, in order to achieve our common
goal.
Allow me to take this opportunity, Madam
President, to express our appreciation for your tireless
efforts in maintaining momentum on this important
issue and in ensuring that we move into the next stage
in our deliberations. I wish you all the best in your
future endeavours.
Mr. Sen (India): We join other delegations in
recording our appreciation for the work you did,
Madam President, during the sixty-first session of the
General Assembly and, on this last day of that session,
wish you with all our hearts good fortune in your
future undertakings.
We joined the consensus on the adoption of the
draft decision on the equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Security Council, including

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

the clarifications provided from the podium on
including in the French version the amendments we
agreed on Friday evening and the correcting of the
typographical error of the words “concrete steps” to
read “concrete results”. Our approach and that of those
who shared it was consistently reasonable, constructive
and democratic, based on reflecting the real wishes of
most members.
It is therefore a matter of satisfaction that the
report we adopted on Friday evening finally
incorporated the concepts of achieving results and
holding intergovernmental negotiations on the basis of
positions and proposals of Member States. We
therefore joined the consensus.
For our part, we are happy not simply on account
of the substance of what we struggled for, but because
the struggle made us part of a group of countries with
so many qualities of head and heart — part of so much
dignity and courage. They strongly felt that there were
wrongs to be righted and rights to be defended. The
dignity and courage was in the face of rumour,
innuendo and intimidation. We heard last week the
force, eloquence and passion of the ringing sincerity
that is the soul of true eloquence and gives wings of
fire to words. We saw the shifting lights of the eloquent
sentences.
Let me also compliment the interpreters, whose
work is so seldom recognized. The English
interpretation of, for instance, a couple of statements in
French made last week by the representatives of two
small island developing States did justice to the power
and momentum of the original.
This is the most important portent for the future.
Things will not be the same hereafter, because the
voices of the developing, the small and those thought
to be marginalized will continue to resonate, will not
be stilled and will continue to disturb the comfortable
sleep of the status quo-ists. That is the real point: there
are two visions of the United Nations. One is that the
United Nations should in fact — and not in
comfortable fiction — in real action — and not in mere
comforting words — respond to their concerns. The
other vision is the cynical one of business as usual and
meaningless ritual, where the General Assembly can
feel the mildew coming over it and its bones turn to
paste — a vision that is so useful for the powerful.
Those who tell the developing, the least developed and
the small that they need not be consulted strike at the

07-50762

heart of the democratic principle that decision-making
by the many, even if some of us may be relatively
inexperienced, is better than decisions made by a
narrow group of the experienced and the cynical few.
Our only regret therefore is that it took the
struggle of so many developing, least developed and
small island developing States to make the report
reflect their major concepts and that the discussion was
artificially cut short in the natural process of doing so.
It is not just a question of arithmetic, but one of
politics; it is not just once again attempting to ignore a
significant number of countries, but continuing the
tradition of the marginalized only talking in words but
their voices not being listened to in practice. It is the
hope of that status quo-ists that they only have to sit
tight and the world will remain the same. But it has
changed, and will change more.
One of our colleagues said that he would quote
Sheikh Jalal Al-Din Al-Roumi on Friday, but he did not
do so. Let me therefore cite him. Roumi said that the
mirror cannot go back to again being iron, or the bread
to again being wheat. The voices of which I speak, and
which the General Assembly heard last week, are
familiar throughout the history of being told this by the
powerful: instead of struggling for what is conducive
to the common good, and what is therefore to your
liking, learn to like what is imposed on you. They have
demonstrated unmistakably and successfully that they
are not prepared to do this anymore.
I have no wish, on this occasion, for sterile
polemics with the votaries of intimidation. But I would
like, in conclusion, in a lighter vein, give them not the
biblical but the Shavian advice: do not do unto others
as you would that they should do unto you, because
their tests may be different.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first, by way of introduction, to recall that the
corrections read out by the President have not been
included in the French version of the text (A/61/47)
that has recently been distributed. Paragraph 21 (c) of
the text to which we agreed clearly spells out the goal
of continuing efforts to reach “general agreement”.
Paragraph 21 (d) also includes a goal, namely, that
“concrete results” be achieved, including through
intergovernmental negotiations.
Let me also, Madam President, commend you for
the commitment and effectiveness that you have
demonstrated in the course of your presidency. Security

7

A/61/PV.109

Council reform, which is crucial to the future of the
Organization, has been one of the difficult issues on
which you have been able to make significant progress.
Never has such thorough work been done on this issue
as that reflected in the report before the Assembly
today. We must build on that work and ensure that it
leads to an energetic relaunching of efforts to ensure
that the Security Council better takes into account the
political and economic realities of the world, as well as
to greater transparency in the Council’s work. You
were able to achieve that, Madam President.
We welcome the fact that the agreement opens
the door to intergovernmental negotiations. We would
certainly have wished that the General Assembly would
have been more resolute in the decision to open such
negotiations, but we should not downplay the progress
that has been made. France attaches great importance
to multilateralism, and specifically to the United
Nations. Under the Charter, the Security Council has
the weighty task of addressing global peace and
security. It is therefore essential that this decision be
clearly understood, and that it be implemented without
conditions.
In order to further strengthen its legitimacy and
effectiveness, we favour an expansion of the Security
Council in both categories of membership — with
Germany, Japan, India and Brazil as new permanent
members and with fair representation for Africa. We
believe that we must negotiate in good faith on this
issue. I would like to reaffirm today that France is
prepared to take part in such negotiations at any time
and in an open and exacting spirit, and with a resolute
desire to attain results.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Madam President, on the consensus
adoption of the report (A/61/47) and of the
recommendations that you have presented on the issue
of the reform of the Security Council. Over the past
year, you have led an open process of consultations and
negotiations, with a view to reaching general
agreement on Security Council reform. You have
performed your task with energy, zeal and honesty.
That process of open consultations commenced,
if memory serves me correctly, on 20 September 2006,
at a dinner hosted by the President of Pakistan and the
Prime Minister of Italy, to which all Member States
were invited and where we offered to open such a
process of consultations and negotiations.

8

The report of the five facilitators issued on
19 April added to the process a new and positive
dynamic that we had not witnessed in previous years.
In that report, the notions on the way forward
concluded that the interim approach was the only
feasible approach. The report suggested four options
for the intermediate category, which included extended
seats and other options that provided for re-election
and rotation. The report further noted that the General
Assembly should opt for a Security Council reform
formula that could garner the widest possible political
acceptance by the membership — and, in any case,
well above the required majority in the General
Assembly. The report of the five facilitators and the
subsequent complementary report of the two
ambassadors were widely welcomed in the Assembly
as significant achievements.
Madam President, we fully agree with the content
of your letter of 10 September that we must “preserve
and build on the positive momentum and spirit created
in the sixty-first session”. The adoption of the report
and its recommendations were disturbed this year by
the unilateral proposal advanced by some States in
document A/61/L.69, seeking to prescribe their
unilateral elements and unilateral modalities for the
Security Council reform process. Fortunately, that
unilateralist approach evoked weak support, and we are
glad that it has not been pressed to a vote. But perhaps
a lesson has been learned: the lesson that voting is not
an option on this sensitive issue of Security Council
reform.
Pakistan and the Uniting for Consensus group
have always supported a negotiated outcome.
Consensus can only be achieved through negotiations;
consensus cannot be achieved through a vote. But
negotiations must build on the work that has already
been accomplished, and the foundation for consensus is
the two reports which are annexed to document
A/61/47, along with the recommendations that we have
just adopted.
We are glad that the conclusions in paragraph 21
state quite clearly that the efforts at the sixty-second
session are to be aimed at achieving general
agreement — I repeat, “general agreement” — among
Member States in the consideration of all — I repeat,
“all” — issues relevant to Security Council reform.
And the conclusion also states that further concrete
results are to be achieved by building on the progress

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

made so far, particularly at the sixty-first session. That
progress is reflected in the two reports.
We need to proceed to the next stage. We need to
agree on evolving consensus on the basis of a
negotiated outcome, which is reflected in the two
reports annexed to the report of the Working Group.
Let me say in conclusion that over the course of
history, there have been many occasions when the
seekers of privilege have come to say that they do not
wish to praise Caesar but to bury him. But their real
design is to seek privilege and power for themselves.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): Madam President, I
wish to express my appreciation and gratitude to you
for the leadership, courage and wisdom with which you
have led us over 12 months to this result today. Much
progress has been achieved. We have made important
steps forward on the basis of the excellent work done
by the facilitators. It was necessary to make sometimes
painful compromises, but in the end, we followed your
guidance, Madam President, in accepting what seemed
to be the final possible compromise.
It is the essence of a compromise that nobody is
100 per cent satisfied. If that were the case, we all
would have done a bad job. With the text adopted now,
we open the door to the next stage. For us, it is
important that we have consensus on this important
step. That does not mean, however, that anybody has
had to give up any position on the substance of the
matter of reforms. We have found a consensus to move
in the right direction, to move from the stage of
consultations to the stage of intergovernmental
negotiations, to come, in the end, to a Security Council
reform that brings about a Council that is truly
representative of the geopolitical realities of our age
and whose legitimacy cannot be challenged by anyone.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Madam President,
I would like to start by joining colleagues in paying
tribute to you for your efforts on this important issue
and for the leadership and guidance that you have
shown us throughout all the deliberations. Our thanks
go also to the facilitators.
I simply wanted to state that the United
Kingdom’s position on Security Council reform
remains unchanged. We believe that it is important to
expand the Security Council in both categories of
membership. We believe that the Council should be
made more representative, reflecting global realities. In

07-50762

doing so, we shall make it more effective. Our position
is that Germany, India, Brazil and Japan should
become permanent members and that there should be
permanent representation for Africa. There are also a
number of other claims that we heard a great deal
about, and quite rightly, in the last few days of our
deliberation, and they too will need important
consideration.
We remain open to all options, including any that
might break the deadlock. We look forward to being
engaged in this important issue as we go forward.
Mr. Spatafora (Italy): At this point, I do not
want to repeat what other colleagues have already said.
I just want to join them, Madam President, in
expressing my warmest, most sincere, strongest
appreciation for your leadership.
Leadership is shown in moments of difficulty, in
delicate moments, in decisive moments, and you have
shown leadership exactly when it was needed,
throughout this past year, and especially in the last
hours and the last days. In recent days, you have shown
that you are a leader; you brought all of us into a
consensus position.
Also, I would like to recall that, a year ago, at the
event hosted on 20 September 2006 by President
Musharraf and Prime Minister Prodi, an appeal for
negotiations was launched and you, Madam President,
were asked to lead and to deliver. You accepted at that
time, and after one year, we have seen that you have
led and you have delivered.
We are now entering a new phase, turning a page.
Today is a day of success not for one group or another.
It is a day of success for all of us. It is a day that offers
a new challenge for all of us. Let us hope that we will
live up to the expectations.
Thank you very much, Madam President. Good
luck, and take care of yourself.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
With regard to draft resolution A/61/L.69/Rev.1,
members have heard the statement by the
representative of South Africa. Therefore, no action is
needed on the draft resolution.
I should now like to express my sincere thanks to
Ambassador Heraldo Muñoz of Chile, Ambassador
Mirjana
Mladineo
of
Croatia,
Ambassador

9

A/61/PV.109

Mavroyiannis of Cyprus, Ambassador Christian
Wenaweser of Liechtenstein, Ambassador Frank
Majoor of the Netherlands and Ambassador Ali
Hachani of Tunisia, who conducted, on my behalf, the
discussions and the complex negotiations of the Openended Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters related to the
Security Council. I am sure that all members of the
Assembly join me in extending to them our sincere
appreciation.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 111?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held a debate on this item at its 95th
plenary meeting, on 17 April 2007.
Under this item, informal consultations have been
conducted on the follow-up of the report of the
Secretary-General
entitled
“Recommendations
contained in the report of the High-level Panel on
United Nations System-wide Coherence in the areas of
development, humanitarian assistance and the
environment” (A/61/836). Informal consultations have
also been conducted on the review of mandates.
As stated in my letters dated 15 September 2007
to Member States, no agreement has been reached on
either of these two subjects. May I therefore take it that
the General Assembly decides to continue
consultations on system-wide coherence at its sixtysecond session? I see no objection.
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that the
General Assembly decides to continue consultations on
mandate review at its sixty-second session on how to
move forward on this issue? I see no objection.
It was so decided.
The President: I should now like to express my
sincere thanks to Ambassador Christopher Hackett of
Barbados and Ambassador Jean-Marc Hoscheit of
Luxembourg, who have so patiently conducted the
discussions and negotiations on system-wide

10

coherence. I should also like to express my sincere
thanks to Ambassador Kaire Munionganda Mbuende of
Namibia, Ambassador David Cooney of Ireland,
Ambassador Munir Akram of Pakistan, Ambassador
Iftekhar Chowdhury of Bangladesh and Ambassador
Claudia Blum of Colombia, who have patiently
conducted the discussions and negotiations on mandate
review.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to conclude its consideration of agenda item 113?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 108 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
Draft resolution (A/61/L.70)
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Community of Central African
States
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American Economic System
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on agenda item 108 and its
sub-items at its 38th and 39th plenary meetings, on
22 October 2006.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Zimbabwe to introduce draft resolution A/61/L.70.
Mr. Chidyausiku (Zimbabwe): On behalf of the
African Group, I wish to start by commending you,
Madam, for convening this important meeting. Since
we are in the drawdown of your presidency, allow me
also to express our deep appreciation for the strength,
commitment, wisdom and excellent skill with which
you have led the sixty-first session of the General
Assembly.
We are pleased to present to the General
Assembly today the draft resolution on cooperation

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

between the United Nations and the African Union,
which, as members know, is renewed by the Assembly
every two years and which this year appears in
document A/61/L.70.
During the sixty-first session of the General
Assembly, we witnessed intense reflection and
consultations between the United Nations and the
African Union on strengthening the cooperation
between the two organizations, pursuant to the
recommendation set out in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1). We would like to thank all
our partners for their active participation and support.
We are pleased that that process culminated in,
among other things, the adoption in November 2006 of
the ten-year capacity-building framework for the
African Union, which highlights key areas for special
emphasis in cooperation between the African Union
and United Nations in the areas of capacity-building
and social development, peace and security and
governance. The draft resolution before members today
reflects those key areas, among others, and has been
endorsed by the African Group. We therefore call for
the support of all members of the General Assembly in
order to consolidate and strengthen those efforts.
For our part, we would like to reaffirm the
commitment and determination of our Governments
and our peoples to fully assume their role. We attach
great significance to the conjunction of our efforts with
those of the United Nations on the basis of the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the Constitutive Act of the African Union.
It is our sincere hope that draft resolution A/61/L.70
will enable us to scale up cooperation between our two
organizations so that we can continue to jointly and
more effectively tackle the myriad complex challenges
to peace, security and sustainable development in
Africa.
In conclusion, I wish to express our gratitude to
all sponsoring nations and partners for their support. I
also appeal to the States Members of the General
Assembly to lend their support to the adoption of this
draft resolution by consensus, as in previous years.
The President: In connection with draft
resolution A/61/L.70, I now call on the representative
of the Secretariat.
Mr. Shaaban (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly and Conference Management): In

07-50762

connection with draft resolution A/61/L.70, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union”, I wish to place on record the
following statement of financial implications on behalf
of the Secretary-General.
Under the terms of operative paragraph 7 of draft
resolution A/61/L.70, the General Assembly would call
for
“the implementation of the declaration on
enhancing
United
Nations-African
Union
cooperation: framework for the ten-year capacitybuilding programme for the African Union, and in
this regard, [request] the Secretary-General to
take appropriate measures to strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations Secretariat and to
implement its mandate with respect to meeting
the special needs of Africa”.
It is the intention of the Secretary-General to
address such capacity with respect to meeting the
special needs of Africa in conjunction with the efforts
to strengthen the risk-assessment and conflictprevention capacities of the United Nations with a
view to improving its early warning, mediation support
and other preventive activities in Africa and around the
world, as referred to in the statement made by the
President of the Security Council of 28 August 2007
(S/PRST/2007/31).
In that connection, any resource requirements and
programmatic implications that have yet to be
elaborated would be submitted for consideration at the
sixty-second session of the General Assembly, in
accordance with established procedures. Accordingly,
should the General Assembly adopt the draft resolution
contained in document A/61/L.70, there would be no
programme budget implications at this time.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/61/L.70.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kitagawa (Japan): My delegation supports
the reinforcement of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) in the area of the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Furthermore, Japan has been extending assistance for
the capacity-building of the AU.

11

A/61/PV.109

With regard to the draft resolution that is before
us, we can agree on many paragraphs contained in it.
However, my delegation has reservations concerning
the procedure followed by the sponsor countries for
consultations on the draft resolution, which were not
inclusive of all interested delegations, including my
delegation.
In light of the absence of a statement on
programme budget implications, my delegation takes it
that there are no financial implications emanating from
the adoption of draft resolution A/61/L.70.
Mr. Wallace (United States of America): The
United States has been a staunch supporter of the
African Union since its inception. On 22 December
2006, we became the first non-African nation to
establish a diplomatic mission to the African Union.
The United States continues to expand the range of
support and collaborative activities we engage in with
the African Union.
For that reason, it is with regret that we must
disassociate ourselves from the draft resolution before
us. While we agree with many paragraphs within the
text, there are others for which insufficient time was
allocated to discuss their meaning and implications. In
the end, we were not given sufficient time to engage in
consultations.
We trust that we will be able to thoughtfully
engage in discussions on future resolutions on the same
theme, and we remind our colleagues that consensus is
possible only when all parties have enough time to air
their views, debate their differences and achieve a
common understanding and acceptance of the text of a
draft resolution.
I wish you luck, Madame, and congratulate you
on your time here at the United Nations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/61/L.70.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, Austria, the Central
African Republic, Chad, the Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Djibouti, Eritrea, Gabon, Germany,
Greece, Italy, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali,
Mauritius, Namibia, Portugal, Seychelles, South

12

Africa, the Sudan, Sweden and Zambia have become
sponsors of the A/61/L.70.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/61/L.70?
Draft resolution
(resolution 61/296).

A/61/L.70

was

adopted

The President: We now turn to sub-items (h), (l),
(o) and (p) of agenda item 108.
I should like to recall for members that, pursuant
to resolution 55/285 of 7 September 2001, the item
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations”, including its subitems, should be biennialized and should appear on the
agenda of the General Assembly at odd-number
sessions after the fifty-seventh session.
Accordingly, sub-items (h), (l), (o) and (p) of
agenda item 108 will be included in the provisional
agenda of the sixty-third session of the General
Assembly.
The Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of sub-items (h), (l), (o) and (p) of
agenda item 108 and of agenda item 108 as a whole.
Agenda item 45
The role of the United Nations in promoting a new
global human order
Draft decision (A/61/L.71)
The President: Members will recall that, at its
2nd plenary meeting on 13 September 2006, the
Assembly decided to include agenda item 45 in the
agenda of the sixty-first session. In connection with the
item, the Assembly has before it a draft decision issued
as document A/61//L.71.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/61/L.71. May I take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to adopt draft decision A/61/L.71?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 45?
It was so decided.

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

Agenda items 17 and 27

Agenda items 12 and 19 to 25

The situation in the occupied territories
of Azerbaijan

The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development

Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their
implications for international peace, security
and development
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the
Assembly decided to include these items in the agenda
of the sixty-first session.
Mr. Tashchian (Armenia): The Armenian
delegation dissociates itself from the consensus on the
decision to transfer agenda item 17, entitled “The
situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan”, to
the sixty-second session of the General Assembly.
I would also like to inform the General Assembly
that the Armenian delegation dissociates itself from the
consensus on the decision to transfer agenda item 27,
entitled “Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and
their
implications
for
peace,
security
and
development”, to the sixty-second session of the
General Assembly. Armenia is confident that an agenda
item dealing with four different conflicts cannot
effectively or appropriately address the specific
circumstances of each. In particular, Armenia is
concerned that the unified concept behind this
initiative could be detrimental to the ongoing
negotiations on the settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict mediated by the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Thus, Armenia believes that any active steps
undertaken within that agenda item could endanger the
integrity of peace talks and thus compel Armenia to
review the existing format of negotiations.
The President: In connection with these items, I
should like to inform members that I have received a
letter dated 4 September 2007 from the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan to the United Nations
requesting that consideration of these two items be
deferred to the sixty-second session. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to defer
consideration of these items and to include them in the
draft agenda of its sixty-second session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda items 17 and 27.

07-50762

Question of Cyprus
Armed aggression against the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
The situation of democracy and human rights
in Haiti
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security
Consequences of the Iraqi occupation of and
aggression against Kuwait
Declaration of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity on
the aerial and naval military attack against the
Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya by the
present United States Administration in April 1986
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the
Assembly decided to include item 12 in the agenda of
the sixty-first session, in accordance with its decision
60/508 of 31 October 2005. Members will further
recall that, at the same plenary meeting of
13 September 2006, the Assembly decided to include
items 19 to 25 in the agenda of the sixty-first session,
in accordance with paragraph 4 (b) of the annex to its
resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004. In resolution 58/316
of 1 July 2004 and decision 60/508 of 31 October
2005, the General Assembly decided that these items
shall remain on the agenda for consideration upon
notification by a Member State. Accordingly, these
items have been included in the draft agenda of the
sixty-second session.
Agenda item 119
Improving the financial situation of the
United Nations
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the

13

A/61/PV.109

Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-first session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the sixty-second session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second
session?
It was so decided.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 119.
Agenda item 137
Financing of the United Nations Mission in
East Timor
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the
Assembly decided to include this item in the agenda of
the sixty-first session. It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the sixty-second session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to defer consideration of this item and to
include it in the draft agenda of its sixty-second
session?
It was so decided.

to engage in full analysis and consideration of the
consequences and implications of those acts.
Costa Rica is convinced that the only way in
which we can avoid a repetition of such shameful and
sad chapters as the scandal that we witnessed regarding
the oil-for-food programme is through an in-depth
analysis of all of the events. Certainly, based on the
Volcker report, that analysis and the adoption of
appropriate measures should be carried out within the
General Assembly, since it is the principal legislative
and deliberative organ of the Organization.
For that reason, Costa Rica would like us to
retain this item on the agenda for the sixty-second
session of the General Assembly.
Allow me to conclude, Madam President, by
thanking you and your team for your work at the head
of our deliberations. My delegation recognizes your
efforts in recent months, and we welcome the success
achieved thanks to your leadership. We wish you all
the best in the future — and we know that that future
will be very satisfactory for you.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to defer consideration of this
item and to include it in the draft agenda of the sixtysecond session?
It was so decided.

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 137.

The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
its consideration of agenda item 154.

Agenda item 154

Agenda items remaining for consideration during
the sixty-first session of the General Assembly

Follow-up to the recommendations on
administrative management and internal
oversight of the Independent Inquiry Committee
into the United Nations Oil-for-Food Programme
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting, on 13 September 2006, the
General Assembly decided to include this item in the
agenda of the sixty-first session.
Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Throughout the world, the work of the United Nations
is rightly acknowledged as being essential for the wellbeing of all peoples. It is with that goal in mind that we
establish programmes and take action. Unfortunately,
the image and the effectiveness of the United Nations
have been affected by acts of corruption involving
high-level staff members. The General Assembly ought

14

The President: I should like to remind
delegations that the following agenda items, on which
action has been taken at previous meetings, remained
open for consideration during the sixty-first session of
the General Assembly: items 13, 14, 32, 42, 44, 47, 52,
63 (b), 90, 100, 105 (a), 106 (h), 107, 112, 115 to 118,
120 to 136, 138 to 147, 149 and 151.
As members are aware, those items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the sixty-second
session of the General Assembly with the exception of
agenda item 120, entitled “Administrative and
budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the
specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency”; agenda item 126, entitled “United
Nations pension system”; and agenda item 131, entitled

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

“Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of United Nations peacekeeping operations”.

we are going to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals on time.

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of those items
at the present session?

Unless we act decisively, the planet will, by 2015,
be suffering not less environmental degradation, but
more. Feeling forgotten and with misplaced hope,
millions of people will still be struggling on less than
one dollar a day, and millions of children will still go
hungry.

It was so decided.
Statement by the President
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have come
to the end of the sixty-first session of the General
Assembly. It has been an honour and a privilege to
work closely with all members. I have presided over a
change of leadership in the Secretariat, and we have
achieved notable successes in the General Assembly.
During this session, we have worked with
determination and consistency, in an open and
transparent manner. From my perspective, as the only
woman President for a generation, and the first from
the Arab world, I have come to see the United Nations
as a global family, a family that is becoming ever more
interdependent. At times, like all families, some
members may have differences of opinion. That is
natural in such a large and diverse group. We have
many mutual interests, but it is only in the spirit of
collective responsibility that we can take further steps
to build greater trust and cooperation. We do that best
when we all join together in common cause.
Despite the suspicion and mistrust that can at
times prevail, members have demonstrated repeatedly
that they can rise above their national interests in the
service of the common good. It is clear to me, without
any doubt, that when we stand united we are stronger;
when we pursue our common goals with purpose and
determination, the General Assembly makes a real
difference and achieves successes sought by the entire
world. To do that effectively, we must all accept both
our shared responsibilities and our differences. The
speed of change in the world around us is accelerating.
Over the past year, the world has witnessed many
dramatic events; civil wars and human rights abuses
continue and have escalated.
Darfur is an ongoing humanitarian crisis; the
threat of terrorism continues; natural disasters have
increased in frequency and scale. Climate change is no
longer a matter of debate; it has become a living reality
for many. We truly face a development emergency if

07-50762

Yet we should not lose hope, for I believe that
great hope arises from great hardship. More important,
we have the means at our disposal to address and
overcome this situation. That is why I made the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
the overarching theme of this session.
Each year the challenges that the multilateral
system faces change, and new priorities emerge. The
United Nations has at times been slow to react and rise
to the occasion. Over the years, the tools we have at
our disposal to tackle pressing issues have become less
effective. That gap continues to grow. However, during
this session of the General Assembly we have added to
the list of accomplishments and helped to close that
gap. Together we have strengthened the principal
organs of the United Nations and have enhanced
cooperation among them, as well as with regional
organizations.
As stipulated by the Charter of the United
Nations, the relationship between the General
Assembly and the other principal organs must be
founded
on
complementary,
and
not
on
competitiveness. We must therefore continue to
develop those relationships in an open, transparent and
cooperative manner, so as to strengthen the
Organization and better accomplish our common goals.
This year we succeeded in forging good working
relationships with the Presidents of the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. On
several occasions, I was invited to address those
Councils during their debates. I trust that cooperation
will continue in future sessions. In that regard, I would
like to call for the implementation of the many
resolutions of the General Assembly aimed at the
promotion of such transparency and cooperation, in
particular resolutions 58/126, 58/316 and 59/313.
Going forward, we need to ensure the faithful
implementation of those and other resolutions to
further enhance partnership among the principal
organs.

15

A/61/PV.109

The revitalization of the General Assembly has
been a priority during this session. In addition to
adopting a new resolution on the matter, we have also
renewed and broadened our engagement with civil
society, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector.
Another essential component necessary to
strengthening the General Assembly is enhancement of
the leadership role of the President of the Assembly.
The role of the President is not only contingent upon
the political and diplomatic skills of the incumbent; it
is also based on the support that the Office of the
President receives from the Secretariat. It is therefore
critical to strengthen the Office of the President of the
General Assembly in proportion to the growing
responsibilities of the President.
The thematic debates I convened on subjects of
development, financing and achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), gender equality and
women’s empowerment, civilizations and the challenge
for peace, and climate change have boosted our
credibility in dealing with important issues on the
global agenda. This has been the beginning of a
renaissance for the General Assembly. The practice of
convening thematic debates on the international
priorities of the day has been an essential part of
revitalizing the Assembly. I would therefore urge
Member States to continue to support those initiatives,
both politically and financially.
In announcing a $10 billion fund for the
realization of the MDGs during the informal thematic
debate on 27 November, the Islamic Development
Bank, the newest member of our family, created an
outstanding precedent that I hope will continue.
We can all be proud of adopting the landmark
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(resolution
61/106,
annex),
the
International
Convention for the Protection of All Persons from
Enforced Disappearance (resolution 61/177, annex)
and the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples (resolution 61/295, annex). Those are major
steps forward in protecting and promoting human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all, as well as in
reasserting the General Assembly’s role as the chief
deliberative and policy-making organ of the United
Nations.
With the strengthening of the Economic and
Social Council, I am confident the Council will more

16

effectively be able to promote global efforts to realize
our international development goals. That is both a
demanding
responsibility
and
a
tremendous
opportunity that we must all wholeheartedly support.
We have all reaffirmed the need to reform the
Security Council. The status quo is no longer
acceptable. During the next session, I hope that the
membership will, on the basis of the progress made
during the sixty-first session on the positions and
proposals of Member States, have the courage to begin
discussions
on
meaningful
intergovernmental
negotiations. The world of the twenty-first century
requires us to make the Security Council more
representative, legitimate and effective. It is also
incumbent upon us to enhance the Organization so that
we can meet the needs of the poor.
The consultations on system-wide coherence have
made some progress. They have demonstrated that we
are less divided on substance than on the process itself.
However, the impasse is not sustainable. We need to
take concrete action, as any further delay will only
prolong the suffering of the poorest among us.
On the issue of gender equality, the opportunity is
now squarely before the Assembly. I hope the proper
decisions will be taken.
On other issues, the Assembly has demonstrated
its willingness to modernize the Organization to enable
it to face the challenges of the twenty-first century.
Members have done that by implementing
comprehensive reforms to strengthen our role in the
areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding; finalizing
consultations recommending concrete options to
strengthen international environmental governance;
launching and reviewing the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy;
improving the effectiveness of the Peacebuilding
Commission and raising new financing for the
Peacebuilding Fund — and I would like to thank the
Member States that have contributed to the Fund this
year, and to express my confidence that the
membership at large will continue to raise additional
resources in the future sessions — giving the staff of
the Organization an effective system to settle disputes
and administer justice and strengthening its oversight
by creating the Independent Audit Advisory
Committee. By adopting a new scale of assessments
and finalizing the Capital Master Plan, the Assembly

07-50762

A/61/PV.109

has put the Organization on the right path towards the
future.
We have also successfully prepared the ground
for important events that will take place during the
sixty-session. Those include the high-level dialogue on
inter-religious and intercultural understanding, the
special commemorative session on children and the
high-level dialogue on financing for development.
In this complex and globalized world, there is a
larger question that looms over the United Nations. Are
we satisfied that the decisions that we take will have a
positive impact on the ground to ease the suffering of
the many people who are in dire need of our support?
In part, the answer is yes, but we need to do much
more.
Of course, the United Nations is not a universal
cure for the world’s problems, though on many issues
we have shown the road ahead. Still, we have not
silenced our critics. We therefore must remember that
it is not they for whom we work to serve, but rather the
global public.
I can tell you first hand, from my experience on
official visits this year, that this Organization
continues — at times against all odds — to work for
the common good, to help build a more democratic and
prosperous world. While the United Nations can guide
the way and point out the futility of military
confrontations, ultimately it is the responsibility of
sovereign Member States to work out solutions to
crises, particularly in the Middle East and Darfur.
More than ever before, we need to focus on the
underlying lack of dialogue between civilizations,
cultures and nations that is at the core of many of
today’s problems. The General Assembly concluded
during the substantive debate on civilizations that there
is a lack of understanding and mutual respect between
different parts of the global community. We must
tackle these issues squarely, and in doing so, we have
to move beyond the outdated mindset that separates the
world into donors and recipients, North and South. We
live in a new age, with new possibilities and new
global players from the South.
Showing the way forward, Gandhi once said that
“we must become the change we want to see in the
world”. Today, for the membership of the United
Nations, this means we must match our words with
deeds, our rhetoric with action. The promises that

07-50762

States Members of the United Nations have made
deserve to be kept. Living up to our promises and
achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015
is one of the greatest gifts that we could give to
humanity, and our future prosperity and stability. We
cannot allow our commitments to remain mere pledges;
then they remain only words that symbolize our broken
promises.
As we close this session, I would like to take this
opportunity once again to extend my deepest
appreciation to all the Vice-Presidents of the General
Assembly during the sixty-first session, and to thank
the Chairpersons and the Bureaus of the Main
Committees for all their hard work. I would like, in
particular, to highlight as well the dedication of all
those ambassadors who have chaired or facilitated
important consultations, for without their dedicated and
skilful efforts I would have nothing to report to the
Assembly today.
I also want to extend my sincerest thanks to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his commitment to
the principles and ideals of the United Nations, and for
his support for the process of reforming this
international Organization throughout the last eight
months during which I have closely worked with him. I
also thank Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro for her continued
support of my work on implementing the Millennium
Development Goals, particularly in the area of gender
equality.
I extend my thanks as well to the Secretariat of
the United Nations, particularly the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
I also thank the many representatives of civil
society and the NGO community, who are such great
advocates for a strong United Nations.
Last but not least, I express my great appreciation
of and thanks to each member of the team of the
presidency of the General Assembly during the sixtyfirst session, who have represented the diversity of the
United Nations through their dedication, hard work,
skill and ability.
I wish to take the opportunity to welcome my
successor, the President of the General Assembly at its
sixty-second session, Mr. Srgjan Kerim. He is an
accomplished academic, a leader in the private sector
and an experienced diplomat who strongly believes in
the United Nations. I have no doubt that the Assembly

17

A/61/PV.109

will extend to him the same cooperation and friendship
I have been so privileged to enjoy.
Mr. Secretary-General, Excellencies, distinguished
delegates, I would like to thank you once again for all
the work you have done over the last year. The
challenge before you now is to continue to carry the
torch of pluralism forward, to bring light where there is
darkness, to bring hope where there is fear. Each of us
here today has a responsibility; we are all accountable.
Only the passage of time will judge whether we have
been successful.
I can pass on this gavel knowing that I have given
my all to serve the values and principles of the United
Nations. For this honour, privilege and opportunity, I
am deeply grateful to all of you. Thank you, farewell,
and a Ramadan karim to all of you.

Minute of silent prayer or meditation
The President: We are now coming to the end of
the sixty-first regular session of the General Assembly.
I invite the representatives to stand and observe one
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
The members of the General Assembly observed a
minute of silent prayer or meditation.
Closure of the sixty-first session
The President: I would like to invite to the
podium the President-elect for the sixty-second session
of the General Assembly, Mr. Srgjan Kerim, so that I
may hand over the gavel to him.
I declare closed the sixty-first session of the
General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

18

07-50762
