TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
b

i’

nd
MEETING: 2 1 MARCH 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 402) . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda

.. .,... ,,,.. ,..,.,...,,,,.......... ...

”
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8484);
lb) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8486) . . . . I . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1402

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Recordi of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEEN HUNDRED. AND SECOND MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 21 March 1968, at 4. p.m.
&&dent:
&sent:

Mr. Ousmane Sock DIOP (Senegal).

when b.e wishes to speak, he will be invited to take a place
at the Council table.

The representatives of the following States:

Algeria,Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. J. Tomeh
(mria) took the place reservedfor him.
3. The PRESIDENT (translated ffom French): The Council will now resume consideration of the item before it.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l402)
1, Adoption of the agenda.
2, The situation in the Middle East:
[u) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8484);
(b) Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8486).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda wasadopted,
The situation in the Middle East:
(8) Letier dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8484);
(bj Letter dated 21 March 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/84lzS)
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from HXYZC~): In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at the 1401st
meeting, I invite the representatives of Jordan, Israel, the
United Arab Republic, Iraq and Morocco to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber, on
the understanding that when one of them wishes to speak,
he will be invited to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Farra
(Jordan), Mr. Y, Tekoah [Israel), Mr. M. A. El Kony
(United Arab Republic), Mr, A. Pachachi (Iraq) and Mr. A.
T. Benhima (Morocco) took the places reserved for them.
2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I have also
received a letter dated 21 March [S/8491] from the
representative of Syria, in which he asks to be invited to
participate, without vote, in the Council’s debate on the
item now before it. If I hear no objection, I shall invite the
representative of Syria to take the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber, on the understanding that

4. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): My
Government views with great concern the disturbing events
which have led to this Council meeting. There has been
further violence in the Middle East, an area overburdened
with past violence and conflict. Upon receipt of the reports
of today’s events, my Government immediately issued a
statement which deplored the Israel military action across
the cease-fire lines and characterized it as damaging to the
hopes for a peaceful settlement of the basic issues involved.
5. The position of the United States with respect to the
matters which concern us has been stated many times in the
Security Council. We adhere to the views we have frequently expressed. The United States Government opposes
violence from any quarter in the Middle East. We oppose
military actions in violation of the cease-fire resolutions of
the Council; such actions create further complications in an
already complicated situation. We oppose acts of terrorism,
which are in violation of the cease-fire resolutions of the
Council, and we are not blind to the additional problems
they create. We believe, further, that military counteractions, such as that which has just taken place on a scale
out of proportion to the acts of violence that preceded it,
are greatly to be deplored.
6. The rule which should guide the parties in all these
situations wasfirst expressed many years ago in resolution
56(1948) of 19 August 1948, in which the Council
declared that:
“Each party has the obligation to use all means at its
disposal to prevent action violating the truce by individuals or groups who are subject to its authority or who
are in territory under its control”;
“No party is permitted to violate the truce on the
ground that it is undertaking reprisals or retaliations
against the other party.”
7. We deem these principles to be applicable to the
cease-fire resolutions of June 1967 which both Israel and
Jordan have pledged to observe. No one faithful to these
principles can view with equanimity the acts of terrorism

They must co-operate in strengthening the supervision of
those arrangements. All concerned must rededicate themselves to the principles of resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November which was unanimously adopted by this Council.
And all parties must co-operate with Mr. Jarring to hasten
the achievement of the objective set forth by the Security
Council, a just and lasting peace in which every State in the
area can live in securityl

which have taken place. But my Government feels strongly
that large-scale military actions across cease-fire lines are
not the answer. Such actions do not bring security; they
only bring deeper insecurity.
8. The wise response, the effective response, is to have
recourse to all possible peaceful means of ending the
provocation rather than seeking to match it and even to
out-top it.

16. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria)
(translated ffom
French): The Security Council is now holding a meeting of

9. There is, as I shall later point out, a peaceful means
available on the ground-the United Nations.

the greatest urgency at the request of Jordan, the victim of
the Israel aggression of 5 June 1967. On the very day when
the international community was commemorating the
anniversary of the Sharpeville massacres, Israel chose to
re-enact that tragedy against the Arab population, That
disturbing coincidence clearly illustrates the identical
nature of the two situations. The one created today by the
Israel forces is particularly grave and disquieting in that it
constitutes a direct continuation of the Israel actions of
5 June and part of an over-all policy of constant provocations followed by repeated acts of aggression,

10. We also view very gravely the peril which the recent
events have created for the all-important peace-making
process set in motion by this Council last November. Under
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967, the Secretary-General’s special representative,
Mr. Jarring, has been working tirelessly and patiently to
establish and maintain contacts with the States concerned,
and thereby to promote agreement and assist efforts to
achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in accordance
with principles unanimously approved by this Council.

17. Unfortunately, the events which have led to the
convening of the Security Council are not isolated, and we
are obliged to note, unless we would condemn ourselvesto
failure, that this phenomenon cannot be examined separately from the links binding it to the problem asa whole,

11. All recognized that this mandate would not be easily
fulfilled; all recognized that the June conflict had raised
new emotional and psychological barriers against rapid
progress; and, similarly, all must’now recognize that those
barriers will only be further heightened by violations of the
cease-fire, including the action of earlier today.

18. The war waged by Israel against the Arab States is
only the manifestation of a colonial type of policy carried
out by expatriates from the four comers of the world and
upheld by the guilty conscience of the west: a policy which
consists in driving from its homeland a peaceful population,
deeply attached to its native soil. The whole tragedy cruelly
afflicting the Middle East, the whole tragedy for peace in
that region, is contained in one word, Palestine. It cannot
be said often enough that it is Palestine, the desire of the
Palestinians to recover their national rights, which is the
crux of the problem. As long as that one basic fact is
overlooked, the future is more than likely to repeat the
past. The United Nations itself has constantly recalled that
fact, which Israel has constantly and unequivocally
rejected.

12. Our experience in the Security Council during the
many months in which we have grappled with the Middle
Eastern problem has demonstrated that no useful purpose is
served by calumny or name-calling, What we should try to
do is to shore up the United Nations mechanism available
for peace-keeping until Mr. Jarring’s ‘peace-making efforts
have succeeded, as we all fervently hope they will,
13. In the light of today’s developments my Government
believes that it is vitally necessaryto strengthen the United
Nations role in the Israel-Jordan sector of the cease-fire
line. In contrast to the Israel-Syrian and Israel-United Arab
Republic sectors, where a most helpful United Nations
presence has been maintained, there have been no United
Nations observers in the Israel-Jordan sector. The Chief of
Staff of UNTSO and the Secretary-General have therefore
been handicapped in observing and supervising the ceasefire and in reporting on violations of it in this area, This
situation should not be permitted to continue in circumstances where the maintenance of the cease-fire and the
prospects for a more lasting peace in the entire area are very
much at stake.

19. We should like to recall certain. features of Israel
policy towards the United Nations and the principles of our
Charter before and after the events of 5 June, for Israel has
just violated those principles once more today through its
massive attack on the non-occupied part of Jordan We
should like to recall that Israel’s acceptance of any decision
has always been tied to the attainment of clearly defined
objectives. To go back only as far as June 1967, it is well
known that despite the Security Council’s decision, Israel
continued its aggression in Syria, the United Arab Republic
and Jordan, until it had achieved the objectives it had set
for itself.

14. We believe that the Council has the right to expect
Israel and Jordan to extend full co-operation to the Chief
of Staff of UNTSO and to United Nations observersso that
the cease-fire may be fully implemented and strictly
observed by all concerned,

20. For example, the entire occupied zone of Syria was
occupied after the Council had called for a cease-fire.

15. Today’s events demonstrate once again that violence is
not and cannot. be the answer to the problems of the
Middle East, What is urgently required is this: the parties
must scrupulously comply with the cease-firearrangements.

21. In order to achieve its objectives, Israel took advantage
of the complicity and support of certain Governments and
was assisted by certain Zionist organizations, Israel acted in
2

this way because it knew what lesson to draw from the fact
that the United Nations has never imposed sanctions when
confronted with problems arising from settler colonies.

27. I should like, if I may, to cite a few passagesfrom an
article which appeared in The Guardian of Manchester on
26 January:
“In response to a series of minor incidents in the last
three weeks, the Israel Army has imposed collective
punishments on the population (mainly refugees from
Palestine) regardless of age and sex. They include curfews
lasting several days, during which no proper provision is
made for the distribution of food and water; arbitrary
arrests; and the random demolition of houses and
property belonging to civilians in no way”-1 emphasize,
in no way-“connected with incidents.

22. Merely by reading its statements of the past few days,
one could infer that Israel gad decided to go beyond the
Security Council’s decision in order to consolidate its
position in the occupied areas and to achieve its standing
objective, the definitive annexation of the occupied Arab
territories. Moreover, this situation will last as long as that
new Messianism, the purpose of which, we are told, is to
carry out the divine will, which wants Biblical promises to
be fulfilled at the expense of the indigenous people. Recent
history reminds us how certain Messiahs arose in Europe
and how they met their end.

“When I left Gaza this morning, three refugee camps,
housing 100,000 Palestine refugees, were under day and
night curfews and there was sporadic shooting in the
streets of Gaza City which served no apparent purpose
beyond the intimidation of the civilian population.

23. This policy has been expressed in several ways,
particularly by the publication of official maps prepared by
the Israel authorities, who have even stipulated that the
cease-fire lines constitute the only currently valid demarcation lines so far as jurisdiction and international relations
are concerned.

I‘
I

.

.

“I had my ups and downs during four years as a
prisoner of war in Germany, but the Germans never
treated me as harshly asthe Israelis are treating the Arabs
of Gaza Strip, the majority of whom are women and
children.“2

24. Furthermore-to
quote from a document distributed
this afternoon by the Press Services of the United Nations
Office orPublic Information-as the spokesman for Zionist
diplomacy told us this morning, a detail which implies a
concern for objectivity, as will be noted: “attacks on Israel
from Jordan territory had continued and had steadily
increased.“’
This document recalls that, to the Israel
authorities, the cease-fire lines have become the “frontiers
of Israel”.

28. The same policy imposed by terror on Jerusalem,
Gaza, the region west of the Jordan, and the Sinai, is today
being extended by the Zionists to the east bank of the
Jordan. Israel is now initiating the third phase of its plan;
the first phase wasaggression, the second was the annexation of the occupied Arab territories, and the third is to
stifle any response to that annexation. For this is not in
fact a policy of reprisals, as the Israel authorities would
have it, but rather an extended act of expansionism, as the
facts demonstrate.

25. In addition, in order to dispel any doubts, the Israel
authorities are proceeding to rename the occupied areas
with Biblical names, such as “Samaria” and “Judea”, in
order to “Zionize” those regions. It is obvious to everyone
that such a situation exists, for it is the direct result of the
occupation of Arab territories after the aggression of
5 June, which was itself the result of the aggression,
clandestine at first and later spectacular, by Zionism against
the Palestinian people. The aggression in Palestine is like all
colonial aggression, particularly the type found in southern
Africa. The presence of Israel in the heart of the Arab
world is in itself an act of aggression and can logically be
continued only by recourse to aggression.

29. Less than a year later, at dawn on 21 March, the
Zionist soldiery, estimated at more than 15,000 men,
invaded another part of Jordan. We are witnessing today a
full-scale territorial invasion carried out by an expeditionary force which has mobilized its full military potential, its
tanks, its airborne troops and its aviation. The war front
thus opened extends over more than a hundred miles, from
the valley of the Jordan to Aqaba.
30. The strength of the forces deployed and the length of
the front itself thus clearly show that these are large-scale
military operations which can in no sense be likened to
selective reprisals, as the propaganda from Tel Aviv
contends, even if one were to accept the imperialist
concepts of reprisals and the “right of pursuit”. In the face
of the daily intensification of what some call “ferrorism”,
but what is, in fact, the strengthening of Arab resistance
movements against the enemy occupation, the Israel troops
in addition to using fascist methods denounced by every
human conscience against the resistance, have launched a
new aggression. Are the examples not conclusive enough to
prove to them that neither reprisals nor massacres will
suffice to overcome a people fighting for their freedom
against foreign occupation?

26. This prolonged occupation has in fact reinforced the
Israelis’ determination to proceed to the definitive annexation of the occupied territories. The population which
remained in the occupied areas despite the war represented,
for the Israel authorities, an obstacle to that annexation.
Therefore, a policy of oppression and systematic destruction was developed in order to overcome that obstacle and
drive the Arabs from their country to swell the ranks of the
millibn and a half Palestinian refugees. The dynamitings,
the collective repression and the destruction of entire
villages have aroused the indignation of world public
opinion.
1 Quoted in English by the speaker. See United Nations Press
Release SC/2981 dated 21 March 1968, take 7.

2 Quoted in English by the speaker.

3

Security Council will have to consider further and more
effective’ steps as envisaged in the Charter to ensure
against the repetition of such acts”.

31. In the usurped land of Palestine, an entire nation is
proudly and courageously preparing itself to forge and fulfil
its destiny. The Palestine liberation movement, notwithstanding the traditionally colonialist epithets with which it
has been labelled this morning, is leading its people towards
their destiny, as in Viet-Nam and Rhodesia.

39. Only a few weeks before, Israel had resorted to crimes
such as blowing up Arab homes to strike terror in the
population of the occupied Arab territories,
in contravention of the humanitarian principles of the Geneva Conventions of 1949.3 The whole world stands appalled and aghast
at Israel’s methods of military occupation and government.

32. The Security Council has had to debate the Palestine
question for nearly twenty years without respite. The
members of this Council know by now the never-changing
Israel scenario: prepare public opinion, then attack. The
objective is always the same, to acquire more territory and
to drive off yet more Palestinian nationals.

40. On the broader question of the Middle East I shall set
forth the views of the Pakistan
Government at the
appropriate time. Since we are concerned at the moment
with the situation created by IsraeI’s act of aggression
today, I would emphasize two basic factors involved.

33. Israel sees itself as, and in fact is, a series of faifs
imposed on the international community and
particularly on the Arab world. Moreover, according to
Israel, we should accept this expansionist phenomenon and
grant it the right to work itself out!

accomplis

41. First, as long as the Israel forces are not withdrawn
from territories occupied by them since June 1967, it is
inevitable that a resistance movement should grow among
the population of those territories. Indeed, the so-called
terrorist activities are but a manifestation of this resistance,

34; Not content with merely terrorizing and massacring
the Arab population in the occupied territories, the Israel
authorities are pursuing these people as far astheir refugee
camps which have been placed there under the auspices of
the United Nations. Hysteria, hatred and unpunished
offences have led these authorities to see in every Palestinian a potential resistance fighter, even, or rather particularly, when he has been driven from his homeland.

42. Second, the pretext offered by Israel for this action is
based on the doctrine of the right of reprisal which Israel
has on previous occasions also asserted before the Security
Council. I need hardly remind my colleagues that the
Council has regarded this doctrine as intolerable. For if we
let Israel claim this right, we destroy the very foundations
of the Charter.

35. And how could it be otherwise, when we all know that
instead of preventing aggression, our Council often meets
merely to take note of it? More than once now, the
representatives of the United Arab Republic and Jordan
have repeated their warnings to this Council that military
preparations were well under way in Israel. But bitter
experience teaches us that this is only a prelude to further
aggression. Knowing what it does, the Security Council can
no longer evade its primary responsibility: to condemn
aggression. In so doing, it will only be abiding by its own
decisions and, above all, discouraging any inclination
towards aggression.

43. It is time that the Security Council turned its eyes
again to the scene and pronounced itself in plain terms in
regard to Israel’s actions. They call for condemnation. They
call for immediate withdrawal of Israel forces from all
occupied territories. They call for an 5nmediare halt by
Israel of its violations of the Geneva Conventions. My
Government is firmly convinced that the Security Council
should do no less. The Security
Council must act
immediately.
44. Those are the observations concerning the present
situation that my delegation would wish to offer at this
stage. We reserve our right to intervene later.

36. My delegation would like to reserve its right to speak
again at such time as it may deem appropriate,
37. Mr. SHAH1 (Pakistan): Today the Israel armed forces
have launched a massive armed attack against the east bank
of Jordan. The pretext given for this inexcusable action was
to attack the so-called terrorist bases in Jordan. The Israel
forces crossed the Jordan River in strength, using helicopters, tanks, and all kinds of weapons, There is not a
shadow of doubt that that armed attack waspremeditated;
it is ‘only too obvious that it is part of a series of
well-planned actions by Israel against its Arab neighbours,
in disregard of the Security Council resolutions calling upon
Israel to cease and desist from all acts of aggression in the
name of retaliatory action.

45. I would mention, parenthetically,
that as I listened to
the statement of the representative of Israel this morning, I
was astonished, as I imagine my colleagues were, that he
opened his statement by directly impugning
the integrity
and impartiality of the Security Council. I have been here
for a number of years, and I did not know that I would ever
come across a representative of a Member State who,
wishing to appear before the Security Council, would begin
the presentation of his case by admonishing
the Council.
But the representative of Israel went further. He served
notice on the Security Council that Israel wodd sit in
judgement over it. We consider that such an attitude and
such an imperious tone are out of place in this important
body.

38. The representative of Jordan, in his moving speech
earlier in the afternoon (140lst meeting], drew our
attention
to Security Council resolution 228 (1966)
adopted on 25 November 1966. Operative paragraph 3 of
that resolution reads as follows:

46. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French): The
French delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President, in

‘%mphasizes to Israel that actions of military reprisal
cannot be tolerated and that, if they are repeated, the

3 GenevaConventions of 12 August 1949

war victims.

4

for the protection of

whose
urgen
extrel
the h
agonil

47. 1
lengti
to pu
opera
the ale
who,
demo]
crisis
48. :
at 15,
Rive]

with
aircra
refuge
49. 1
repris;
men t
the ril
repres
allege1
action

the w
us. 1:i
Charts
pointe
inevit;
partic
for t.l
renew
50. 1
limite
sentat
“nece~
popul;
for ‘u
establi

51. 1
days I
letters
[S/8<!
The s
was c
grave
when
like ‘tr
situati
re-esta
of the
IsraeS

52. 1
respec
0pera.t
withclr

-

whose abilities we have every confidence, for having
urgently convened the Security Council following the
extremely serious even% which have erupted once again in
the Middle F,+astand which have inflicted new and cruel
agonies on the unfortunate people of that area.

prompt and full compliance with resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967; that compliance can no longer be
blocked on fallacious pretexts.
53. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(translated from Russian): An urgent meeting of the
Security Council has been convened today at the request of
the representative of Jordan in order to discuss a new
criminal act of aggression committed by Israel against
Jordan. This is a further flagrant violation by Israel of the
Security Council’s decisions on the cease-fire and the
cessation of hostilities.

47. I shall be very brief. Today is not the time to speak at
length. It is the time to act, and to act as soon as possible,
to put an end to such thoroughly reprehensible military
operations. The French Government is deeply concerned by
the action taken by the army of Israel against an adversary
who, on several occasions since the conflict last June, had
demonstrated his willingness to find a just solution to the
crisis which has ravaged the region in question.

54. In the statement he made today, the representative of
Jordan told the Council that Israel armed forces had carried
out a large-scale attack on towns and populated places in
Jordan and on refugee camps in which many peaceful Arabs
were living, and that the Israel air force had also carried out
air raids on the territory of his country. He informed the
Council that this piratical raid had resulted in heavy
casualties and widespread damage to property.

48, The attack unleashed by Israel, with forces estimated
at 15,000 men, over the seventy-mile course of the Jordan
River from Lake Tiberias to the Dead Sea, was carried out
with tanks, infantry and commandos and supported by
aircraft. It was especially directed against the Karameh
refugee camp.
49, The fact that this operation has been termed an act of
reprisal does not diminish the responsibility of the Government whi;ch ordered it. We cannot allow a State to reserve
the right violently to take the law into its own hands, as the
representative of Israel would have it. Even if certain events
alleged to have preceded it are cited by way of excuse, this
action is out of all proportion with those events. Moreover,
the very concept of reprisals has never been acceptable to
us. It is condemned by our Organization and by our
Charter. On many a previous occasion, my Government has
pointed out that acts of so-called terrorism are the almost
inevitable consequence of military occupation; calling
particuiar attention to this danger, it has constantly called
for the evacuation of the occupied territories. We now
renew that call.

55. He also adduced numerous facts and irrefutable
evidence to show that unprovoked aggression had been
committed by Israel against Jordan. It is quite clear that
this is not a fortuitous incident, but a new deliberate and
premeditated act of military provocation-a large-scale
aggressivemilitary operation on the part of Israel.
56. The Israel authorities do not even attempt to conceal
the fact that this new, flagrant defiance of the Security
Council decisions on the cease-fire and the cessation of
hostilities is obviously deliberate. On the eve of this
criminal attack, we heard various representatives of Israel
repeatedly make open threats against the Arab countries, in
particular Jordan. Members of the Council well know that
the Government of Jordan informed the Security Council
well in advance about Israel’s preparations for a new
aggressiveattack.

50. This new action cannot be described as “localized and
limited preventive measures”, as it is in the Israel representative’s letter [S/8486/, nor can we accept any talk of
“necessary measures for the security of the territory and
population under [the Israel Government’s] jurisdiction”,
for we cannot recognize that jurisdiction, which was
established through occupation.

57. The Security Council has today received official
confirmation of the fact that this military attack was
planned and prepared by Israel in advance. This can be
confirmed by reference to the document containing the
communication dated 21 March from the Chief of Staff of
UNTSO, which says in paragraph 2: “There have also been
reports of an unusual build-up of Israel military force in the
Jordan valley area.” [S/793O/Add. 64.1 4 This is an official
confirmation in a United Nations document that the attack
against Jordan wasplanned and prepared.

51, This action was carefully prepared, because for several
days preceding it the Amman Government, especially in its
letters of 19 and 20 March addressed to our President
[S/8478, s/8482], had been stating that it was imminent.
The special representative of the Secretary-General, who
wascalled to the Jordanian capital, was informed of the
grave concern felt by that government. At the very time
when Mr. Jarring, to whose efforts my delegation would
like to pay a public tribute, had just studied this grave
situation with the Jordanian authorities and was seeking to
reestablish peace in that region, in accordance with the will
of the Council, and a fortiorz’ to avoid any new outbreaks,
Israel’s attack was launched.

58. All of this happened at a time when consultations are
being carried out by the representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Jarring, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) adopted on 22 November 1967. This
is yet another most convincing piece of evidence that Israel
does not intend, and has never intended to seek a peaceful
settlement in compliance with this Security Council decision. Israel continues to play an unscrupulous double game,
trying to mislead the peoples of the world and to make the
Arab countries relax their vigilance.

52. The Security Council demands that the cease-fire be
respected. It must thoroughly condemn this military
operation by the Israel forces. It must demand their
withdrawal from the occupied territories, It must insist on

4 Quoted in English by the speaker.

5

“consider further and more effective steps as envisaged in
the Charter” /ibid./.

59. The diversionary manoeuvres which Tel Aviv used
during the consultations with Mr. Jarring were only a
camouflage for the preparation of a new act of aggression
against the Arab countries. It has also become quite Clear
why Israel has been stubbornly refusing, and continues to
refuse, to accept and implement this Security Council
resolution, and why the Israel authorities have been
pursuing such a provocative policy, arbitrarily interpreting
and distorting this resolution. Only the Security Council,
not the Government of Israel, has the right to interpret its
reso’utions.

66. In his statement, the Israel representative made use
once again of a favourite tactic of aggressors, and tried to
mislead the Security Council by casting Israel in the role of
the “innocent lamb” and shifting the blame for aggression
on its victim. But one can have no faith in the words of the
aggressor. The facts adduced by the representative of
Jordan
and the information contained in the Secretariat
document to which I have referred, expose Israel beyond all
doubt as a violator of the cease-fire and as a country which
has committed another act of aggression against the Arab
countries.

60. As the Foreign Minister of the United Arab Republic
quite rightly pointed out in his recent statement-the text
of which has been circulated as an official Security Council
document dated 19 March 1968 [S/8479/ at the request of
the representative of the United Arab Republic-Israel’s
expansionist policy is emphasized by the recent steps it has
taken, among which are the administrative annexation Of
the occupied territories to Israel, the annexation of
Jerusalem, its acquisition by force of the Arab lands in
Jerusalem with a view to replacing the Arabs by Israelis, its
imposition of Israel currency in the occupied territories as
well as the repressive measures and the destruction of
houses which have forced 400,000 Arabs to flee their
homes. All these illegal measures have been denounced
throughout the world.

67. Neither can we fail to remark on the Israel representative’s provocative attitude towards the Security Council. He almost posed as a prosecutor, dwelt at length on the
impotence of the Security Council, tried to tell the Security
Council how it should act, and stated cynically that Israel
would continue to carry out so-called “reprisals”.
68. All this shows that Israel is once again challenging all
the peace-loving nations of the world, the United Nations
Charter and the Security Council, and that its ruling circles
are continuing to pursue an adventurist, irresponsible and
senseless policy which is not only a cause of extreme
tension in the Middle East, but a danger to the Israel people
themselves.

61. As the Foreign Minister of the United Arab Republic
further pointed out, the international community has
become immune to Israel’s deceptive practices, and is
further aware that its persistent occupation of Arab
territory constitutes in itself continued aggression against
the Arab countries and a violation of the United Nations
Charter and Security Council resolutions, no matter how
Israel tries to deceive the world by uttering words of peace.

69. We must also note that responsibility for this new
breach of the peace in the Middle East rests not only with
the head-strong Israel politicians. It must be shared by the
American and British protectors of Tel Aviv, who supply
Israel with financial resources and arms. shield the aggressor
and, as has recently become clear, place at Israel’s disposal
their own propaganda machinery for disseminating hatred
of and hostility to the Arab world.

62. Israel’s criminal acts reveal the Israel extremists for
what they are; they are clearly part of Israel’s aggressive
policy aimed at the open annexation of territories of the
Arab States for the purpose of consolidating the results of
their aggression. This is a flagr,;;t violation of both the
spirit and the letter of the United Nations Charter.

70. Recent events are further proof that Israel is still
relying for the support of its aggressive policy first and
fcremost on the political, economic, military and diplomatic assistance of the United States, the United Kingdom
and several other Western countries. It is typical that since
the recent visit of Prime Minister Eshkol of Israel to
Washington, Israel has been acting more provocatively and
has now carried out a large-scale armed attack on Jordan.

63. Now, as in the past, Israel is attempting to justify its
aggression, and its blatant violation of Security Council
decisions, by alleging that the attack on Jordan was “an act
of reprisal)‘.

71. The Security Council cannot overlook such a state of
affairs. It must try to ensure that the policies and actions of
the United States and some other Western countries do not
give Israel the opportunity or the grounds to rely on the
assistance and co-operation of those countries. Those
countries on whose assistance Israel counts and relies to
carry out its aggression must cease to encourage this policy
of aggression and must co-operate effectively to improve
the situation in the Middle East. It is no secret to anyone
that they have the means to do this and should do it.

64. In this connexion we should recall that on four
occasions-in January 1956, in April 1962, in April 1964
and in November 1966-the Security Council categorically
condemned Israel for carrying out so-called “reprisals” of a
military nature.
65. On 25 November 1966, the Security Council condemned the Government of Israel for its carefully planned
“large-scale military action in violation of the United
Nations Charter” [resolution 228 (1966/l. At that time too
Israel was trying to delude the Security Council and ,the
whole world by speaking of the alleged necessity for
so-called “reprisals”. The Security Council exposed this
trick and warned Israel that if actions of military
reprisal
were repeated the Security Council would have to

72. The main and essential prerequisite for a political
settlement in the Middle East, as has repeatedly been stated
by the Soviet Union, remains the immediate withdrawal of
the troops of the Israel aggressors from all seized Arab
territories to the positions they held prior to 5 June 1967.
6

If Israel does not remove its troops from the seized Arab
lands, it will be impossible to create the conditions
necessary for the settlement of all outstanding problems in
that region of the world.

the Security Council, it will be necessary to apply sanctions
against it as an aggressorwho has violated Security Council
decisions,
79. If such a decision is taken by the Security Council, the
Soviet Union will be ready to take part in implementing
those sanctions.

73. In his statement, the representative of the United
States mentioned the question of sending more United
Nations observers into the Israel-Jordan region. In that
connexion, the following considerations should be borne in
mind. Does the sending of yet another group of United
Nations observers to the region really touch the heart of the
matter? The circumstances surrounding this further act of
aggression by Israel against Jordan are perfectly clear.
Indeed, the Israel representative himself did not deny the
facts, nor did he trouble to conceal that a wide-scale
miIitary attack had been carried out. So why should we
need to concern ourselves with the question of observers?

80. We must sternly condemn and firmly call a halt to
Israel aggression against Jordan, and force the aggressor to
complr with and respect the decisions of the Security
Council, as required by the United Nations Charter.
81. Mr. PARTHASARATHI (India): Once again the Security Council is meeting under the shadow of a crisis in West
Asia which has been forcefully brought to our attention by
the Israel armed attack today on Jordanian territory east of
the Jordan River. According to the latest reports, Israel
armed forces mounted a large-scale operation across the
cease-fire positions along the Jordan River and attacked
several Jordanian villages. This has resulted in heavy loss of
life and damage to civilian property.

74. But the question does arise whether this idea has not
been thought of for the mere purpose of diverting the
Council’s attention from the main issue, which is the need
to take forceful and effective measures to put a stop to the
aggression.

82. This is not, of course, the first time that the
Security Council has been called to meet and consider a
situation resulting from violations of the cease-fire. In July
1967, after the Council met to consider a similar situation,
it emphasized the need for all parties to observe the
provisions of Security Council resolutions 233 (1967),
234 (1967) 235 (1967) and 236 (1967). On 25 October
1967 the Council, in its resolution 240 (1967), condemned
the violations of the cease-fire,reaffirmed the necessity of
strict observance thereof, and demanded the immediate
cessation of all prohibited military activities in the area.

75. We have serious doubts about the value of sending
United Nations observers into this region. It is well known
that there are United Nations observers-and quite a
number of them-in the Suez Canal zone. But this certainly
did not prevent the Israel aggressors from committing acts
of armed provocation and continuing their aggression. What
is more, we only have to refer again to the United Nations
Secretariat document I have already mentioned [S/7930/
Add.641 to convince ourselves once more that Israel is
ignoring not only the United Nations observers, but the
Organization itself.

83. From the account given by the representative of
Jordan as well as from the reports which have appeared in
the press, it is clear that we are once again facing a similar
situation. But this time the Government of Jordan had
foreseen the massive violation of the cease-fire by Israel.
The representative of Jordan, in his letter dated 19 March,
informed the Council that the “Israel authorities are now
contemplating a mass armed attack against the east bank of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan”[S/8478].

76. In paragraph 3 of this document the representative of
the Israel authorities states that talks between the representatives of Israel and Jordan should be held without
United Nations presence. This shows that Israel is ignoring
the United Nations, and does :lot wish representatives of
the United Nations to be present during the meetings and
talks with the representative of Jordan, In that case, what is
the point of sending more United Nations observers to the
region?

84. In view of the gravity of the situation and the urgency
of positive action by the Council, my delegation would not
at this stage like to go into details. Suffice it to say that the
latest action of the Israel authorities is in utter defiance of
resolution 236 (1967) of 12 June 1967 which specifically
prohibited any forward military movement subsequent to
the cease-fire. In the context of this clear prohibition, the
Israel attack on Jordanian territory today cannot be
justified on any ground and must therefore be condemned
as a grave violation of the cease-fire imposed by the
Security Council. It is incumbent upon the Council to act
immediately and not only order an immediate cessation of
hostilities and withdrawal of Israel military forces which
have crossed the Jordan River-if they have not already
been withdrawn-but also demand of Israel that it desist
from action of that kind in the future.

77. The Soviet Union considers that the Security Council
should categorically condemn this new act of armed
aggression which has been committed by Israel against an
Arab country, Jordan. Israel has violated Security Council
decisions, which are binding on all States Members of the
United Nations, regarding the cease-fire and the cessation of
hostilities,
This entirely justifies the Security Council’s
undertaking immediately
and urgently the most effective
measures against the Israel aggressors in accordance with
the United Nations Charter and in defence of the rights and
interests of the victf..ns of this aggression.
78, If the measures taken by the Security Council in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter for the purpose
of maintaining international peace and security have proved
inadequate, the Council is authorized to apply appropriate
sanctions, Therefore, as the Soviet Union has stated, if
Israel continues to disregard the decisions and demands of

85. Resolution 236 (1967) of the Council, to which I have
just referred, also called for “full co-operation with the
7

i

effect, agreement on the part of the Council that Israel has
no international obligation to withdraw its forces. Encouraged by this, every single action taken by the Government of Israel from June 1967 until today has been
carefully planned and calculated with a view to the eventual
annexation of the occupied territory.

Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization and the observers in implementing the ceasefire”. In this connexion, my delegation cannot but notice
from the Secretary-General’s report that on 20 March
Jordan had proposed a meeting with Israel under the
auspices of the United Nations, This was refused by the
Government of Israel. The Secretary-General has rightly
characterized that refusal as “unnecessarily negative and
rigid” (S/793O/Add. 641. That refusal is in violation of the
relevant paragraph of resolution 236 (1967) which I have
just quoted.

90. Barely three weeks after the adoption of the cease-fire
resolution of 6 June, Israel annexed the Arab part of
Jerusalem-on 28 June 1967. That matter, of course, was
brought before the fifth emergency special session of the
General Assembly which adopted two resolutions on the
question [2253 (ES-V), 2254 (ES-V)] and asked the Secretary-General to send a special representative to look into
the situation and report to him thereon, The General
Assembly, by overwhelming majorities, considered that the
actions taken by Israel in respect of Jerusalem were invalid,
and called upon that Government to rescind them forthwith. But the report which was presented on 12 September
1967 [S/8146/ by Mr. Ernest0 A. Thalmann of Switzerland, the special-representative of the Secretary-General,
informed the international community that the position of
Israel had not changed and that he had been informed by
Israel officials that the actions and measures taken in
Jerusalem were not negotiable and were irreversible.

86. During the entire discussion of the West Asian crisis in
the Security Council and the General Assembly in 1967,
my delegation consistently maintained a position which is
not only one of principle, but also the most just and
practical one. The continued occupation of vast Arab
territories and the frequent clashes along the cease-fire
positions are constant reminders of the serious situation
prevailing in that area. My delegation has always held, and
would like to reiterate again, that we cannot expect the
return of peace and security to the area without the
withdrawal of the Israel forces from occupied Arab lands.
This principle was clearly recognized in Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

91. At the same time, the well-planned and calculated
campaign of terror against the Arab people of Palestine
continued unabated, with the result that nearly 400,000
people were evicted from their homes and had to flee across
the Jordan River, and this in spite of the solemn resolution
adopted by the Security Council on 14 June(237/1967)],
which was reaffirmed twice by the General Assembly, at its
fifth emergency special session (2252 (ES-V)] and also at
its twenty-second regular session (2341 (XXII)].

87. It is a matter of regret that, in spite of the patient and
arduous efforts of the special representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Gunnar Jarring, no progress has yet been
made in the implementation of that resolution. Without
such implementation we cannot hope to lay the found*
tions of lasting peace in West Asia. It is therefore of prime
importance that this resolution be implemented in full. We
are glad to note from the letter of the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Republic[S/8479/
that
his Government has informed Mr, Jarring of its readiness to
implement this resolution. Speaking in the Council this
morning, the representative of Jordan also affirmed his
Government’s desire to give Mr. Jarring every chance to
succeed in his, mission. My delegation is apprehensive,
however, that such serious violations of the cease-fire could
jeopardize the mission.

92. It wasclear from the very beginning that Israel did not
want the United Nations to intervene in this question; they
made no secret of this position, They greeted the failure of
the fifth emergency special session to adopt a resolution on
the substantive question of withdrawal as a great victory for
them, in spite of the fact that at the time there wasvirtual
unanimity in the United Nations on asking for withdrawal
because it was considered inadmissible under the Charter to
achieve territorial gains by military force.

88. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): First of all, Mr. President, I
should like to express my thanks to you and to the
members of the Council for giving me this opportunity to
address the Council on the grave situation in the Middle
East.

93. At the opening of the twenty-second regular session,
the Foreign Minister of Israel again cautioned the General
Assembly against interfering in the question, and said: The
Middle East is not a protectorate, and therefore the matter
should not be a subject of decisions by the General
Assembly.

89. The last time I addressed the Council on this question
was at the 1348th meeting on 6 June 1967, immediately
after the adoption of the cease-fire resolution of that date
[233 (1967/I. I would recall that I cautioned the Council
against a cease-fire resolution that wasnot accompanied by
a demand for the withdrawal of the occupying forces from
Arab lands. I stated at -the time that a resolution which
merely concerned itself with a cease-fire and the cessation
of hostilities, without asking for withdrawal, would give
Israel the opportunity and the chance to perpetuate its
occupation of Arab lands and enable it eventually to annex
those lands. In fact, the representatives of Israel in this
Council and in the General Assembly have never ceased to
say that the failure of the Council to ask for the immediate
withdrawal of the occupying forces from Arab lands was, in

94. They did everything possible, as all members of the
Council know, to prevent .this Council from taking a
substantive decision. But the Council took a decision on 22
November 1967, when it adopted unanimously the draft
resolution proposed by Lord Caradon, the representative of
the United Kingdom. But I am sure all members of the
Council recall that during the agonizing weeks and months
that preceded the adoption of that resolution and the
continuous discussions and contacts between the members
of the Council and the parties directly concerned, it was
made quite clear that there was no possibility of the
8

Council’s taking a decision on direct negotiations between
Israel and the Arab States. The fact that resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 did not contain a
provision for direct negotiations was not accidental; it was
deliberate. For if there had been any possibility of the Arab
side accepting direct negotiations while their territories
were under military occupation, there would have been no
need for the contacts and for the discussions that went on
for weeks and months. There was a delicate balance
presented in that resolution, in which the main effort of the
international community to settle the problem peacefully
was entrusted not to the parties directly concerned but to a
special representative of the Secretary-General, on whose
shoulders the main responsibility had lain from that day, 22
November.

98. What is the situation facing the Council today? A
cease-fire line was established following the adoption of
Council resolution 233 (1967) of 6 June 1967, when the
Council made it quite clear that no violation of the
cease-fire shall be tolerated coming from any side. Yet, how
many times has Israel violated the cease-fire, whether across
the Jordan River or in the Suez Canal area? And what
greater violation is there than the dispatching of 14,000 or
15,000 troops across the cease-fire line, supported by tanks,
artillery and aircraft, sending hundreds of paratroopers
deep in”3 Jordanian territory, and then massacring more
than 1.50, perhaps 200 civilians in Jordan?
99. They have called these civilians terrorists, But perhaps
what they did, in the short time available to them today,
was to kill any young man under thirty. And this reminds
me of what we read in the Bible about King Herod when
the birth of Christ made him perpetrate one of the greatest
crimes in history, that is, the massacre of the innocents. Is
that not the same thing, killing 150 or 200 young men
within a few hours? Could they not possibly know that
those young men were so-called terrorists?
They
slaughtered them all just in case some of them might be
freedom fighters, as we call them, or terrorists as they call
them.

95. But we have seen that since the adoption of that
resolution the Government of Israel has never tired of
trying to read into it its own interpretation, of trying to
shoyr that that resolution provided for direct negotiations,
when everybody knows that it did not; and it did not
because it was impossible to have a resolution calling for
direct negotiations go through the Council. And our
rejection of direct negotiations is based on a very simple
premise and fact-namely, that no self-respecting Government can possibly negotiate under the threat and shadow.of
foreign occupation of its land. Such would be not negotiation, but capitulation. The Arab people are not capitulating, have not capitulated, and never will capitulate. History
and time are on our side.

100. But is it conceivable that in a country under
occupation, and under repressive military rule, there will
not be opposition on. the part of the inhabitants? As I look
around this table, I can see representatives of many
countries which were victims of foreign occupation; and the
resistance fighters and freedom fighters of those countries
against heavy odds fought against the occupying Power.
The people of Palestine are no different. There is no
Government in the Arab world that is able or willing to
prevent the activities of those freedom-fighters. As long as
Israel maintains its occupation of our territories, as long as
it continues measures aimed at the eventual annexation of
those territories, it cannot expect the Arab countries to
provide it with defence and sanctuary against the efforts of
the people of Palestine to regain their lost homeland.

96. But what has Israel done since the adoption of that
resolution? Has it co-operated loyally with the special
representative of the Secretary-General? Has it tried to
provide the necessary conditions for the success of his
task? Has it, in other words, facilitated his mission? Or has
it by every means at its disposal tried to ensure the failure
of his mission and prevent a peaceful settlement of the
problem? From the beginning of December 1967 there has
been a continuous and increasing provocation on the part
of Israel against Jordan. The Permanent Representative of
Jordan to the United Nations has given the Council all the
necessary information about the actions of the Israel armed
forces in shelling refugee camps across the Jordan River,
with tragic loss of life. The wholesale expulsions and the
reign of terror in Gaza have continued; more than 800 acres
of Arab land in Jerusalem have been expropriated; and
then, finally, the decision was announced that the occupied
territories were no longer to be considered as enemy
territory, and that therefore all points of entry into Israel
would be at the commencement of the occupied territory.
The Israeli authorities could not have been ignorant of the
fact that those measures made the tasks of Mr. Jarring
difficult, if not impossible.

101. In any case, the cease-fire resolution was addressed to
Governments. It was not addressed to individuals acting as
individuals without the instigation of any Government.
Because, I am sure nobody can disagree that all these acts
of the infiltrators or of the freedom fighters who are still on
occupied territory are not the result of official or governmental instigation, but are the actions of peoples who
cannot tolerate the continuance of foreign military occupation of their homeland.
102. It is wrong to state, as the representative of the
United States stated this afternoon, that the activities of
those freedom fighters can be considered as violations of
the cease-fire resolution. That resolution was addressed to
Governments. And it is only the action of the Israel armed
forces, under direct orders of their Government, that can
properly be considered as a violation of the cease-fire
resolution.

97. One thing I must hand to the Israelis: they never act
rashly or on the spur of the moment. Everything they do is
well planned and calculated. And I think when one
considers the whole picture of these actions which began
right after the adoption of resolution 242 (1967) of 22
November and culminated in the massive attack of today,
we have a clear picture with a very clear aim, and that is to
prevent the success of Mr. Jarring’s mission, since they
failed to prevent the Security Council from adopting a
resolution on this question.

103. But what is the Council to do in the face of this clear
violation not only of the cease-fire resolution but of the
obligations of Israel as a Member of the United Nations,
9

and of the most elementary principles of international law
and equity? Are we to satisfy ourselves with a recommendation that United Nations observers be stationed
there, and forget about this violation and the tragic loss of
life that it caused? Or is the Council called upon to protect
its own resolution, to protect a vital and basic principle of
the United Nations Charter by making it quite clear to
Israel that actions of this kind cannot be tolerated by the
international community, but must be roundly and clearly
condemned as acts of aggression? Therefore, we support
the view. of representatives who spoke before me that the
Council must invoke Chapter VII of the Charter and take
enforcement and punitive measures against Israel including
the imposition of sanctions.

107. I have quoted the statement to show clearly the
cynical opportunism of Israel’s policy in the United
Nations. Something which was defended with such eloquence in October of 1966 was attacked with such
vehemence only a few months later when Israel was able,
by its act of aggression, to occupy Arab lands. I will have a
lot more to say on this and other aspects of the Middle East
situation when the time comes. But I call on the Council
not to heed the arrogant threats of the representative of
Israel, who appointed himself judge of the Council this
morning, but to take actions that are consistent with its
own resolution and with the basic principles of the Charter.
An abdication of responsibility now and failure to take
resolute action will have the most serious and catastrophic
consequences for this Organization and for international
peace and security.

104. Because of the urgency of the problem, I do not wish
to prolong my statement now, but I hope I shall have
another opportunity to speak at some length on the
substantive issues relating to the Middle Eastern crisis. I
think now we should try to get the whole Council behind a
decision that would make clear to Israel that actions of this
sort shall not pass unnoticed or unpunished.
10.5. But before concluding, I must say that I was struck
by the statement of the representative of Israel this
morning when he spoke about armistice lines and how
inadequate they were, and that Israel never considered
them as its frontiers, and therefore would never go back to
them.

108. kij Endalkachew MAKONNEN (Ethiopia): It is with
deep regret and with a sense of grave anxiety that we have
learnt of the military reprisals that have been undertaken
by the armed forces of Israel in Jordanian territory which
lies clearly over and beyond the cease-fire positions
established in accordance with the decisions of this Council.
My delegation deplores this act on the part of the military
forces of Israel which we consider to be most unfortunate
and ill-advised-the more so since there can be no excuse
for such action in circumstances where a United Nations
machinery exists in the area and a special representative of
the Secretary-General is patiently endeavouring to carry out
a high mission entrusted to the Secretary-General by the
Council.

106. I think this is the argument we have heard so often,
that the armistice lines were bad frontiers and therefore
Israel will never agree to go back to them; in other words,
trying to justify annexation of large territories conquered
from Jordan, Syria and the United Arab Republic. But I
came across an interesting statement made at the twentyfirst session of the General Assembly just a few months
before Israel unleashed its aggressive war on the Arab
people last June. This was a statement by Mr. Eban in the
general debate in October 1966, only eight months before
the war; these are his words:
“Behind the armistice frontiers established by agreement between Israel and its Arab neighbours in 1949, the
national life of sovereign States has become crystallized in
an increasingly stable mould. There is some evidence that
thoughtful minds in the Middle East are becoming
sceptical about threats to change the existing territorial
and political structure by armed force. Such threats, and
the policies concerted to support them, offend the spirit
and letter of the United Nations Charter. They
violate”-and these are the words of Mr, Eban-“bilateral
agreements freely negotiated and solemnly signed”meaning, of course, the Armistice Agreements-

109. We had been hopeful that the quiet and persistent
effort of Mr. Jarring would by now lead to some progress,
thus making it possible for the United Nations to effectively implement the provisions contained in resolution
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967. But it is all too obvious
that for Mr. Jarring to be successful in his high mission of
peace in this troubled area it is necessary that he obtain the
unreserved co-operation of all the parties concerned, and
that nothing be done which would undermine the purposes
of his urgent and delicate mission. It is only the full
co-operation and restraint on all sides that can ensure the
success of the United Nations effort to bring peace and
tranquillity to this area; and the Security Council, which
has assumed its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security in the area in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 1 of the Charter, is
entitled to demand that the chance of peace be not
jeopardized by impulsive hostile acts.
110. The military reprisal that Israel has undertaken
cannot even be justified by what the representative of Israel
describes in his letter addressed to the Security Council
[S/8486/ as being measures undertaken to meet the need
to avert terrorist activities that are alleged to have been
committed by armed bands organized on the Jordanian side
of the armistice position.

“They undermine the central principles of international
civility, and they have no chance of being carried into
effect . , . [because of] the opposition of the world
community to the alteration by aggressiveforce of legally
established and internationally recognized situations.”
He went on to say:

111. While fully recognizing the need for strict observance
of all cease-fire provisions and for the avoidance of hostile
acts on all sides, and while also deploring the sad
consequences of su;h hostilities, my delegation maintains
none the less that military reprisals can in no way be

“It is not really necessary to formulate new or special
principles for peace and security in the Middle East.“’
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first Session,
Plenary Meetings, 1428th meeting, paras. 112 and 113.

10

permissible or justified. It is the view of my delegation that
alI developments and incidents that might arise in the
fragile situation surrounding the cease-fire arrangements
should be resolved through the United Nations machinery
that exists in the arFa.

118. I think that, like a good banker, he feels that the
credit established by Hitler for the history of Israel has not
yet been exhausted. That notion has been made use of, but
its historical and moral falsity has been proved. While he
told us of the Hitler regime, he neglected to speak to us of
the activities of world Zionism well before the turn of the
century, of the international deals at, the time of the
BaIfour Declaration, or of the groups which had already
been sent to Palestine before the Second World War to
establish the Jewish homeland, which cannot be considered
as compensation for the concentration camps of which the
Jews, as citizens of the occupied countries which suffered
under Hitler’s racism, were the victims at that time.

112. We cannot allow such reprisals to continue without
jeopardizing the delicate task that has been entrusted to the
Secretary-General
and to his special representative,
Mr. Jarring. I need hardly recall in this connexion the
provision of Security Council resolution 228 (1966) of 25
November 1966, by which the Security Council has already
made it clear that acts of military reprisals cannot be
tolerated.

119. I believe that in the treaties and agreements signed by
the Great Powers after the defeat of the Germans and at the
time of the Niirnberg trials, no decision was taken which
obliged the world community to establish a state of Israel
in order to give Jewish nationals of the occupied countries
some sort of compensation,

113. In the face of the present act of reprisal undertaken
by the armed forces of Israel, the Council has no alternative
but to depiore this act of reprisal and to demand that the
said forces be immediately withdrawn to the positions of
the cease-fire they previously occupied behind the west
bank of the Jordan Biver. My delegation would further urge
the Council to sound a clear and unmistakable warning that
acts of military hostility and reprisal are not to be tolerated
and that the party that resorts to such acts can expect
nothing but censure from the Security Council.

120. At that time, certain great Powers, perhaps because
they were shocked by the excessesof nazism and by the
choice of the Jews asits main victims, or perhaps to soothe
a guilty conscience caused by the years which preceded the
war and by the anti-Semitism in certain European capitals,
sought to appease the conscience of the international
community. There is a very wise counsel mentioned in the
Bible which I believe, has been handed down by all
civilizations from the very beginnings of mankind: two
wrongs cannot make a right, and an injustice can never be
set right by another injustice.

114. It is on the basis of those considerations that, in the
view of my delegation, the Security Council must now take
an urgent decision.
115. In conclusion, I wish to say that the cause of peace in
the Middle East is in no way served by hostilities and
reprisals. The way to peace in the Middle East lies in the
acceptance by both sides of resolution 242 (1967) of the
Council as the basis for lasting peace and permanent
settlement.

121. There is no human value, legal principle or moral
value which, in order to compensate the Jewish people, can
permit the choosing of another victim and the eviction of a
community from its own homeland to make room for
nationals of various countries who receive financial and
territorial reparations both as a nation and as a people,
when the State of Israel itself continues to exploit the
conscience of German Christian democracy in order to
receive compensation for the Jewish victims in the form of
armaments and money.

116. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) [translated from French):
First of all, Mr. President, I should like to express my
delegation’s thanks to you and to the members of the
Council for having given my country the opportunity to
express some of its views on the incidents which have just
occurred today. I must acknowledge that I take the floor
with a feeling both of professional satisfaction, since events
have proven us right, and of sorrow, for our prediction has
been tragically borne out by the corpses of the new Arab
dead we bury today.

122. I wonder what Power in the world would dare to say,
before the Arab victims who are scattered everywhere as
refugees or those in the refugee camps which Israel still
attacks today, that there is an international conscience
which can justify such behaviour and which can find moral
justification for refusing compensation to the Arabs.

117. Before going any further, I should also like to make a
few remarks concerning the statement made before the
Council this morning by the new representative of Israel.
He told us that this was the first time he had had the
occasion to speak before the Council, and he did so like
those missionaries who, in taking up their parish, begin
their preaching with the most elementary catechism, as if
their parishioners knew nothing at all of religion or of God.
Apparently like all Israel representatives, he dwelt inordinately on the well-known theme of justifying the existence
of Israel by the persecution and the horrors of nazism.
Perhaps he thought that he would move us in his own way
and that he was doing the duty of a new priest of Israel by
explaining to us that the phenomenon of the existence of
Israel is closely linked to the memory of the horrors of
nazism.

123. I have made these preliminary remarks in order not
to disappoint the Israel representative, who doubtless
expected his statement to provoke some reply.
124. But to come to the crux of the problem, we have
been told this morning that for twenty years Israel has been
fighting day after day for its survival and its existence.
125. I should like very briefly to review exactly what has
occurred in that part of the world in the past twenty years.
On the one hand, we have been witnessing a State growing
stronger each day, becoming a Power, perhaps even a great
colonizing and imperialist Power; we have seen Jewish
11

immigrants come from all over the world to swell the
nation which has installed itself in that territory. On the
other hand we see an uninterrupted exile of Arabs, who
have been periodically expelled from their homeland over a
period of twenty years, in identical circumstances on
practically every occasion, to make room for expatriates
who have no right to live in that region.
126. I think that what we witnessed-in 1948 here in the
United Nations, unfortunately-with
the creation of the
State of Israel was a ruthless violation of every legal
criterion of international law, of every humanitarian and
moral principle; a violation justified at the time with
whatever sophistry and rhetoric one great Power or another
managed to produce, but having no justification in the
criteria which constitute the basis for the creation, existence and legitimacy of States.

stood, it would receive the moral and political support of
the great Powers which had taken the initiative in proposing
it to the Council or whose representatives had spoken here
to explain how they intended to implement that decision.
Unfortunately, since the cease-fire and since that resolution
was adopted, we have witnessed a series of violations at
every level-military, legal, and in the fields of public order
and of human rights; we have seen these endless violations
repeated with ever-increasing frequency-proof that the
intentions we imputed to Israel at the time of the crisis
were indeed that State’s real intentions,
131. We were told that we were over-dramatizing the
situation. Unhappily, today we have good reason to ask
those who accused us then of systematic pessimism to bury
their illusions and their trust, if they ever truly had any.
132. At the time the cease-fire decision was adopted, a
Council meeting was convened for six o’clock in the
morning, ‘you will recall, and continued until after four
o’clock in the afternoon (1352nd meeting]. The Israel
military authorities took no action in response to the
Council’s appeal, for they intended to reach strategic
positions, arrive at the banks of the Suez Canal, complete
the occupation of the west bank of the Jordan and take the
Syrian heights. We said at that time that Israel’s plans went
beyond a strictly military operation of intimidation, that
they had political consequences and aimed at political
objectives which have been the same since time began,
namely to hold as many trumps as possible and so be in a
position to impose peace terms or armistice conditions.

127. The United Nations served as a shield in that
international situation, and the fact is perhaps regretted by
many of those responsible at the time. But lines were
established limiting the territory of Israel in that region. If
we look at the map of the Middle East, we see that this
people, which contends that it has fought daily for its
survival, has expanded far and wide, and rarely in modern
history has a country which came to existence in the guise
of a victim become so large, widespread and powerful an
empire in so short a time.
128. This is how Israel seesitself, as victim; whereas today
it enjoys the privilege of a very great Power which, by
military action and legal cunning, has evaded all the United
Nations resolutions permitting its existence within certain
limits, and now occupies territory twice as large as the area
that had been allotted it.

133. The cease-fire, which we accepted immediately, as
the Council requested, was callously ignored from the day
it was adopted until Israel had achieved its real objectives,
Moreover, we have the impression that even that belated
cease-fire did not satisfy Israel, for we have since been
witnessing the continuation, in one form or another of
Israel activities aimed at nothing less than the annexation of
the territories.

129. What has been done on the Arab side, these twenty
years, when decisions have been taken by the United
Nations? We have shown a scrupulous respect for those
decisions. Whether we have found them satisfactory or not,
we have acknowledged that the decisions of the Security
Council are invested with an authority which all must
respect. The victims of these resolutions, who have shown
their respect for these values of the Charter, should not also
be the constant victims of the legal trickery through which
Israel distorts their meaning with ease and impunity. Aside
from the resolutions which have not been respected, there
is, for instance, the Tripartite Declaration of 1950, whereby
three great Powers committed themselves to ensuring that
the status quo in that part of the world would be respected.
But we saw not a single measure taken by the Powers in
question when the status quo was violently and repeatedly
altered. Neither at the time of the Suez affair in 1956, nor
when Israel changed the structure and status of the
territories in that region, did the great Powers do anything,
although they had pledged their own moral and political
authority
to guarantee respect for the Tripartite
Declaration,

134. Here I should like to stress the gravity of the position
taken by the Minister of the Interior of Israel in deciding to
place the occupied territories under the municipal law of
the State of Israel. In all history, except in the case of the
Nazi regime, or that of German nationalism under
Bismarck, we have never seen an occupied territory
immediately become conquered land, annexed to the
territory of the conqueror by the arbitrary dictate of the
conqueror’s law. It will be recalled that in 1870, under
Bismarck, Prussia annexed Alsace-Lorraine under the same
conditions, in violation of the international law of the time.
When Hitler’s Germany conquered the Sudetenland, it
immediately annexed that territory and placed it under the
municipal administration of the Hitler regime, under the
authority of Himmler. And when the Anschluss took place,
that political and military operation whose very name
signifies a union pure and simple, the territory of Austria
was immediately placed under German authority. At that
time the entire world, though perhaps even more powerless
than today, at least attempted to take legal action against
that alteration of international law. It may have been
unable to take military action at the time-and that failure
to react cost it dear-but in any case there were consciences

130. I can think of a Security Council resolution which
caused US no satisfaction, but which we saw,at the time of
its adoption, as a last effort to achieve unanimity in the
Council so that useful and effective steps could be taken.
We were told that if that resolution were adopted as it
12

among the great Powers at the time which denounced that
violation of international law. Now, Israel, with its Semitic
rhetorical cunning-and I hope it will recognize that we
share its awareness of these subtleties-has blatantly announced, three times over, that the territories in question
have ceased to be enemy territories. If that is the case, we
should like to know what they have become. Three times
Israel has announced that the law relating to occupied
territories is no longer applicable. What law, then, is now
applied to those territories?

place in the region? The method of operation is exactly
that of the Nazis, who seem to be an obsession with the
Israelis. It forms the background of their political doctrine,
their actions and their legal approach to the problem in the
Middle East and evidently draws its inspiration from the
cunning of Ribbentrop or the actions of Himmler. I think
that after the events which have just taken place it is
important to try and gauge the scope of Israel’s intentions.
The challenge is hurled not only at the Arabs, but at this
international Organization, whose decisions, despite all the
prestige attached to the members of this Council and to the
Organization itself, are wrecked and eroded day after day
by the decisions of the Tel Aviv clique.

135. Our understanding is that a cease-fire is a form of
status quo which covers all activities in the occupied
territories. It was explained that this related to customs
measures, measures to facilitate movement, and so on.
Israel has accepted the cease-fire; it must therefore accept
the political and legal consequences thereof. But the great
Powers have not reacted, nor has the Security Council. It is
that which has given Israel the courage to continue its
activities, with the idea that the international community
either has an interest in maintaining a tacit complicity, or
stands powerless before what is being done.

141. I think it is time we became aware of this problem.
What has Israel just done this morning? It has carried out a
military operation, the aims of which have been publicly
announced, and the Prime Minister has said he is satisfied
with that operation and that the Israel troops are returning
home after having accomplished their mission and achieved
their purpose.
142. I do not think Hitler ever had the courage to make
such momentous statements; he left the League of Nations,
rather than have to juggle with the law. Yet, Israel
continues to sit among us, tries to stir the conscience of the
world with reports which have nothing to do with its own
conduct, and goes on behaving before the internationaI
community like an international pirate whose impunity is
assured.

136. ’ Of course: the events of the past few weeks have
shown us that a Mr. Smith or a Mr. Vorster can defy the
international
conscience with impunity,
and Zionism,
which sees Mr. Smith as its imitator and South Africa as its
fellow traveller, cannot lag behind those two r&imes in its
behaviour.
137. Unfortunately, the Security Council has for months
had nothing on its agenda but problems concerning these
three States, inspired by the same philosophy, the same
policy and the same insolence towards the international
community.

143. It is perhaps superfluous to add any more to our
debates here, when the Council is considering a situation
which everyone knows to be one of reprisals. There have
been precedents in this very body; let me cite a few of
them. There was a resolution condemning the United
Kingdom for reprisals against the village of Harib in Yemen.
There was a resolution, submitted by one of the great
Powers sitting in this Council and concerning certain
incidents in As Samu, which expressed the United Nations
unequivocal condemnation of the principle of reprisals. It
was deeply disappointing to hear certain representatives say
this afternoon that the victim wasbeing placed on an equal
footing with the aggressor and that an appeal should be
addressedto both parties to ceasetheir activities.

138. I have summarized a few facts which have incalculable consequences for the future. When we have
approached the Secretary-General and successivePresidents
of the Security Council, it has never been our intention
merely to pile up extra documents and fresh protests; fully
aware of our responsibility, we wished to produce proof of
Israel’s intentions in completely ignoring the political
situation created by the Council’s decisions. It ignored that
situation at the outset, because it never intended to state
how it meant to implement the Council’s resolution, When
Mr. Jarring was endeavouring to produce some small basis
for optimism and to pave the way for a dialogue, it
sabotaged all his efforts.

144. I think it would be more honest today, to recall that
the Security Council and the General Assembly have
recently taken a very clear stand in condemning reprisals:
just as, a few years ago, the international community and
all the jurists of the world pronounced against the right of
pursuit. If at that time everyone had turned a blind eye to
the arguments advanced in support of the right of pursuit, I
believe that today we should have had the conquest of
Cambodia.

139. I was very pleased to hear one of the most
authoritative voices in the Council remark a few moments
ago that it was no mere coincidence that today’s events
occurred at the very time when Mr. Jarring was leaving by
air for Amman to continue one of the stages in his
endeavours. This reminds us that on the very eve of 5 June
1967, the movements of certain ruling Powers had led us to
believe that important contacts and visits were going to
take place in order to bring about a settlement of the crisis;
and it was on the following day that we found ourselves
confronted with the aggression of 4 June 1967.

145. I believe it to be absolutely necessary for the
Security Council to take a clear decision, to express
unqualified condemnation, and not compare Israel’s military operations with the actions of people who in the face
of the illegal act of aggression, have no resource but the
legitimate action of self-liberation.
,146. We were more than a little shocked to see this
morning in a United Nations text, in the supplementary

140. Is it possible that all these facts cannot.make the
Council more vividly aware of the events which are taking
13

information
which was circulated, that the word “terrorists” had been used. Worse still, we found the phrase
“relating to terrorist activities on the Israel side [S/7930/
Add.64, para. 21.” I think the Israel representative made a
slip this morning-unless
he did it on purpose. He spoke of
terrorists infiltrating into Israel territory. I am not aware
that the west bank of Jordan is Israel territory. He should
say that they are infiltrating into their own country: that
would be more in keeping with the facts. If Israel accuses
them of terrorism, that is the conqueror’s own personal
point of view; but that the United Nations should use such
a term in one of its documents justifies us, I think-with all
due respect to the departments which drafted the text-in
drawing attention to the use of such terms in United
Nations documents.
147. I do not wish to say much more at this stage; I would
onIy recall that there have been other equally serious
occasions when we have called upon the Security Council,
asking it to take decisions in keeping with the importance
of the events, and that then, apparently, different ideas
prevailed.
148. Today, confronted with a situation in the Middle
East which has lasted for six months, we can see that the
course on which Israel has embarked is directed to the very
goal which we denounced at the beginning. If the United
Nations continues to ignore it, I believe that this Organization could incur a much graver responsibility than that of
its predecessor before the Second World War, and that to
express moral condemnation of Israel would be a totally
inadequate reaction. The Security Council must-and it is
with great respect that I make this appeal-show itself equal
to the events which have just taken place.

dead letters for Israel. It is the law of the jungle and the
conviction that might makes right which constitute the
foundation of Israel’s policy towards its neighbours, The
arrogance with which the representative of Israel felt
entitled to state this morning that it is for Israel alone to
decide when to attack another Member State of the United
Nations should open the eyes of even those who, for
reasons known only to them, have been reluctant to require
that Israel should abide by the provisions of the Charter.
Their failure to condemn the aggression by Israel of June
1967 has only added to making Israel more arrogant and
more contemptuous of the most elementary norms of
behaviour among States.
153. The representative of Israel in his by now traditional
manner could again not resist the temptation to refer to
matters outside the scope of our discussion. He referred to
the brutalities of the Nazis during the Second World War. In
spite of the irrelevance of those issues to our present
discussion-and the aim of such statements is clearly to
inject emotional elements into the discussion-we should be
thankful to him for raising the point. By reminding us of
the behaviour of the Nazis he unwittingly directed our
attention to the tragic similarity of Israel’s attitude in
occupied Arab territories to that of the Nazi occupiers in
Europe. We understand the interest of Israel in depicting
the self-defence of the population of the Arab territories as
violence, and those who have been chased ‘from there by
Israel as terrorists. We still remember those terms being
used by the Nazis against the resistance fighters of many
European countries who heroically resisted the invaders of
their homelands. It brings no glory to Israel to emulate
them here.
154. We want to state in the most categorical manner that
the Charter of the United Nations recognizes the right of
everyone to resist aggression. It is Israel which has been
acting in contravention of our Charter by invading and
occupying Arab lands, by driving away their inhabitants, by
instituting a reign of terror and reprisals against the civilian
population, by destroying their homes and committing
other atrocities in the occupied territories. No amount of
sophistry can conceal the fact that the resistance of the
Arab peoples, like the resistance of the Jordanians against
the invaders of their homeland, is lawful and is in ful!
conformity with the Charter.

149. Mr. CSATORDAY (Hungary): The Security Council
is faced again with an act of armed invasion against Jordan,
the latest in a chain of aggressive actions that Israel has for
years been committing against the Arab countries.
150. The Permanent Representative of Jordan informed
the Council in his letter of 2l March 1968 that “the Israel
authorities launched their mass attack” [S/8484], another
clear case of a premeditated and reckless attack, to the
possibility and even to the probability of which the
Permanent Representative of Jordan had drawn our attention well in advance during the past days.

155. The Foreign Minister of my country stated very
clearly our position regarding this situation in the courseof
the general debate of the twenty-second session of the
General Assembly when he said:

15 1. Not so long ago, the Security Council, after months
of inconclusive discussions, finally adopted, on 22 November 1967, resolution 242 (1967) with a view to eliminating
the consequences of the aggression of Israel in June 1967.
It is common knowledge that that resolution has never been
accepted by Israel. It has not withdrawn its armed forces
from territories it occupied during that war. In sharp
contrast to the attitude of the interested Arab States, which
have repeatedly stated their readiness to abide by the terms
of that resolution, Israel has so far refused to do so, and
thus its attitude is in direct contravention of Article 25 of
the Charter.

“According to the Charter of the United Nations, all
necessary steps are justified in order to put a stop to
aggression and to liquidate its consequences,“e
156. In his statement the representative of Israel openly
claimed the right to wage preventive wars, a claim which
the Charter expressly forbids. Is it not obvious to everyone
that by acting in that manner Israel is clearly setting itself
outside the scope of our Charter? What we are told in

152. The fact that Israel has again seen fit to resort to
naked armed aggression cannot but convince everyone that
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations remain

6 Ibid., Twenty-second Session, Plenary Meetings, 1578th meet-

ing, para. 17.
14

le.
le
le

1t
io
:d
)r
re
r,
le
.d
,f
al
0
0

I-l
It
0

e
If
lr
n
n
&
s
Y
g
Y
f
:

effect in this: All Member States are obliged to abide by the
provisions of the Charter except Israel which has the right
to start preventive wars and search-and-destroy missions in
the lands of others.
157. We heard the representative of Israel speak of
“mopping-up operations”. The spiritual parent of all these
operations must be heartened by the knowledge which his
pupils so convincingly demonstrate day by day. It was after
all not useless for General Moshe Dayan to study those
operations in Viet-Nam. Now he and his Government can
put them into practice against other peoples fighting for
their independence and territorial integrity.

been even-handed in its consideration of the problems of
the Middle East. I should like, however, to refer to the
record, which is the best way to determine how evenhanded any country is in considering problems before the
Council.

158. The Arab peoples, as ehe representative of Jordan has
reminded us, put their confidence in the Security Council.
Israel’s attitude towards our Council was eloquently stated
by Mr. Tekoah this morning. We are not to be trusted, he
stated in effect, because some of us have condemned the
earlier aggressions committed by Israel.

165. The Council addressed itself, under my Presidency,
to the problems of the Middle East in November 1966. We
had before us first a complaint of Syrian violation of its
obligations under prior Security Council resolutions. After
considerable consultation a draft resolution dated 3 November 1966 (S/7575/Rev.l]
was offered by Argentina, Japan,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria and Uganda. That
draft resolution in the most polite fashion invited the
Government of Syria to strengthen its measures for
preventing terrorist incidents and then went on to call upon
both Syria and Israel to facilitate the work of UNTSO. That
draft resolution, members of the Council will recall, was
defeated after it had received the requisite number of votes
in favour-10 votes-by the veto of the Soviet Union.

159. We are proud of having taken a resolute stand against
Israel aggressions, and will continue to do so. We are not
claiming to be impartial between the invader and the
invaded, We have been entrusted by our people with the
task of strengthening peace and security all over the world,
and resisting aggression should it occur in the Middle East
or elsewhere, and we shall do everything in our power to
meet these obligations, which are undertaken by Members
of the United Nations.

1.66. Let us contrast that, when we consider the question
of even-handedness, with what occurred later that month,
on 25 November 1966, when on the complaint of Jordan
there was brought before the Council actions by Israel
which were deemed to be a violation of Israel’s obligations.
There the Council, with the firm support of the United
States, adopted a far more drastic resolution [228 (1966/l,
deploring Israel’s large-scale military action on that occasion.

160. The Government of the Hungarian People’s Republic
is of the opinion that it is the duty of the Security Council
to condemn the latest Israel aggression against Jordan and
to do everything to prevent the recurrence of such attacks.
The Council should achieve by all means at its disposal the
full implementation of resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 to eliminate all consequences of Israel aggression.
The lawlessness perpetrated by Israel should be condemned
and Israel should be made to understand that the United
Nations will not tolerate any Charter violations.

167. Now Ambassador Malik has dismissed as a diversion
and a waste of time the suggestion we made that the United
Nations extend its supervisory function to the Israel-Jordan
cease-fire line. In discussing that, the representative of the
Soviet Union read from the report of the Secretary-General.
In the sentence immediately following what he read, there
is a statement which indeed demonstrates the need for the
extension of United Nations activities in this very situation.
I shall read the sentence that Ambassador Malik read:
“There have also been reports of an unusual build-up of
Israel military forces in the Jordan Valley area.”

161. The PRESIDENT (trunsZated from French): I call
upon the representative of the United States, who has asked
to speak in exercise of his right of reply.

Thenext sentence reads:

162. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I
should like to reply very briefly to some comments made
by the representative of the Soviet Union.

“Unfortunately, little or no verified information on
these developments has been available to the Secretary
General because no United Nations observers are deployed in the Israel-Jordan sector as has been reported
previously to the Council.” (Sf 793O/Add. 64, para. 2.1

163. But first, since I was detained in Washington on
urgent business when he first made an appearance again in
the Council, I should like, if you will permit me, Mr. President, to associate myself with the words of welcome
extended to him on my behalf by my deputy, Ambassador
Buffum. I shall look forward to working with Ambassador
Malik and all other colleagues in the Council in the interest
of seeking what we still have not been able to obtain, peace
and security, not only in this area but throughout the
world.

168. It would have aided us considerably had we had such
information and perhaps the Council might then have been
able to take some preventive action. I made the suggestion
that I made in my original intervention in the interest of
making progress towards the implementation of our prior
resolutions and making progress towards seeing that the
cease-fire is scrupulously adhered to by all parties concerned.

164. I followed with close attention Ambassador Malik’s
intervention today. He made the statement, which in effect
amounted to an allegation, that the United States has not

169. While no one would suggest that such action would
solve the basic problems of the Middle East, it is clear that
it would help to prevent or at least reduce events similar to
15

the ones the Council is considering today, events which
serve only to heighten the already formidable obstacles to a
lasting and peaceful settlement in the Middle East. These
are not suggestions tailored for this occasion by my
Government or my delegation. We made a similar observation when we debated the complaint against Syria on
4 November 1966, and 1shall read from my intervention on
that occasion:
“And the United States likewise endorsed, and still
endorses, the call upon both Governments to facilitate
the work of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in the a’sa.” f 1319th meeting, par-a. 130.1

177. I have listened with great care to a member of the
Security Council, the representative of Algeria. Algeria has
been throughout one of the primary forces in the war of
aggression pursued by the Arab States against Israel. On
4 June 1967 President Boumedienne declared:
“Brethren, this is the battle of the Arab homeland, of
the Arab nation, the battle of destiny, and we must look
at the battle from this angle. The true freedom of the
entire homeland must be won through the liquidation of
the State of the Zionists.”

We made a similar observation in the debate which took
place on the complaint by Jordan against Israel.
170. Finally, I should like to say, as an illustration of the
consistency of our position throughout, that on 4 November 1966 I made the following statement on behalf of my
GOVX :ment :

178. On 9 June 1967, Algeria announced that it had
decided to reject the call for the cease-fire. Algeria persists
in this attitude. What right has a State which pursues illegal
war against another Member State of the United Nations,
which defies the Security Council resolutions calling for a
cease-fire, to come here and complain of the defence
measures taken against warfare, terrorism and sabotage?

“The deep concern of the United States is that peace be
preserved in the Middle East. This is, we trust, a common
concern. The responsibility of all Members of the United
Nations, and particularly the members of the Security
Council, is to encourage restraint and to urge governmental action to prevent violence.“(Ibid., para. 131.1
171. That has been our position.
position in the Security Council.

Council would have spoken words of peace and understanding and not of abuse and hate. The nature of this
abuse is most revealing. It was clearly illustrated in the
words of the Hungarian representative. It is now clear that
the Nazis used to call Jews Communists: the Communists
call us Nazis. I leave it to history to pronounce on this
unholy alliance of hate.

179. The representative of Algeria had referred to the
situation in the areas under Israel control. Nothing could be
further from the truth than the allegations made by him.
We have refuted them repeatedly in a number of letters
submitted to the Secretary-General and the President of the
Security Council. May I be permitted to reiterate that in
the areas under its control Israel is determined to ensure
normal civilian life and economic development free from
the threat of violence and bloodshed. It is a source of
satisfaction that agricultural, commercial, industrial and
educational activities and public services are continuing
normally in all these regions and are being developed and
expanded.

That remains our

172. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I now
call on the representative of Israel, who has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply.
173. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President, thank you for
granting me the right of reply. The hour being as late as it
is, I shall try to be as brief as possible. I should like to
exercise my right of reply in order to make only a few brief
observations on a number of statements made here, while
reserving my right to comment on them more fully at a
later stage,

180. It is not surprising that this situation is not to the
liking of those who seek to heighten tension and foster
hostility. However, they fmd no support for their designs
among the vast majority of the area’s population. Jewsand
Arabs alike are weary of the long and bitter strife and want
now to live at long last in peaceful coexistence. It is high
time that the Arab Governments respond to these yearnings
of the peoples by relinquishing the dangerous path of
violence and by turning towards the achievement of a
peaceful settlement.

174. First, however, I should like to inform you, Mr. President and members of the Security Council, that quiet
prevails now along the entire cease-fire line and that all
Israel forces have left the east bank.
175. I should like at the outset to refer to the statement
made by the representative of the Soviet Union. I am afraid
that calumny in the Russian language is not new to my
people. The Soviet representative has displayed today a
distinct faithfulness to this dubious tradition. The world
knows who started the 1948 war of aggression against Israel
and who has maintained it for twenty years. The world
knows who wants peace and who wants war in the Middle
East, and who encourages and supports the forces of war:
The worId knows that the United Nations has time and
again rejected Soviet attempts to shift responsibility for the
events of June 1967 to Israel.

181. I do not know exactly when the ancestors of the
representatives of Algeria and Morocco conquered the lands
which they represent today in the United Nations. I do
know when my ancestors in Israel were conquered by
Roman imperialism. I do know when the Romans and then
the Byzantines and after them the Persians, the Arabs, the
Mamelukes, the Turks and others began to colonize the
land of my fathers. I know what it meant for my people to
resist for twenty centuries the consequences of conquest,
imperialism and colonialism. I know what it meant for
them to keep their national identity through ages of exile,

176. If the Soviet Government were interested in peace in
the area, I am certain that its representative in the Security
16

oppression and discrimination. If there is in the annals of
history an example of a supreme, relentless struggle to
overcome the tragedy of conquest by imperialism, it is the
Jewish people that provides that example, and no attempt
at rewriting history will affect it. It is too late to invent the
history of the Jewish people and to distort the ethos of its
rebirth in its ancestral home.

to uphold the principles of the Charter and tell the Israelis
that they are aggressorswhen they are aggressors.
188. The representative of Israel spoke about the twentyyear-old war. But the war did not start in 1948. The war
against the Arab people of Palestine started in 1897, more
than seventy years ago, when a group of European Jews
decided to establish a State which for fourteen centuries
had been predominantly Arab in population and culture.
The question is: Are the people of Palestine entitled to the
rights that peoples of other countries in the world are
entitled to and have been able to achieve? Are they
entitled to the right of self-determination in their own
homeland? Are they entitled to freedom and independence
in the land of their ancestors? If we are going to redraw the
map of the world in the shape it had 2,000 years ago, I
shudder to think of the confusion and chaos into which the
world will be thrown.

182. We have listened today to a long list of Arab orators.
The speakers varied but not their statements. There was one
central theme that was common to all of them: “We are at
war, War must continue. War shall continue. We will not
stop raids, terror and murder. We cannot do that. We are
against peace. We shall not make peace”, Will they in these
circumstances come to 1s urith advice on how to defend
ourselves, where and how to strike at the aggressors,how to
repel raiders and saboteurs, how to protect our homes, our
women and children? I for one cannot think of any effort,
of any sacrifice, of any measure that I would not be ready
to take in order to defend my home and those who are dear
to me. We seek nothing of our neighbours but the right to
live in peace. But if they make war on us they must leave it
to us to decide how we should defend ourselves.

189. The representative of Israel spoke about the land of
his fathers which has been subjected to alien conquest and
aggression. But if we want to go that far back in history, it
is a matter of common historical knowledge that the
ancient Hebrews were not the first people to inhabit part of
Palestine, that the Jewish religious connexion with the Holy
Land is not exclusive, that other peoples had inhabited
Palestine long before the ancient Hebrews went there and
that people inhabited that country long after the Hebrews
left.

183. The eyes of the world are on the Security Council.
Will a small people, after a 2,000-year-old strife to
overcome the results of imperialist conquest, be able at last
to live at peace in its land? Will the Security Council help
the nations of the Middle East to terminate the war? Will it
help us to put an end to terrorism and sabotage, to raids
and murder? Will it assist us in advancing toward peace?

190. The Holy Land does not have religious connexions
with Judaism exclusively. As we all know, it occupies an
important place, religiously speaking, in Christianity and in
Islam. But, basing themselves on such dubious grounds,
they try to dislodge, in the twentieth century, a people that
has lived in that country for more than fourteen centuries,
to take over its land and to establish a State composed of
immigrants from the four comers of the earth.

184. Those are the questions confronting this Council. My
people, and I am certain all peace-loving nations too, await
the answer in the hope that it will grant us relief from the
grim shadow of war, unveiling our region and bringing us
closer to peace and security for all in the area.
185. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of Iraq, who has asked to speak in
exercise of his right of reply.

191. It is the Arabs who have been on the defensive, and
not only since 1948 but since long before that. In 1917,
when the Balfour Declaration was issued, the Arabs of
Palestine outnumbered the Jewish population by nearly
twelve to one. But in thirty years, through the help of the
Mandatory Power, the land was flooded with immigrants
who came into the country against the express wishes of
the majority of its inhabitants. That country alone in the
world, and a country that was under the international
mandate system in addition, was denied the right of
self-determination. If the Arabs of Palestine are entitled to
the right of self-determination, if they are entitled to be
free in their homeland, it is not possible to grant them that
right and still insist on the establishment of a predominantly or exclusively Jewish State in Palestine. The rights of
the inhabitants of Palestine and those of the Zionist
invaders have been, still are and always will be mutually
exclusive.

186. Mr. PACHACHI (Iraq): The representative of Israel
has just informed the Council that quiet reigns on the
cease-fire lines. I imagine,that he expected the members of
the Council to be overjoyed at this news. But this is the
quiet of death and destruction. It is the quiet that left more
than 200 people dead. It is the quiet which left numerous
camps of refugees in ashes. Yet the representative of Israel
comes here and tells us that everything is quiet now, that
the Council really does not have much to do any more on
this particular question. The Israel army went on an
:xcursion or pleasure trip of slaughter and destruction. No,
Sir, the matter cannot stop there. The Council has more
reasons than ever to take action, and decisive action at that.
187. The representative of Israel harped on a familiar
tune. Whoever criticizes the policies of his Government is
.mmediately labelled a Jew-hater. This method of hanging
the label of anti-Semitism on anybody who criticizes and
blares to expose the aggressive policies of Israel is a
well-known method and stratagem. I never thought that a
apresentative of Israel, after all these years, would resort to
his disgraceful way of trying to intimidate those who want

192. Therefore, the war of aggressiveinvasion started long
before 1948, and it continues to this very day. But even in
1948 it was the Zionist forces which occupied territories
allotted under the partition plan to the Arab States, and
they occupied those territories before the entry of the Arab
armies into Palestine, In fact, the present Minister of
17

Labour in the Government of Israel, Yigal Allon-who, I
understand, has ambitions to become Prime Minister of
Israel-himself stated, in a book which was published many
years ago, that had it not been for the entry of the Arab
forces on 15 May 1948, the drive of the Haganah and the
Zionist forces would have succeeded in occupying the
whole of Palestine to the Jordan River. So General Allon,
who of course was a commander in that war, himself, in
clear and unambiguous terms, said that had it not been for
the entry of the Arab forces, the whole of Palestine,
including the whole of the area allotted to the Arab States
under the partition plan, would have been occupied by the
Zionist forces.

198. Mr. BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): I thought that, having passed over in silence and
treated as they deserved the accusations voiced here at the
end of the morning and the beginning of the afternoon by
the spokesman of Zionist diplomacy, we should have
finished with accusations which are both groundless and
time-wasting, I am sorry to find that this is not so.
199. In regard to Algeria’s attitude, which, everyone
knows, has never changed, I would say only that Algeria is
accountable to the community of African States which
unanimously supported us as the candidate from that new
continent for a seat in the Security Council. Algeria is
accountable also to the community of nations as represented in the General Assembly, which, with an encouraging majority, saw fit to elect us to the Security Council.

193. So the entry of the Arab armies into Palestine in
1948, far from being an act of aggression, was an act of
salvation for whatever remained of the Arab parts of
Palestine.

200. But with regard to defying Security Council resolutions, it is clear that the representative of Zionist diplomacy
knows what he is talking about. The whole history of
Zionism consists of challenges, direct and concrete challenges, to the resolutions of the international community,

194. The representative of Israel spoke about the protection of their homes and their children. But who has been
dynamiting houses, imposing repressive measures on the
population? Who is guilty of wholesale slaughter and the
killing of women and children? Who has perpetrated these
acts? Only a few days ago the Commission on Human
Rights, meeting in the neighbouring chamber, sent a
telegram to the Government of Israel denouncing the
wanton destruction of Arab property in Jerusalem.7 Many
Governments have also expressed repugnance and revulsion
at the repressive measures and the destruction to which the
Arab people of the occupied territories are being subjected.
All the grisly apparatus of a police-state, all the inthnidation and cruelty under which people lived in Nazi-occupied
Europe, are at present seen in the Holy Land.

201. My country’s attitude to the Palestine question is the
same as prompts our reactions to all problems of this kind.
We have said this many tinies before and, if necessary, we
shall say it again. Our position remains the same, be it on
the question of Palestine, of Rhodesia, of South Africa or
of South West Africa. We are not prepared to accept, and
we have never accepted, decisions which we consider unjust
to the Palestine people, the Rhodesian people or the South
African people. Moreover, if any proof were needed of the
similarities between the situations in Palestine and in South
Africa, one need only pay some attention to the latest
statement by the representative of Zionist diplomacy.

195. As I said, I shall have another opportunity to go into
the substance of the/ problem and into the matter of how
Israel has been trying to prevent the United Nations from
playing a role in this situation, and to show that all its
actions are calculated and planned with one, and only one,
objective in view-that is, to ensure the failure of the
mission of the Secretary-General’s special representative so
that the measures already taken to annex the occupied
territories may be consolidated and the options ‘open to
Israel for further expansion may be kept open.

202. When we speak of the dynamitings, reprisals and
collective repressions which are being carried out, we are
told that agriculture is doing well, industry is developing,
and trade is flourishing. That is precisely what we hear
every so often from the representatives of the Pretoria
r6gime.
203. With regard to the declaration of President Boumedienne, I wish to say that Algeria is in fact bent on the
destruction of all such rkgimes, be it the apartheid regime
or the Zionist r&me, both of which are inspired by the
same philosopi:y.

196’. For all those reasons, action by the Council at the
present moment on this problem is of vital importance,
Failure to take resolute action now will undoubtedly be
regarded as encouragement by the rulers of Tel Aviv and
they will embark upon new aggressionsand adventures. It is
therefore quite clear that the Council is at a crossroads. If
the United Nations is to continue to play its vital role in
this question, this is the time now to take resolute action,
this is the decisive moment. Failure to take such action will
inevitably lead to a renewal of hostilities and peace will
never be attained in our area.

204. I do not know when the Algerians conquered Algeria;
they have always had it. If I understand the spokesman of
Zionist diplomacy, and if I rightly follow his reasoning, we
ought to accept Vorster and his clique which holds power
in South Africa, and we ought to ask for Ian Smith to be
represented amongst the members of this Organization.
205. Some time ago, our Secretary-General said in effect
that racism was born of fear. Fear was forced upon the
Jewish communities in Europe; they were driven into
ghettos; they suffered massacre. That same fear still inspires
them, and it is that fear which explains their racism and the
fact that the Zionist state is a racist state.

197. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of Algeria who has asked to speak
in exercise of his right of reply.
1 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Forty-fourth Session,
Supplement No. 4, paras. 400-403.

206. These are the facts on which Algeria’s policy is based.
18

207. Of course, to allay any anxiety which the Council
might feel, the Zionist spokesman told us that all was quiet
on the cease-fire line. I seem to remember that a few
centuries ago someone said that order reigned in Warsaw.

between Judaism and Berber paganism, both of which held
to a belief in one, supreme divine authority, made it
possible for the Jews to flee from Carthage and take refuge
in Morocco where, under official protection, they were able
freely to practice their religion as before, and to continue
the commercial and agricultural activities in which they
proved to be highly expert.

208. If I understand aright, the logic of the Zionist
spokesman’s statement would imply that power in the
United States should be given back to the Indians and that
the descendants of the Spanish who settled in Latin
America should be asked to hand over power to the
indigenous inhabitants. But that sort of logic, I must admit,
is beyond my understanding.

214. I trust YOU will not object if I borrow a phrase from a
journalist of the Jewish faith who said that the Jew was a
swallow who followed good weather. When the Arabs were
driven out of Spain, 250,000 Jews preferred to follow the
vanquished to North Africa rather than remain in Spain
subject to the law of the Western Christian conqueror.

209. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I call
upon the representative of Morocco to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.

215. 1 do not want to bring up certain facts that belong to
the history of religions and empires; but I believe that since
the beginning of persecution and of the Roman-Christian
civilization, there has not been in the history of Islam or in
the history of the Jewish community in the Moslem world a
single example of a pogrom or of collective persecution, I
can even say that under the Ottoman Empire, or under the
Arab Empire in Spain, it was the Jews who played a
dynamic role in the bourgeois classes,and they have always
been well content to be able to live in those territories.

210. Mr, BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated from French):
I could have wished that the representative of Israel, in
exercising his right of reply, had actually answered some of
the questions put to him by other speakers in the Council; I
myself was one of them, and I asked him what was
currently happening in the Middle East and what was the
significance of the events we have been watching daily for
the last few months. Of course, having first digressed to
another subject, because he could not answer the questions
put to him, he brought in Iraq, Algeria and Morocco and
spoke of peoples which had reconquered their countries.

216. I would refer the representative of Israel to the
Jewish immigration movement which has been going on for
three thousand years. He will see that the Jew did not come
from the Arab world to the West, but that in the worst
periods of anti-Jewish persecution that the world has
known, the immigration went from the West to the Arab
world, and not the other way.

211. I do not think I can give a better reply to the first
half of the statement of the Israel representative than that
which has just been given by my Algerian colleague: that
the Algerians have always been in Algeria and the Moroccans have always been in Morocco.
212. I am amazed that such an eminent Israel personality
should know so little of the history of North Africa, for
from the time of the Roman Empire North Africa has been
the first land of exile and protection for the persecuted
Jews. I would refer him to certain authors of his own
rehgion and race, in whom he will have more confidence, to
verify the truth of what I say and learn that this is an
historical fact asserted by several distinguished scholars of
the ancient universities of Israel, such as Leon Poliakov,
who wrote a three-volume work on the’history of antiSemitisma, in which he paid a ringing tribute to what Islam
md the Arab world have done to protect the Jewish
:ommunity since the beginning of persecution under the
Roman Empire and, unfortunately, in the early days of
Christianity.
113. I would refer him to one of the eminent professors of
.he history of Arab civilization in Spain, Levi-Proven@,
vho brought out the part played by the Jewish community
n Arab Spain over a period of six centuries, I am sure he is
rot unaware that the Jewish community in Spain was one
rf the most active, dynamic and brilliant communities of
he Jewish people throughout the six centuries of its
mxistence in Spain. Finally, I would say this to him: at the
ime of the Roman massacres in Cyrenaica, when Rome
onquered Carthage, the monotheistic affinities that existed

217. It was therefore a flagrant injustice that it should
have been the Arabs who were expelled from Palestine,
which, as the representative of Iraq said, is not exclusive,
like the Jewish religion, but has been the cradle of all
civilizations. We want this land to continue today to be the
home of an international community adhering to all the
transcendental forms of humanism and of contemporary
idealism, instead of being a cradle for Israel Aryanism, in
which a people’s life is governed by law made by race and
religion.
218. That is all I wish to say on behalf of Morocco. But in
case the representative of Israel has not had time in his
Zionist training to pay much attention to recent history, I
shall tell him that when the entire West yielded to the
power of Germany, when the entire West was occupied,
when it accepted Nazi laws against the Jews, there was one
, country which, although it wasa protectorate and therefore
had neither the liberty to express itself nor the means to
make its voice heard, remembered that the Jewish citizens
of Morocco were Moroccans and that consequently the
anti-Jewish laws enforced by Vichy would not extend to
the Jewsin Morocco.
219. That protection and that attitude, in my view,
deprive the Israel representative of the right to mention
Morocco as one of the countries involved in persecution of
the Jews.
220. His statement just now was delivered in tones of
emotion and pleading for peace. I think he is in a bad

8 L&n Poliakov, Du Christ aux juifs de cow; histoire de
antiskmitisme,
Paris,Calmann-L&y,1955.

9

position to talk of peace, when he declared in the same
statement that calm had returned and peace and prosperity
were foreseeable in the Middle East. I tell him that what
happened this morning in Jordan takes us further away
from peace-and he well knows why. The setback has been
deliberate, wretched. But I should like those events to make
the Security Council more keenly aware of its responsibilities and its duty, and I should like the Council to show
that awarenessby taking a decision this evening.

20

221. The PRESIDENT (translated fvom French): From
consultations I have had there seems to be general
agreement to adjourn the meeting now and resume it at
9.30 p.m. As I hear no objection, the meeting will be
adjourned and we shall reconvene at 9.30 to continue
consideration of the item on our agenda.
The meeting rose at 8 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Notions
publications,may
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

be

PUBLICATIONS
obtained
or write

from boekstorer
to: United
Nations,

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

and

distributors
Sales Section,

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
sont
en vente
dans
10s libreiries
et les ogences
d6poritaires
du monde entier.
Informer-vous
aup&
de votre
libroirie
ov odressez-vous
b:
Notions
Unies, Section des ventes,
New York ou GenCve.
KAK

IlOJY’IHTb

l3AAHHR

OPl-AHH3AuHH

OEibEAHHEHHblX

HAUlAfl

OGzeAnmm~x Haqnfi ~0x110 ~ynu~a n ~(imi~~lrlx 2lcara;Imax
n
mmmax
no nccx paiiollax
arnpr. HanoyTe cnpamw 06 tra~aunflx n ziauelf
I~IIIIHiHOM
raraanne II~II ~II~ITC no aqpecp: Opramiaaqws OGzeAmieumx IIaqnfi, Cctiqrra no
npoAart;o n3AamiI, Hnlo-Ilop~c AIR JKeltesa.
1Ia~aI1rrn Opra11113aI~nn

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de Ins Nociones
Unidos
est&n
en todas portes del mundo.
Consulte
e su librero
Ventos, Nueva York o Gincbra.

Litho

in U.N.

Price:

$U.S.

0.50

(or

equivalent

en venta
o dirliasc

UNIDAS
en librerias
a: Naciones

in other

y cesas dirtribuidoros
Unidos,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

35948-May

1971-2,100
