General Assembly-Thirty-second Session

46

stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction should not impede the utilization of science
and technology for the economic development of States,
Desiring to contribute to an early and successful
conclusion of the negotiations on effective and strict
measures for the complete prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of ali chemical weapons and for their destruction,
l. Urges all States to reach early agreement on the
effective prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
des truction;
2. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations and, as a matter
of high priority, to undertake the elaboration of an
agreement on effective measures for the prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of ali
chemical weapons and for their destruction, taking
into account all existing proposals and future initiatives
submitted for its consideration;
3. Invites all States that have not yet done so to
accede to the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their
Destruction, as well as to accede to or ratify the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June
1925, and calls again for the strict observance by ali
States of the principles and objectives of those instruments;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament ali
documents of the thirty-second session of the General
Assembly relating to chemical weapons and to chemical
means of warfare;
5. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to report on the results of its negotiations
to the General Assembly at its special session devoted
to disarmament, to be held in May and June 1978,
and at its thirty-third session.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

pressed in those treaties to continue negohat10ns to
achieve the discontinuance of ali test explosions of
nuclear weapons for ali time,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the subject,
Taking note of that part of the report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament 11 relating
to the qucstion of a comprehensive test-bao treaty,
l. Reiterates its grave concern that in spite of the
repeated resolutions of the General Assembly related
to nuclear-weapon testing in ali environments, adopted
by very large majorities, such testing has continued unabated during the past year;
2. Notes with satisfaction that negotiations have
begun among thrce nuclear-weapon States with a view
to the drafting of an agreement on the subject of the
present rcsolution;
3. Declares that the conclusion of such an agreement and its opening for signature would be the best
possible augury for the success of the special session
of the General Asscmbly devoted to disarmament. to
be he!d in May and June 1978;
4. Urges the three nuclear-weapon States to expedite their negotiations with a view to bringing them
to a positive conclusion as soon as possible and to
use their best endeavours to transmit the results for
full consideration by the Conference of the Committee
on Disarmament by the beginning of its spring session
m 1978;
5. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to take up the agreed text resulting from
the negotiations referred to in paragraph 4 above with
the utmost urgency, with a view to the submission of
a d~aft treaty to the_ General Assembly at its special
sess10n devoted to d1sarmament;
. 6. . Deci~es to i~clude in the provisional agenda of
1ts thir_ty-third sess10n an item relating to the implementat10n of the present resolution.
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977

;{2/79.
32/78.

Urgent need for cessation of nuclear and
thermonuclear tests and conclusion of a
treaty designed to achieve a comprehensive test ban; conclusion of a treaty on
the complete and general prohibition of
nuclear-weapon tests

The General Assembly,
Reafjirming its conviction that the cessation of nuclear-weapon testing by all States would be in the supreme interest of mankind, both as a major step towards
controlling the development and proliferation of nuclear
weapons and to relieve the deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences of radioactive contamination for the health of present and future generations,
Recalling the determination of the parties to the
Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water 9 and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 1 º ex9 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol.
10 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.

480, No. 6964, p. 43.

Implementation of General Assembly
resolution 31/67 concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition
of Nuclear W eapo.;s in Latin Amcrica
(Treaty of" Tlatclolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resol utions 1911 (XVIII) of 2 7 November 1963, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December 1967,
2456 B (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2666 (XXV)
of 7 December 1970, 2830 (XXVI) of 16 December
J 971, 2935 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3079
( XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3258 (XXIX) of
9 December J 974, 3467 (XXX) of 11 December
1975 and 31/67 of 10 December 1976, nine of which
contain appeals to the nuclear-weapon States regarding
thc signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latín America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), 12
11 Ojficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/32/27), paras. 33-86.
12 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068, p. 326.

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Reiterating its firm conviction that, far the maximum
effectiveness of any treaty establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone, the co-operation of the nuclearweapon States is necessary and that such co-operation
should take the form of commitments likewise undertaken in a formal international instrument which is
legally binding, such as a treaty, convention or protocol,
Recalling with particular satisfaction that the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and N orthern Ireland, the
United States of America, France and the People's
Republic of China are already parties to Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),
Noting that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
has submitted to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session a draft resolution, in which it is "solemnly urged" that:
"All non-nuclear-weapon States should establish
nuclear-weapon-free zones, which may cover entire
continents or large geographical areas, as well as
groups of States or individual States, and nuclear
States should respect the status of such nuclear-free
zones;", 13
l. Again urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America ( Treaty of Tlatelolco) ;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session an itero entitled "lmplementation
of General Assembly resolution 32/79 concerning the
signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II of
the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
32/80.

Effective measures to implement the
purposes and ohjectives of the Disarmament Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it dedared the decade of the
1970s the Disarmament Decade and envisaged a link
between the Disarmament Decade and the Second
United Nations Development Decade,
Also recalling its resolution 31/68 of 10 December
1976, in which it reaffirmed the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament Decade, and its resolution
31/189 B of 21 December 1976, in which it decided to
convene a special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament,
Deploring that these purposes and objectives have
not been fulfilled in terms of effective disarmament
agreements and that the arms race, especially the nuclear arms race, continues unabated,
Deeply concerned at the continued wastage of resources on armaments and the consequent detrimental
effect on international security and the achievement of
the objectives of the new international economic order,
13 A/C.1/32/L.2, para. 6. For the printed text, see Official
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second Session, Annexes, agenda item 127, document A/32/242, annex II.

47

Reaffirming the incompatibility between the unbridled
arms race and the will of the international community,
proclaimed and repeatedly reaffirmed, to promote
healthy economic co-operation among all States,
Convinced that the peaceful use of the human and
material resources allocated every year to the manufacture of armaments of all kinds will havc very positive
effects for the future of mankind,
Believing that the aid made available to developing
countries, in ali its forros, will serve its purpose only
in a healthy, peaceful atmosphere characterized by
mutual respect,
Afjirming the urgent need for the promotion of negotiations on effective measures for the cessation of the
arms race, especially in the nuclear field, for the reduction of military expenditures and for general and
complete disarmament,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament, 14
l. Takes note of the decision of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament to set up an ad hoc
working group to elaborate a comprehensive programme for disarmament;
2. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue its work on this subject and
to submit a progress report to the General Assembly
at its_ special session devoted to disarmament, to be
held m May and June 1978;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all
documents relating to the consideration of this item
by the General Assembly at its thirty-second session;
4. Calls upon Member States and the SecretaryGeneral to intensify their efforts in support of the link
between disarmament and development, envisaged in
General Assembly resolution 2602 E (XXIV) on the
Disarmament Decade, so as to promete disarmament
negotiations and to ensure that the human and material
resources freed by disarmament are used to promote
economic and social development, particularly in the
developing countries;
5. Urges that the unparalleled technical possibilities now available to mankind should be exploited for
the purpose of combating poverty, ignorance, disease
and hunger throughout the world;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-third session the ítem entitled "Effective measures to implement the purposes and objectives of the
Disarmament Decade".
100th plenary meeting
12 December 1977
32/81.

lmplementation of the Declaration on
the Denuclearization of Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/70 of 10 December 1976,
in which it reiterated its conviction that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones could make a great
contribution to the security of States in such zones and
to the prevention of proliferation of nuclear weapons,
14 O/ficia/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supp/ement No. 27 (A/32/27).
