A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/125
26 January 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 107
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/596)]
54/125. Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/91 of 12 December 1997 and 53/110 of 9 December 1998 on preparations
for the Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1993/32 of 27 July 1993 and the rules of
procedure for United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders,
Emphasizing the role of the Tenth Congress as a consultative body of the United Nations Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, in accordance with paragraph 29 of the statement of principles
and programme of action of the Programme annexed to General Assembly resolution 46/152 of 18 December
1991,
Welcoming the recommendations made by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
at its seventh1 and eighth2 sessions on the organizational and substantive preparations for the Tenth Congress,

1

Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum
(E/1998/30 and Corr.1), chap. II.
2

Ibid., 1999, Supplement No. 10 (E/1999/30), chap. IV.

00 24650

/...

A/RES/54/125
Page 2

Stressing the importance of undertaking all the preparatory activities for the Tenth Congress in a timely
and concerted manner,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on progress made in the preparations for the
Tenth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;3
2. Also takes note of the reports of the four regional preparatory meetings for the Tenth Congress,4
and invites Member States and other entities involved to take into account the conclusions and
recommendations contained in those reports;
3. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure, in collaboration with Member States, a
wide and effective programme of public information related to the preparations for the Tenth Congress, to
the Congress itself and to the follow-up to and implementation of its conclusions;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to assist least developed countries and consider ways to assist
developing countries in need to participate in the Tenth Congress by providing the necessary resources for
the travel and per diem of delegations from least developed countries, within available resources, and by
exploring the possibility of obtaining contributions for that purpose from governmental, intergovernmental
and relevant non-governmental organizations and donors;
5. Calls upon the specialized agencies and other relevant United Nations bodies and institutes and
other intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to participate effectively in the Tenth Congress
and to contribute to the formulation of regional and international measures aimed at preventing crime and
ensuring justice;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the substantive and organizational arrangements for
the Tenth Congress are adequate in relation to its expected outcome and to provide the required resources
for that purpose in the proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000–2001;
7. Approves the documentation and the draft programme of work for the Tenth Congress, as proposed
by the Secretary-General in his report on progress made in the preparations for the Congress,5 taking into
account the recommendations of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice related thereto;
8. Decides that the high-level segment of the Tenth Congress shall be held on 14 and 15 April 2000
to allow heads of State or Government or government ministers to focus on the main theme of the Congress;
9. Encourages States, other entities concerned and the Secretary-General to work together in order
to ensure that the four workshops to be held during the Tenth Congress focus clearly on the respective issues
and achieve practical results, and invites interested Governments to follow up with concrete technical
cooperation projects or activities;

3

E/CN.15/1999/6 and Corr.1.

4

A/CONF.187/RPM.1/1 and Corr.1, A/CONF.187/RPM.2/1, A/CONF.187/RPM.3/1 and A/CONF.187/RPM.4/1.

5

E/CN.15/1999/6 and Corr.1, chap. II, sect. F, and annex.
/...

A/RES/54/125
Page 3

10. Invites donor countries to cooperate with developing countries to ensure their full participation in
the workshops;
11. Encourages Governments to make preparations for the Tenth Congress at an early stage and by all
necessary means, including, where appropriate, by establishing national preparatory committees, with a view
to contributing to a focused and productive discussion of the topics and to participating actively in the
organization of and follow-up to the workshops, the submission of national position papers on different
agenda items and the encouragement of contributions from the academic community and relevant scientific
institutions;
12. Reiterates its invitation to Member States to be represented at the Tenth Congress at a high political
level, for example, by heads of State or Government, government ministers or attorneys-general;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to invite prominent personalities with acknowledged expertise in
the topics of the Tenth Congress, on the basis of equitable geographical distribution, to participate in panels
under each topic of the Congress at the expense of the United Nations, with a view to ensuring a more
focused discussion and action-oriented conclusions;
14. Decides that the Tenth Congress, within the framework of the provisional agenda approved by the
General Assembly in its resolution 53/110, should devote particular attention to ways and means of making
operational the provisions of the United Nations convention against transnational organized crime, especially
taking into account the needs of developing countries in the area of capacity-building;
15. Requests the Tenth Congress to submit, through the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice and the Economic and Social Council, its declaration to the Millennium Assembly for consideration
and action;
16. Requests the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to give priority attention at
its ninth session to the conclusions and recommendations of the Tenth Congress, with a view to
recommending, through the Economic and Social Council, appropriate follow-up by the General Assembly
at its fifty-fifth session;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to appoint a Secretary-General and an Executive Secretary of the
Tenth Congress, in accordance with past practice, to perform their functions under the rules of procedure for
United Nations congresses on the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders;
18. Decides to consider this question at its fifty-fifth session.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
