56

General Assembly -

Member's assessments in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1445 (XIV) of
5 December 1959;
2. Members shall make cash advances to the Working
Capital Fund as required under p~ragraph 1 (a) above
in accordance with the scale adopted by the General
Assembly for contribution of Members to the budget
for the financial year 1961 ;
3. There shall be set off against this allocation of
advances the amounts paid by Members to the Working
Capital Fund for the financial year 1960 under General
Assembly resolution 1445 (XIV) provided that, should
such advance paid by any Member to the Working
Capital Fund for the financial year 1960 exceed the
amount of that Member's advance under the provisions
of paragraph 2 above, the excess shall be set off against
the amount of contributions payable by that Member in
respect of the budget for the financial year 1961, or
any previous budget;
4. The Secretary-General is authorized to advance
from the Working Capital Fund:
(a) Such sums as may be necessary to finance budgetary appropriations pending receipt of contributions;
sums so advanced shall be reimbursed as soon as receipts
from contributions are available for the purpose;
( b) .Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the provisions of General Assembly resolution 1585 (XV) of
20 December 1960, relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; the Secretary-General shall make provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpose, do not flxceed $125,000, to
continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total $125,000 may be made with the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions ;
( d) Loans to specialized agencies and preparatory
commissions of agencies to be established by intergovernmental agreement under the auspices of the
United Nations to finance their work, pending receipt
by the agencies concerned of sufficient contributions
under their own budgets ; such loans sha!l normally be
repayable within two years, and the Secretary-General
shall obtain the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for
any cash issues which would increase the aggregate
balance outstanding (including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) at any one time to an amount
in excess of $250,000;
( e) Such sums not exceeding $35,000 as may be
required to finance payments of advance insurance
premiums where the period of insurance extends beyond
the end of the financial year in which payment is made;
this amount may be increased with the prior concurrence
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates of each year, during
the life of the related policies, to cover the charges
applicable to each such year ;
(f) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending accumulation of credits; such advances shall
be repaid as soon as credits are available in the Tax
Equalization Fund;

Fifteenth Session

(g) Such sums, not to exceed $100,000 during the
period 1961 to 1964, as may be necessary to finance
awards made for the international encouragement of
scientific research into the control of cancerous diseases,
pursuant to General Assembly resolution 1398 (XIV)
of 20 November 1959; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the annual budget estimates for reimbursing the Working Capital Fund;
5. Should the provisions in paragraph 1 above prove
inadequate to meet the purposes normally related to
the Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is
authorized to utilize in 1%1, under the conditions approved in General Assembly resolution 1448 (XIV) of
5 December 1959, cash from special funds and accounts in
his custody or to seek short-term loans from Governments.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

1587 (XV). Administrative arrangements under
the draft Single Convention on Narcotic
Drugs

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that a Conference of Plenipotentiaries will be convened in January 1961 for the purpose
of concluding a Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs,
Having noted with approval the report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
on administrative arrangemen'.ts under the draft Sirigle
Convention,4~
1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
report of the Advi$ory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions to the Conference of Plenipotentiaries ;
2. Commends the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee to the consideration of the Conference in
connexion with the relevant articles of the draft Single
Convention.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.
1588 (XV). System of travel and subsistence
allowances to members of organs and
subsidiary organs of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Confirming the principles that govern the payment
out of United Nations funds of travel and subsistence
expenses to members of organs and subsidiary organs
of the United Nations, as set forth in General Assembly
resolution 1075 (XI) of 7 December 1956,
Taking note however of the increases in subsistence
costs that have occurred since the rates of subsistence
allowance were established in General Assembly resolution 459 (V) of 1 December 1950,
1. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1961,
subsistence allowance shall be payable to eligible members of organs and subsidiary organs of the United
Nations at the following daily rates :
U.S. dollars

(a) While attending meetings at Headquarters, New York . . . . . .
( b) While attending meetings in Geneva,
the equivalent in local currency of.
4 ~ Ibid., agenda item 50, document A/4flJ3.

30
23
