United Nations

S/PV.6103

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6103rd meeting
Wednesday, 8 April 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Mexico)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Renié
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Mugoya
Mr. Quarrey
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country
(S/2009/169)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-29637 (E)

*0929637*

S/PV.6103

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Guinea-Bissau
Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in that country (S/2009/169)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mutaboba to take a seat at the
Council table.
As this is Mr. Mutaboba’s first briefing to the
Security Council in his capacity as the Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in GuineaBissau, on behalf of the Council I wish to congratulate
him on his appointment. We look forward to working
closely with him and wish him good luck and success
in his new and challenging assignment.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the

2

Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Brazil.
It is so decided.
I invite Ambassador Viotti to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/169, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, the new
Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti.
I now give the floor to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba.
Mr. Mutaboba: I must at the outset apologize for
the sound of my voice: it has been affected by travel
and by the great deal of talking I have recently done in
Guinea-Bissau — but the talking has been useful.
The report before the Council, contained in
document S/2009/169, is the thirty-fourth report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau
(UNOGBIS).
Its highlights are that the report reviews the main
developments in Guinea-Bissau since the SecretaryGeneral’s previous report, of 2 December 2008
(S/2008/751), in particular the formation of the new
Government, and the tragic events of March and the
aftermath.
The ruling party, the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC),
won an absolute majority in the legislative elections of
November 2008, and President Nino Vieira invited the
PAIGC leader, Carlos Gomes, Jr., to form a
Government, which took office on 8 January 2009.

09-29637

S/PV.6103

On the evening of 1 March, a bomb blast killed
the Chief of General Staff, General Tagme Na Waie,
and a few hours later, the head of State, President João
Bernardo Vieira, was also assassinated. On 2 March,
the Council of Ministers instructed the Prosecutor
General to establish a commission of inquiry into both
assassinations. On 3 March, the Speaker, Raimundo
Pereira, was sworn in as interim President of the
Republic, in keeping with the provisions of the
constitution, with the main task of organizing the
anticipated presidential elections.
Reaction to the assassinations was swift, and
several countries and organizations, including the
African Union (AU), the Community of Portuguesespeaking Countries (CPLP), the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), the European
Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the United Nations, and bilateral
partners, condemned the assassinations and called for a
transparent investigation. They also called for the full
restoration of the constitutional order through the
holding of presidential elections.
Here are just a few words to update members of
the Council on developments in Guinea-Bissau since
the report was published.
On political developments, the state funeral of
President Vieira took place on 10 March in an
emotional but peaceful atmosphere. On 14 March, the
Council of Ministers nominated Navy Commander José
Zamora Induta as Chief of General Staff and
Lieutenant Colonel António N’djai as Vice-Chief of
General Staff. The army and air force chiefs of staff,
who are more senior in rank than those two men, were
passed over. The interim President issued a decree on
4 April to confirm those appointments on an interim
basis until the swearing-in of the elected President of
the Republic, although the constitution does not give
him such a power.
The commission of inquiry into the double
assassinations started its work on 12 March. The
Prosecutor General and Minister of Justice requested
technical and financial support. The Prosecutor
General expressed concerns about the lack of security
for commission members and witnesses against threats
and intimidation and the lack of cooperation from the
military with regard to information exchange on the
military inquiry.

09-29637

A parallel inquiry has been set up by the military
to investigate the assassination of General Tagme Na
Waie. The military commission detained a number of
military and civilian people. According to the GuineaBissau League of Human Rights, some of the detainees
show signs of physical mistreatment. On 2 April, the
Prosecutor General called on the international
community to intercede so that those impediments
could be resolved and conditions created for the
inquiry to proceed.
ECOWAS and the CPLP sent delegations on
3 March to discuss the crisis. The 26th ministerial-level
meeting of the ECOWAS Mediation and Security
Council recommended that ECOWAS mobilize
international support, including from the United
Nations, for the preventive deployment of military and
police to ensure the protection of institutions of the
State, Government officials and the electoral process. It
also recommended immediate steps to implement the
ECOWAS Praia plan of action against drug trafficking,
using Guinea-Bissau as one of the pilot countries. I am
happy to report that Guinea-Bissau will be the first
country to be used in the pilot.
The CPLP Council of Ministers, meeting in Praia
on 25 March, among other things, supported the setting
up of an international commission of inquiry, endorsed
the ECOWAS proposal on preventive security
deployment, if this was requested by the Guinea-Bissau
Government, was coordinated by the African Union
and received a mandate from the United Nations.
However, on 1 April, the Minister of Social
Communication and spokesperson of the Government
stated that Guinea-Bissau had made no request for such
a deployment and highlighted that what was needed
was international support for security sector reform.
On 6 April, the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union, Jean Ping, announced the
appointment of Mr. João Bernardo de Miranda, former
Minister of External Relations of the Republic of
Angola, as AU Special Envoy for Guinea-Bissau.
Regarding the presidential elections, a constitutional
crisis was averted after talks between interim President
Pereira and parliamentary and non-parliamentary
political parties, as well as civil society, culminated in
broad consensus to hold elections on 28 June 2009.
The budget for the elections is nearly $5 million. The
precise figure is $4,965,709. The Resident
Representative of the United Nations Development

3

S/PV.6103

Programme has indicated that, including pledges, the
current gap stands at $2.5 million.
With regard to human rights developments, Pedro
Infanda, the lawyer of Rear Admiral Bubo Na Tchuto,
was detained by the military and subject to torture on
23 March. Mr. Infanda’s arrest followed his public
criticism of what he considered to be unconstitutional
nominations to the military leadership. The military
claimed that his comments were a threat to peace and
security. Mr. Infanda appeared before the Prosecutor
General on 27 March and was interned in hospital. The
former Prime Minister and current President of the
Audit Court, Francisco Fadul, was also attacked in his
residence in the early hours of 1 April by armed men in
military uniforms, after he had made comments on the
radio critical of the armed forces. The nominee for
Chief of the General Staff condemned the attack but
said it was probably carried out by individuals not
belonging to the armed forces who wanted to tarnish
the reputation of the armed forces. The President of the
League of Human Rights went into hiding on 1 April
after League staff reported that it had been threatened
by an armed individual in plain clothes.
On socio-economic developments, the teachers’
and health workers’ unions have taken strike action
over salary arrears and other issues. The Government
currently owes three months’ worth of salaries from
2008 and is processing February salaries.
In conclusion, allow me to highlight some key
points. First, the people of Guinea-Bissau voted
maturely and massively for hope and change in their
lives. They were faced with infighting in the governing
party prior to the tragic events of March. The
Government was then forced by the events of 1 and
2 March to focus its energies on managing the political
and military crisis. It is also grappling with a
precarious fiscal situation and faces enormous
difficulties in clearing salary arrears and tackling the
social issues that it promised to resolve.
While the patience of the people of GuineaBissau is seemingly endless, one has to recognize that
disillusionment is setting in, as is a feeling of
frustration that any promise made quickly evaporates
with another cyclical crisis. The people are being asked
to go to the polls on 28 June 2009 to elect a President.
Many of them question the appropriateness of elections
soon after major violence and before the socio-political
and military environment has had time to settle. We

4

support elections as part of the democratic process and
respect for the Constitution, but we must take on board
those perceptions and be aware that there is a growing
disconnect between the population and the democratic
process, which, in the eyes of many, treats the people
as electoral fodder and gives them nothing in return. It
is important, therefore, that the population see some
quick improvements in their lives if democracy is to
mean anything to them.
Secondly, a sound Commission of Inquiry is
essential to end the cycles of violence and impunity in
the country. Officials tell me endlessly that they fear
that such an inquiry will fail like so many previous
ones. The Prosecutor General has, on several
occasions, argued that the Commission does not have
the necessary material or technical support. He also
recently complained about the lack of cooperation from
the military in this matter. It is also important to
acknowledge that asking investigators and witnesses to
carry out their duty and be brave when there is no
safety net adds to the distinct possibility of failure.
Those pessimistic assessments are an argument
for the creation of an international commission of
inquiry and the provision of protection for witnesses
and national officials involved in such an inquiry. The
ECOWAS/CPLP proposal for protection provides a
window for action to protect individuals and to
guarantee peace and security. However, that
international inquiry and protection offer requires a
request from the Government, which has not been
forthcoming. In contrast, following the 23 November
2008 attack on President Vieira, the caretaker
Government in power and civil society asked for
protection for top State officials. In my assessment, the
security environment in the country is volatile and the
international community must consider how best to
bolster the security of the State, if called upon to do so,
in what could be a rapidly changing environment.
Thirdly, security sector reform (SSR) is among
the key reforms of the State. The focus of national
stakeholders is particularly on defence. I regret to
inform the Council that they have lost faith in the
international community’s ability to kick-start the
reform. There are indeed programmes ready that need
funding. Now is the time to get some quick wins and to
start implementing those programmes, which in
particular affect the veterans and other servicemen
above the age of retirement.

09-29637

S/PV.6103

There is an urgent need to focus on the basic
needs of the military and of the population in general.
As an integral part of the security sector reform plan, I
am currently working with the Government of GuineaBissau, from the top down, to develop projects that
would use military labour and land allocated to the
armed forces to grow and process food, build homes
and schools and provide other social services, using
military personnel. Those projects will address the
need to create a modern republican army endowed with
the basic rights to food, shelter and education. The
success of such projects will have a positive impact on
SSR and on relations between the civilian population
and the military. It is expected that, ultimately, the
latter will become partners in the attainment of
development and political stability in Guinea-Bissau.
At the same time, it is crucial that the
international community provide financial and
technical support to implement the national SSR
programme and the ECOWAS regional action plan to
address the growing problem of illicit drug trafficking,
organized crime and drug abuse in West Africa as a
region. In that connection, the Department of Political
Affairs — through the United Nations Office in West
Africa, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Criminal Police Organization — have
agreed to work in synergy to support the
implementation of the ECOWAS action plan. That joint
initiative aims at providing technical assistance and
building the capacity of police and law enforcement
agencies in ECOWAS member States to improve the
prevention of and fight against organized crime and
drug trafficking. Guinea-Bissau is one of the pilot
countries of this initiative, as I have already
mentioned, and the country’s international partners
should help to make the initiative a success.
Finally, through you, Mr. President, I would like
to call on the members of the Council and the
international community to send a signal to the security
forces and the Government of Guinea-Bissau that they
are the only parties responsible for protecting and
upholding the human rights of the people of GuineaBissau. I also urge each member of the Council to
contribute its part to the efforts being made by the
international community to support the elections,
programmes aimed at ending impunity, and security
sector reform in Guinea-Bissau.

09-29637

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.
Mrs. Viotti: Mr. President, I would like to thank
you for the invitation to address the Security Council
in my capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Guinea-Bissau, Mr. Joseph
Mutaboba, for his presentation on the current situation
in the country.
Since my briefing to the Security Council on
7 October 2008, there have been a number of
developments in the country — some encouraging,
others deeply disturbing — that impact international
efforts to support peacebuilding. On the positive side,
elections were held, a new Government was installed
and its programme approved by the National Assembly.
The members of the National Steering Committee for
Peacebuilding were appointed.
Such progress was marred by the tragic events of
1 and 2 March. The country-specific configuration has
joined the international community, including this
Council, in strongly condemning the assassinations of
President Vieira and General Tagme Na Waie. We also
invited all partners and friends of Guinea-Bissau to
maintain their commitment to the country, in particular
through assistance in organizing the presidential
elections called for in the national Constitution.
Fortunately, in the aftermath of these dreadful
events, the Speaker of the Parliament, Mr. Raimundo
Pereira, took over as the interim President, in
accordance with the applicable constitutional
provisions. In addition, a Commission of Inquiry was
promptly set up.
However, the political situation was once again
disturbed by recent episodes of violence and
intimidation against well-known figures in GuineaBissau, including the President of the Audit Court and
the lawyer of a former Navy Chief of Staff. Detentions
of other persons, including senior military officers,
have not yet been fully explained.
This is all extremely relevant to the work of the
Commission. The assassinations and the latest
developments are a reminder of the fragility of GuineaBissau and the need for the international community to

5

S/PV.6103

muster political and financial support for the country. It
is also a reminder of the need for the country’s
Government and society to take full advantage of
international willingness to assist them in surmounting
the manifold challenges they face.
Among these challenges, I would single out two
where the Peacebuilding Commission can make a
significant contribution in the short term. The first is
the organization of the presidential elections, which,
according to a political agreement recently achieved,
could take place on 28 June. Its estimated cost is
around $5 million. The country-specific meeting will
make an effort to help mobilize the funds needed to fill
the gap. For its part, the Government is expected to
take all measures to ensure a fair, transparent and
credible electoral process. I am confident that the
Bissau Guinean leadership — civilian and military —
fully understands that the preservation of the
constitutional order and effective democracy are
essential elements of peacebuilding and an
indispensable component of our partnership.
Another issue of critical importance is the reform
of the security and defence sectors. The Peacebuilding
Commission will convene a meeting dedicated to that
matter next week, with the aim of listening to all
relevant actors on their current activities on the ground.
The meeting is expected to feed into the Praia
conference scheduled for 20 April, at the initiative of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). The objective of the Commission’s
meeting is to take stock of current undertakings in
security sector reform, assess the main gaps and
bottlenecks, and envision how we can best assist actors
on the field to respond to Guinea-Bissau’s concrete
needs.
Security sector reform should be undertaken in a
holistic manner. It should be seen not merely as a
means of reducing the number of military personnel,
but rather as a process that would allow Guinea-Bissau
to rely on professional and republican armed forces.
Adequate living conditions for those who will remain
in the active service are also essential. Equally
important, effective mechanisms to reintegrate those
demobilized into civilian life are needed to ensure the
political sustainability of the reform. These were key
messages conveyed by the Minister of Defence at the
Commission’s last meeting on 25 March. The
suggestions and ideas put forward just now by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General are

6

very welcome and constitute, I think, an interesting
basis for our discussions in the Peacebuilding
Commission.
As acknowledged in the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau, security sector reform
should neither be undertaken in isolation, separate
from other important reforms, nor considered a
panacea. The stability of the country will require a
broader effort aimed at consolidating its institutions,
strengthening the State and overcoming the hurdles
that have been preventing Guinea-Bissau from
embarking on a self-sustained process of economic
growth over the past years.
Needless to say, strengthened State institutions
are also key in the fight against illicit drug trafficking
in Guinea-Bissau and in the region. We recall the
support of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries in making Guinea-Bissau a pilot country, in
implementation of the ECOWAS Praia action plan
agreed upon last year.
In conclusion, the scenario for peacebuilding in
Guinea-Bissau remains quite challenging. The situation
calls for sustained political and financial support from
the international community and further and better
technical cooperation. To this end, the strengthening of
the United Nations presence on the ground is
absolutely indispensable. We look forward to the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on how to
upgrade the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) into an integrated
office that is adequately staffed and endowed with the
necessary resources to assist the Government in
tackling the country’s challenges. All the support that
the Security Council can provide to UNOGBIS will be
most welcome.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ambassador Viotti for her briefing.
I now give the floor to
Representative of Guinea-Bissau.

the

Permanent

Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to take
the floor today after the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, and the
Ambassador of Brazil, who spoke in her capacity as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

09-29637

S/PV.6103

The Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral stated earlier that the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2009/169) is the thirty-fourth of its kind,
which shows just how long the Council has been
considering the situation in my country. It has been a
rather extended period of time, given that the United
Nations Office was created nearly 10 years ago, which
I believe evinces the Council members’ confirmed
interest in my country. Unfortunately, however, it also
shows how long the situation in my country has
dragged on.
Today, I take the floor with a heavy heart
because, as the Secretary-General says in his report and
as his Special Representative, Mr. Mutaboba, reiterated
earlier, tragic events have occurred in my country. The
unfortunate assassinations of the President of the
Republic and the General Chief of Staff of the Armed
Forces were two tragic events compounding the evil
that has, as I said earlier, plagued the daily life of my
fellow citizens for quite some time.
Unfortunately, we face a tragic situation. But I
want to assure the Council that, whatever the current
circumstances might be, no one should conclude that
Guinea-Bissau is a lost cause — that, despite all the
efforts of the international community, we are not
achieving the hoped-for results. In fact, we in GuineaBissau are aware of the need to ensure that the
country’s credibility is restored. We are mindful of the
need to reconcile with one another, to establish
dialogue as a means of communication, to ensure
harmony among all sectors of the population — all
ethnic groups, all the components of our nation.
That is why I should like to insist here that,
despite what has happened, despite the brutality that
has occurred, the people of Guinea-Bissau are not a
violent people. Quite to the contrary, the people of
Guinea-Bissau are a peaceful people who love peace
and are striving to ensure that peace becomes a lasting
reality in our country. Thus, I should like to ask, as the
Secretary-General did in his report (S/2009/169), that
these people not be abandoned, because the people of
Guinea-Bissau deserve to be supported in this national
reconciliation effort so that they can find their way
back to the path of peace and political stability and can
lay the foundations for sustainable development. We
need development; we do not need conflict. We need
the international community to help us face major
challenges. Most of those challenges are described in
the Secretary-General’s report, and the Special

09-29637

Representative made more specific reference to some
of our most essential priorities.
It is imperative that the people of Guinea-Bissau
reconcile with one another. The international
community and the Security Council must have a
positive and immediate impact. It is essential that the
Council help us, that the international community help
us to create a favourable atmosphere for the
forthcoming elections, to be held on 28 June, in the
wake of the President’s assassination.
Despite the tragic nature of the events that have
occurred in my country, and despite certain difficulties
in harmonizing positions, the political parties have
lived up to their responsibilities. They met to take a
consensual decision on the date of 28 June. It is
essential that the international community help us to
organize those elections. We want them to be credible
and transparent and to be an opportunity for the
citizens of Guinea-Bissau to decisively choose the
person they want.
I should like to add that it is vital that the
international community help us initiate and complete
the reform of our defence and security forces. That is
an element essential to peacebuilding in GuineaBissau. We must acknowledge that the conditions in
which my country’s soldiers — my fellow citizens —
live are utterly regrettable. I believe that the United
Nations missions that have gone to Guinea-Bissau can
attest to that. It is not a question of creating conditions
that are more perfect than those that are most essential for
any person’s everyday life; it is just a question of ensuring
that we, too, can create minimum living conditions in
the barracks so that the soldiers, who are an integral
part of society and normal citizens, can reclaim the
dignity that is indispensable to any human being. When
one thinks of those living in barracks that do not even
have a roof, at the mercy of the weather — and the rainy
season will begin soon in Guinea-Bissau — I believe
that one can understand the state of mind of my
countrymen in the barracks.
I believe we all agree that these reforms must
take place as swiftly as possible. We have made that
decision: the authorities, parliament and, in particular,
the army have decided to play a critical role in this
reform of the defence and security forces. So I should
just like to say that there is a national consensus in this
area, but we need the financial wherewithal to
implement plans that we have already established in

7

S/PV.6103

order to create the structures essential to this reform
that we are all earnestly calling for.
Furthermore, not only do we need to create the
conditions essential for organizing the elections; at the
same time, the Government needs to meet the daily
needs of the population. I ask the Council not to focus
only on the preparation of future elections: first the
elections, and then we will see. I hope that, if possible,
the authorities of Guinea-Bissau, the people of GuineaBissau and the international community can, in parallel
and at the same time, also deal with obligations in
other areas. As the Special Representative has
indicated, the minimum conditions for normal life in
Guinea-Bissau must be created.
In other words, hope must be restored to the
people of Guinea-Bissau. This must be said: “Despite
what has happened in your country, we have
confidence in you, provided that you make the effort
necessary to reconcile with one another and to
establish a constructive dialogue among yourselves and
for yourselves”. I can assure the Council that the
people of Guinea-Bissau are prepared to take that step,
to make every effort and every sacrifice necessary to
ensure that this credibility that we need will be
restored, that lasting peace will be established in our
country once and for all.
Once again, I should like to say that we are
indebted to the international community for all the
messages of solidarity and compassion that have been
expressed to us by the President of the Council, the
Secretary-General, the African Union, the European
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and all others who are concerned about what
is happening in Guinea-Bissau, in a unanimous
demonstration of human solidarity. Here and now, I
should like to thank all those who have demonstrated
their unfailing solidarity towards a people in need, the
people of Guinea-Bissau.
Finally, I should like to say that we in GuineaBissau will continue to create the conditions necessary
for this dialogue of which I have spoken, in order to
ensure that the rule of law can prevail so that
unfortunate incidents such as those just referred to by
the Special Representative — which could call into

8

question the rule of law and respect for the law — do
not recur and all those doubts can be dispelled. But to
do that, we need functional and credible justice, which
means that here too we need the international
community’s help to ensure credible justice for those
who are to be judged and to ensure that the people of
Guinea-Bissau will be confident in their justice system
and can turn to it in the knowledge that it will be
prepared not only to hear them but also to render
justice under conditions that respect international law.
As I said before, we shall continue to strive to attain a
democratic State based on the rule of law, in which all
citizens will be seen, inclusively, as stakeholders in the
conduct of national affairs.
I reiterate that we are mindful of our obligations.
I recently spoke with our Prime Minister; he asked me
to tell the Council that we are mindful of the
challenges we must face and that we are mindful that
we in Guinea-Bissau bear primary responsibility for
what happens in our country. We are ready to take up
these challenges. We need the Council’s understanding,
solidarity and support in order to continue the task we
have undertaken, so that, in spite of the obstacles, we
will be able to move forward to build a democratic
country and ensure that Guinea-Bissau can recover its
credibility and respectability on the international scene.
I repeat — because it is important to do so — that
the people of Guinea-Bissau are not a violent people.
They are a peace-loving people and deserve the
Council’s close attention. I am grateful for the
sustained attention that the Council has always devoted
to my people and my country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I am certain
that members of the Council will pay due heed to the
appeal made today by the representative of GuineaBissau to the Council and to the international
community to support the process under way in
Guinea-Bissau.
There are no further speakers on my list. In
accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, I should now like to
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

09-29637
