499 (V).

Place of meeting of the sixth regular session
of the General AssembI~-

ther to deny such contributions would support aaa
supplement the military action of the United Nations ia
Korea and would assist in putting an end to th~
aggression,

( Resolution adopted without reference
to a Committee)

Recommends that every State :
(a) Apply an embargo on the shipment to ,1r~:1~
under the control of the Central P.::ople's Govcrnm.:nt
of the People's Republic of China and of the North
Korean authorities of arms, ammunition and implements of war, atomic energy materials, petroleum, tran~portation materials of strategic value, and items useful
in the production of arms, ammunition and implements
of war;
(b) Determine which commodities exported from its
territory fall within the embargo, and apply controls
to give effect to the embargo ;
(c) Prevent by all means within its jurisdiction the
circumvention of controls on shipments applied by
other States pursuant to the present resolution ;
(d) Co-operate with other States in carrying out the
purposes of this embargo;
(e) Report to the Additional Measures Committee.
within thirty days and thereafter at the request of the
Committee, on the measures taken in accordance with
the present resolution;
2. Requests the Additional Measures Committee :
(a) To report to the General Assembly, with recommendations as appropriate, on the general effectiveness
of the embargo and the desirability of continuing.
extending or relaxing it ;
(b) To continue its consideration of additional measures to be employed to meet the aggression in Korea.
and to report thereon further to the General Assembly•
it being understood that the Co~ttee is authorized
to defer its report if the Good Offices Committee
reports satisfactory progress in its efforts ;
3. Reaffirms that it contin.ues to be the policy of
the United Nations to bring about a cessation of hostilities in Korea, and the achievement of United Nations
objectives in Korea by peaceful means, and request,
the Good Offices Committee to continue its good offices.
l.

Tiu: General Assembly,
Having hecn informed' that the French Government,
desirous of responding to the wish that has be:::n
expressed to it on several occasions, has decided to
welcome the General Assembly to Paris for the duration of its sixth session,
1. Decides, in pursuance of its resolution 497 (V) of
14 December 1950, to hold its sixth regular session
in Paris;

2. Decides that, notwithstanding the provisio.,s of
rule 1 of its n~les of procedure, the sixth session shall
commence not later than 6 November 1951 ;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General to conclude with
the French Government the necessary agreements for
holding the sixth session of the General Assembly in
Paris, provided that the total estimated cost of holding
the sixth session in Paris (including such meetings as
may be arranged after 1 January 1952) shall not
exceed the amount of $US 2,350,400 provided in the
1951 budget, plus such additional amounts as may be
authorized by transfer from other sections of the 1951
budget by the Secretary-General with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.
329th plenary meeting,
20 March 1951.
SOO (V).

Additional measures to be employed to meet
the aggression in K:orea

(Re.w/ution adopted on the report of the First
Committee)
The General A uembly,
Notin~ the report• of the Adc!~tional Measures
Committee dated 14 May 1951,
Recalling its resolution 498 (V) of 1 February 1951,

330th plenary meetim:.
18 May 1951.

Nothing that :
(a) The Additional ~easures Committee established
by that resolution has considered additional measures
to be employed to meet the aggression in Korea,
(b) The Additional Measures Committee has reported" that a number of States have already taken measures designed to deny contributions to the military
strength of the forces opposing the United. Nations in
Korea,

50 l (V).

Question of the representation of Clliaa iA
the General Auembly

(Resolution adopted on the report of the Special Cummittee an the Representation of China)
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report" of the Special Commi11e.:
on the R~presentation of China.

(c) The Additional Measures Committee has also
reported" that certain economic measures designed fur-

332nd plenary meeting.
5 November 1951.

• See document A/1788/Rev. J.
• See document A/1799.
• Sec Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth
Sesssion, First Committee, 443rd meeting.

'See documeni A/192J.

2
