UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/27
15 September 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3926th meeting of the Security Council, held on 15 September 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Afghanistan", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
The Security Council strongly condemns the murder of Iranian diplomats in
Afghanistan by Taliban combatants. This was a crime committed in flagrant
violation of international law and despite repeated assurances by the Taliban
leaders guaranteeing the safety and security of the personnel of foreign
missions in Mazar-e-Sharif. The killing of Iranian diplomats by Taliban
combatants has seriously increased tension in the region.
The Security Council expresses its deepest condolences to the families of
the Iranian diplomats and to the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran. It
believes that this criminal act should be fully investigated with the
participation of the United Nations with a view to prosecuting those
responsible. The Council demands that the Taliban release other Iranians
detained in Afghanistan and ensure their safe and dignified passage out of
Afghanistan without further delay.
The Security Council recalls its condemnation of the murders of members of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and the personnel of
humanitarian agencies in areas controlled by the Taliban and demands that these
crimes be investigated and the Taliban ensure the safety and security of all
international personnel.
The Security Council expresses its deep concern at the escalating military
operations in the Bamyan province and at reports of mass killings of civilians
in northern Afghanistan. It demands that the Taliban fully respect
international humanitarian law and human rights.
The Security Council calls upon all concerned to exercise maximum
restraint. It also calls upon the parties, in particular the Taliban, to take
action in response to the strong concerns expressed by the international
community, to stop fighting and resume negotiations aimed at achieving a

98-26954 (E)

150998

/...

S/PRST/1998/27
English
Page 2

peaceful settlement of the conflict on the basis of the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and of the Security Council.
The Security Council will keep the situation under close review and is
prepared to consider urgently further action.

-----
