S/PV.9426

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9426th meeting

Wednesday, 27 September 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Oye
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585 (2021), 2642
(2022) and 2672 (2023) (S/2023/621)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-27981 (E)
*2327981*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

participants in Istanbul, and through holding virtual
engagements with actors on the ground, including from
Deir ez-Zor and As-Suwayda.

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021), 2642 (2022) and 2672 (2023) (S/2023/621)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; Ms. Edem Wosornu, Director of Operations and
Advocacy, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; and Ms. Su’ad Jarbawi, Middle East and North
Africa Regional Vice-President at the International
Rescue Committee.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/621, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020), 2533 (2020), 2585
(2021), 2642 (2022) and 2672 (2023).
I give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: I have engaged in several weeks
of intensive diplomacy on the subject of the Syrian
Arab Republic in Geneva, Beirut, Damascus and New
York, meeting with the Syrian Government and the
Syrian Negotiations Commission several times, and
all key international actors. In parallel, my Deputy
Special Envoy Najat Rochdi, and our team, have been
engaging with Syrians widely, through the Women’s
Advisory Board, which recently met in Rome, through
consultations with Civil Society Support Room
2/22

27/09/2023

As the Secretary-General told the General
Assembly, the Syrian Arab Republic is in ruins, and
peace remains remote. Tragically, a comprehensive
solution of the Syrian conflict remains elusive. Gaps
of political will, the distance between substantive
positions of the parties, deep distrust and the
challenging international climate all play a part in the
deadlock. The suffering and the sense of hopelessness
among Syrians are deepening. We cannot simply accept
the status quo, because it will get worse and worse — it
could well unravel, and this will lead to new challenges.
We need the political process to start to deliver on the
ground and to deliver hope. We see this when we turn
to the alarming trends on the ground.
Let me just remind the Council: after a dozen years
of conflict, corruption and mismanagement, external
economic shocks, illicit drug trafficking and sanctions
have collectively seen the Syrian economy go into a
free fall. This year, the Syrian pound halved in value,
while food prices doubled. Half the population is foodinsecure, and more than 600,000 children under five
are stunted. Doctors and nurses earn less than $20 per
month — not enough to cover even transport. Many
essential health-care workers are leaving the country.
Whole sectors are in danger of being hollowed out.
Meanwhile, instead of conditions being created
for the displaced to return voluntarily and in safety
and dignity, civilians continue to be killed and injured
by violence, and tens of thousands were displaced last
month. Indeed, we have seen in this period some of
the most serious threats to the relative calm that has
prevailed since 2020. This has included some two
weeks of armed clashes between Arab tribes and the
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) in Deir ez-Zor; armed
opposition groups attempting to advance into SDF-held
territory, prompting further clashes and exchanges
of fire between the SDF and the armed opposition
and Türkiye, as well as Turkish and pro-Government
airstrikes; Security-Council listed terrorist group Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham conducting multiple cross-line raids in
north-west Syria, with an allied group seeking to take
and hold territory from the Government, challenging
the March 2020 Russian-Turkish ceasefire lines; a
dramatic escalation of pro-government shelling and
airstrikes on north-west Syria; further reports of Israeli
airstrikes; further reports of Jordanian airstrikes;
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

further security incidents in the south-west; reports of
infighting among pro-government forces in the northeast and among armed opposition groups and within
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in the north-west; and further
reports of Da’esh attacks.
It should be no surprise that there are new
manifestations of popular frustration in Syria. For well
over a month, protests have continued in Al-Suwayda
governorate, with participants citing economic,
social and political grievances and demands. In video
footage, we have seen many placards calling for the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
Let me stress the need to respect the right to
peaceful protest in all areas of Syria and the need for
protests to remain peaceful. Let me also stress the need
for an end to all violence against civilians, for full
respect of international human rights and international
humanitarian law and for work towards a nationwide
ceasefire. Meanwhile — and as we will later hear more
on this from the representative of the Office for the
Coordination for Humanitarian Affairs — I take note
of the resumption of United Nations humanitarian
deliveries from Türkiye into north-west Syria through
the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. All modalities, including
cross-line, must be utilized. Resources are desperately
needed too for all pillars, including enhancing early
recovery in the humanitarian response plan and for
refugees and host countries. We also need to ensure that
any adverse effects of sanctions on ordinary Syrians
are avoided and mitigated, including through the full
use of existing humanitarian exemptions and efforts by
States imposing sanctions to counter overcompliance.
Beyond that, we must focus urgently on political
movement to change the dynamics that I have just
described in quite some detail. Doing that requires a
shift in our mindset, which I know is a big ask. But,
as the Secretary-General told the General Assembly
last week, politics is compromise; diplomacy is
compromise; effective leadership is compromise. The
Syrian parties and all key international actors need
to entertain compromise in a more fundamental way
than many have done do to date. If they do, it will be
possible to act in parallel and urgently reverse negative
economic, security and political trends and relaunch a
Syrian-led and -owned political process, as called for
in resolution 2254 (2015). But to do that we will need
concrete moves with contributions from all sides — step
for step. That could help us move towards a safe, calm
and neutral environment that begins to create conditions

S/PV.9426

that arrest further displacement; that opens up towards
the safe, dignified and voluntary return of internally
displaced persons and refugees; that sees real measures
to address the protection and livelihood concerns of
Syrian civilians; and that creates some level of trust
and confidence. That will require serious commitments
to be implemented to begin to address the concerns of
Syrian civilians within and outside the country.
Those who have been arbitrarily detained could
be released, with steps taken to ensure that anyone
in detention is treated in line with their right to due
process. More Syrians could access their property or
the birth, marriage and death certificates and other
documents that they desperately need. Syrians who
have fled and fear conscription would have their
concerns addressed. Syrians abroad could find more
ways to access the consular services they need. Power
cuts could become fewer and less prolonged, and clean
water made more available. Patients could access
medicines that are currently unavailable. Farmers could
import more supplies needed to become self-sufficient
once again. Those devastated by the earthquake could
access the supplies needed for recovery. Payments for
legitimate humanitarian activity could flow into Syria
more easily.
In short, if Syrians were to see protection concerns
meaningfully addressed, donors, including those in the
region, could in parallel step forward with more support
and States imposing sanctions could take measures
to facilitate that. Meanwhile, the various de facto
arrangements for calm could be embedded in a broader
nationwide and sustainable ceasefire and a common
approach to supporting the efforts to combat Security
Council-listed terrorist groups still active in Syria.
In parallel, the Syrian parties could be engaged in
a process of a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
dialogue facilitated by the United Nations, working
seriously in the Constitutional Committee. They would
be recommending and reacting to concrete proposals,
working through the Constitution, chapter by chapter,
and identifying the makings of a future social contract
for all the citizens of a deeply divided country. They
would put behind them any attempts to avoid dialogue
with others and would be putting forward proposals
designed to gain some support across the divide that
exists today in Syria. At the very least, they would be
working continuously and expeditiously and exploring
the making of a future together. And, while all of that
was being worked on, we in the United Nations would

23-279813/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

be engaging continuously with Syrian civil society,
men, women and youth from within and outside Syria,
on the full range of their issues, concerns and priorities
and connecting them with others and the process.
Progress on those fronts is not yet the political
solution that Syrians need and deserve. But moving on
them and actually achieving them would be a start to
addressing core issues of concern to Syrians today and
move us along the path of resolution 2254 (2015). There
are also mechanisms and pathways that can help us
move forward if they are utilized. As all know, I have
been working with all parties and coordinating closely
in particular with the Arab ministerial contact group
on Syria to seek urgent progress on steps for steps.
There are clear ideas on the table. There is an invitation
to genuine engagement and to concrete discussions.
This opportunity should be seized. For that to work,
each side should engage with precision. We would
need to coordinate reciprocal steps, and there needs to
be verification.
With regard to the Constitutional Committee, the
Syrian parties have informed me that they would like
to see the Constitutional Committee reconvened. The
Astana format and the Arab contact group, as well as
the Western capitals, all tell me that they support its
resumption facilitated by the United Nations. I believe
that a way forward is possible, and I will continue in
that regard to stress and seek to enhance the Syrian
ownership and leadership of the process, divorced of
any foreign interference or external agendas. I will also
seek to ensure the substantive nature of the sessions. I
am continuing my consultations with the aim of issuing
invitations so that we can resume the work before the
end of the year. We will, of course, keep the Middle
Third apprised of concrete developments.
There is a path forward for Syria, and I appeal
to all to engage. But let me issue a stark warning. If
that path is not taken, the alternative is not a grim but
containable status quo; it is not a miraculous change for
the better from the perspective of this or that Syrian
party; it is rather a future of deterioration across
humanitarian, security and institutional fronts, with
significant implications for all. That is a recipe for
disaster for the Syrian people and the region. And it runs
contrary to the common interests of the international
community for stability and progress in Syria. The way
forward would see genuine confidence-building via
mutual and reciprocal steps — step-for-step — while
addressing protection and livelihood concerns. It would
4/22

27/09/2023

see a gradual deepening of a Syrian-owned and -led
constitutional dialogue. It would see the deepened
engagement of Syrian civil society. The key circles of
international effort would align priorities behind this
way forward. Let me appeal to all to put aside any
blocking or conditioning of this or that aspect of the
United Nations effort and to provide strong support for
the strategy I have outlined.
In that way, we would arrest Syria’s downward
slide, see incremental progress and build some trust
and confidence. In doing so, we would set the scene
for what is ultimately needed and what resolution 2254
(2015) calls for: a fundamental attempt at conflict
resolution that respects and restores the sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity of Syria
and enables the Syrian people to achieve their legitimate
aspirations. It is time to act together, determined that
the Syrian people see a change in their lives and a ray
of hope for the future.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wosornu.
Ms. Wosornu: From the humanitarian side, allow
me to begin today on a positive note. Last week saw the
resumption of United Nations humanitarian deliveries
from Türkiye into north-west Syria through the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing. Since then, 65 trucks have crossed,
carrying health and nutrition items and other vital
relief supplies for more than 2 million people. We
expect many more trucks to cross into the north-west
in the coming days and weeks. Those were the first aid
deliveries through Bab Al-Hawa since 10 July, when
the authorization under resolution 2672 (2023) lapsed.
United Nations personnel have also been able to go
through this crossing, thereby enhancing our ability
to support partners, monitor projects, engage with the
communities we serve and strengthen the protection
environment through physical presence on the ground.
In the interim, the United Nations and our partners
have also used pre-positioned supplies and deliveries
through the Bab Al-Salam and the Al-Rai border crossings to sustain programmes throughout north-west Syria. Bab Al-Hawa, however, remains the central channel
for cross-border assistance from Türkiye into northwest Syria. That development means that we can carry
out deliveries at the scale required to meet the urgent
needs of over 4 million people, 80 per cent of whom are
women and children. The reopening of Bab Al-Hawa
for United Nations cross-border aid is the result of an
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

understanding with the Government of Syria on the
principled delivery of United Nations cross-border assistance, of operational and security assurances from
the de facto authorities in Idlib and of consultations
with a range of Member States, including the Republic of Türkiye, donors, non-governmental organizations
and other partners.
The cross-border response extends beyond the
movement of trucks. It means better functioning
schools, health facilities and sanitation systems and
improved access to safe drinking water and life-saving protection services. It also includes the delivery
of cash-based assistance. Our commitment to providing humanitarian aid by all means possible, whether
crossline or cross-border, remains unchanged.
As the Special Envoy said, an escalation of hostilities in northern Syria earlier this month provided a stark
reminder of the criticality of sustaining humanitarian
assistance. Renewed hostilities in the past three weeks
in the north and north-east of Aleppo have temporarily
displaced — as previously mentioned — tens of thousands of people, many of whom have had to sleep in
the open due to overcrowding in displacement camps.
Civilian casualties have also been reported, including
among women and children. Moreover, 32 schools have
had to stop educational activities, 14 of which have
been used as temporary shelters. In addition, fighting
in the north-east reportedly left 23 civilians killed and
many more were injured in Deir ez-Zor governorate
late last month, according to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Tens
of thousands of people were displaced, while those who
remained faced shortages of food and medicines. On
Monday, a water station in Deir ez-Zor was damaged
because of the continuing hostilities, leaving at least
17,000 people — many of them displaced from other
areas — without access to safe drinking water. Humanitarian workers are focused on getting food, water,
health and shelter assistance to affected people. Local
organizations, including grassroots women’s organizations, play a critical role in ensuring that assistance
equitably reaches those in need. I strongly urge all the
parties to the hostilities to uphold international humanitarian law and take all feasible precautions to avoid
and minimize harm to civilians.
Across the country, families are grappling with
the continuing strain of a deepening economic crisis,
again as Mr. Pedersen mentioned. The Syrian pound
has lost more than half its value since the start of this

S/PV.9426

year, while prices of essential food commodities have
nearly doubled. At the beginning of this year, half of
the population — some 12 million people — was food
insecure. The situation has continued to worsen, and if
these economic trends persist, we will likely see millions more people slide into food insecurity.
All that is happening against the backdrop of a
sharp decline in the resources available for the humanitarian response. We have just three months left in the
year, and yet the 2023 humanitarian response plan for
Syria remains less than 30 per cent funded. That means
that many humanitarian agencies are being forced to
make painful decisions. As reported in July, the World
Food Programme has had to cut assistance to 2.5 million
people, while halving the standard ration for others.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is having to cut and scale back essential assistance programmes, including interventions
to respond to gender-based violence. In the north-west,
some 17 safe spaces for women and girls were closed
in the past few months, and two dozen more will be
closed by the end of the year if additional funding is not
received. Further cuts to already underfunded genderbased violence programmes will have profound consequences for survivors. Women and girls are paying a
steep price. Their fundamental rights, including access
to services that are critical for their health and wellbeing, have become a casualty of the conflict. Women
and girls struggle to access health care, including reproductive services, because of widespread damage to
health facilities, shortages of health workers, as previously mentioned, limited transportation options, a lack
of documentation, overcrowding and long wait times.
UNICEF informs us that funding shortfalls are
compromising access to education for millions of children and undermining urgent efforts to sustain water
and sanitation systems, which are essential to preventing catastrophic public health risks, including cholera.
Similarly, the World Health Organization reports cuts
to health services that affect millions of people and reduce essential services, including child immunizations
and disease surveillance.
The resumption of United Nations aid deliveries
through Bab Al-Hawa is positive news. However, as I
have highlighted today, massive humanitarian needs
and protection risks persist across the country. Much
more is still needed for millions of people throughout
Syria to reclaim a safe and dignified life.

23-279815/22

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9426

The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Wosornu

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Jarbawi.
Ms. Jarbawi: The International Rescue Committee
has been delivering aid in Syria since 2012, and in
many respects it has never been so complex. Yet the
truth is that very little of what I will share with the
Security Council today will come as a surprise. Month
on month, year on year, the Council has been briefed
on the declining humanitarian situation inside Syria.
Thirteen years into the crisis, we have simply run out of
novel ways to describe the suffering experienced daily
by so many. Forever on the brink, and yet somehow
consistently able to plunge into newfound depths, the
humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
continues to decline. The first outbreak of cholera in
more than a decade last year, rates of malnutrition
never seen before, increasingly hotter summers and
unpredictable winters are all exacerbating the situation
for Syrian families. It is therefore imperative for the
situation to remain on the agenda of the Council, and
I am therefore grateful for the opportunity to brief
everyone today on behalf of the IRC, its partners and
those we serve.
As the Council has already just heard from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), more than 15 million people inside the Syrian
Arab Republic are currently in need of humanitarian
assistance — more than at any other point since the
conflict began. The absence of progress towards a
political solution and the consequences of the protracted
crisis have pushed roughly 90 per cent of Syrians
into poverty. Without concerted action to address the
drivers of humanitarian need, those numbers will only
continue to rise.
In July, the Council failed to re-authorize the United
Nations-led cross-border assistance to north-west Syrian
Arab Republic for a 12-month mandate (see S/PV.9371).
The resulting uncertainty has highlighted the critical
and continued role of the Council in promoting safe,
dignified and unhindered access to assistance for
populations inside the Syrian Arab Republic. The IRC’s
Syrian partners have highlighted to us their frustration
and anxiety following the non-renewal of that mandate,
including their very legitimate concerns about the
future of humanitarian assistance for the millions of
people that depend on it, the majority of whom are
children and women. Syrian voices and civil society
6/22

27/09/2023

are the lifeblood of that humanitarian response, and it
is incumbent on all actors to ensure that they are both
heard and included in decision-making.
Across the north of the country, where the IRC
works, civilians continue to suffer from the perpetual
conflict. Shockingly, in some areas of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the IRC’s clients tell us that they have been
displaced more than 20 times since the crisis first began. As the Council heard from the Special Envoy and
OCHA, this past week, in Idlib, in the north-west, air
strikes killed a 90-year-old man and his granddaughter, who were living in a displacement camp. They had
already made the impossible decision of leaving their
home to live in a tent, in search of safety, yet they still
paid the ultimate price. This past month, an escalation
in hostilities in Deir ez-Zor saw at least 54 civilians
killed, including 4 children. Such incidents have continued to cause damage to critical public infrastructure,
including hospitals and water-treatment facilities, and
have caused further displacements.
We cannot forget about the devastating earthquakes
that struck in February. They too have further added to
the layers of suffering, driving displacement, damaging
and destroying yet more critical infrastructure and killing and injuring more than 13,000 people in the northwest alone.
As the economic situation worsens and food prices
continue to rise, many of those we serve tell us that they
can now no longer afford to feed their families. One
man living in Serekaniye camp, in north-east Syria,
told my colleagues that he is forced to choose between
life-saving medical care and food for his family. He
has diabetes and heart disease, and the lack of available health services means that he has to sell part of his
food basket in order to buy life-sustaining medicine. He
spoke of his distress at not having enough to feed his
family as a result. That is the impossible choice facing
many Syrian families in need right now.
Sadly, those choices are not limited to medical services and food alone — rather, they extend to every
facet of life, including the education of children. In an
assessment conducted this summer by the IRC, nearly
half of the households we surveyed stated that their
children were not enrolled in school. When asked why,
74 per cent of households reported that their boys were
not enrolled, as they needed to work to support their
families, while 46 per cent reported that early marriage
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

was the reason behind the non-enrolment of girls in education.
While Syrian families are facing impossible
choices between food and health care, education and
sustained financial status, humanitarian agencies
are also being forced to make impossible decisions
regarding the services we should prioritize. Across the
country, humanitarian assistance continues to provide
a vital lifeline to Syrians left with few other options for
survival. Yet despite the clear increase in humanitarian
need, this year’s humanitarian response plan is less
than 30 per cent funded, as stated by OCHA. Many
of our donors have already informed us to expect an
additional 20 to 40 per cent budget cut next year. The
substantial funding gap will simply mean even greater
needs in 2024, creating a downward spiral and forcing
us to make the terrible choice of which vulnerable
families we should serve. The burden of that choice
falls on the shoulders of humanitarian agencies— the
IRC and our 27 partners — as we are asked to do more
with even less.
With both efforts to bring an end to the crisis and
financial support to those affected by its stalling, there
are very real fears that the Syrian Arab Republic is
in danger of becoming a forgotten crisis. That is why
the IRC and the wider non-governmental organization
community had consistently pressed for the 12-month
re-authorization by the Council of the cross-border
assistance. While recent progress has been made
in-country, with United Nations assistance travelling
again through Bab Al-Hawa after weeks of uncertainty,
we remain concerned that the current agreements, which
are short-term and time-bound, are not sustainable.
All Syrians, regardless of where they reside, have the
right to choice and dignity when it comes to access
to assistance.
As already noted, we believe it is imperative for
the humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic
to remain on the Council’s agenda, including through
regular humanitarian briefings and written reporting.
With the crisis showing little prospect of abating, we
do urge the world to not forget those in need, and we
continue to emphasize the Council’s responsibility to
protect Syrians, wherever they are.
The President: I thank Ms. Jarbawi for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

S/PV.9426

Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral Geir Pedersen and Ms. Edem Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
briefings, and we listened attentively to the statement
delivered by Ms. Jarbawi.
We remain convinced that there is no alternative
to advancing the Syrian-led and Syrian-implemented
political settlement process in Syria with the assistance
of the United Nations, in strict compliance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and without external interference.
On that basis, we will continue to consistently pursue
our cooperation, both with the Syrians and the Special
Envoy, as well as with all other stakeholders, first and
foremost with our partners under the Astana format.
To that end, on 22 September, on the margins of
the high-level week of the seventy-eighth session of the
General Assembly, another meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Russia, Iran and Türkiye was
held, during which the leading role and approach of
the Astana troika in pursuing consolidated efforts to
facilitate a comprehensive settlement in Syria on the
basis of strict adherence to the principle of respect for
the country’s sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity
were once again emphasized. In addition, there was a
focus and an emphasis on the need to mobilize external
assistance to Syria, including to ensure its post-conflict
recovery, as well as to increase the pace of the return of
Syrian refugees to their homeland.
The trilateral meeting was followed by consultations
between the Astana format representatives and
Mr. Pedersen, during which special attention was
paid to the task of re-establishing the effective work
of the Constitutional Committee, among other things.
In that context, we would like to welcome once again
the outcome of the ministerial meeting of the contact
group of the League of Arab States, held on 15 August
in Cairo, during which there was an agreement reached
to resume meetings of the Constitutional Committee
and to conduct another round of the drafting committee
at an agreed venue by the end of the year.
Given the position of the Syrians themselves, both
the Syrian Government and the opposition, we hope
that Mr. Pedersen will focus specifically on convening
a new session of the Constitutional Committee, without
being distracted by other initiatives. At the same time,
we continue to believe that the key decisions regarding

23-279817/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

the modalities of the Committee’s continued operation
and the venue for subsequent rounds of consultation
need to be made by the Syrian people themselves.
The situation on the ground in a number of regions
of Syria not under Damascus’ control remains fraught
with tensions. That state of affairs is a consequence,
first and foremost, of the ongoing illegal military
presence of the United States in the area beyond the
Euphrates River and in Al-Tanf. Clashes between
Kurds and Arab tribes in Deir ez-Zor governorate
are of growing concern, as are the escalating tensions
in the south, including in Al-Suwayda governorate.
Those alarming trends were a direct consequence of
the foreign intervention of Washington and its allies in
order to further destabilize the situation in Syria and
create a border buffer strip.
Along with Kurdish groups under their control,
Western countries illegally present in Syria under the
pretext of fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant have long since ceased to combat terrorism.
Instead, they are actively using the fighters in service
of their own aims against the Syrian military and their
allies and have been attempting to whitewash the Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham terrorist group, which has seized
Idlib. In addition to the provocative actions of Western
countries, the Israeli authorities are also exacerbating
the situation by increasing the frequency of arbitrary
air strikes targeting Syria. In August alone, there were
three strikes targeting Damascus and Aleppo, including
from the Golan Heights airspace, as a result of which
the Aleppo airport was again put out of service.
For our part, we consistently believe that long-term
peace and security in Syria can be achieved only through
the full restoration of Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity, including the Syrian authorities’ control over
their national borders and natural resources, while
continuing counter-terrorism operations.
Turning to the humanitarian situation in Syria,
first and foremost, we wish to welcome the agreements
reached between Damascus and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the use of
three border crossings on the border with Türkiye
for the delivery of humanitarian supplies. The Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Rai border crossings remain open
to the United Nations until 13 November of this year,
while the Bab Al-Hawa crossing will remain open
for a whole six months, that is, until 13 March 2024.
Thus, the capabilities of the United Nations to deliver
8/22

27/09/2023

humanitarian supplies to north-west Syria now exceed
those provided for by the Security Council’s crossborder resolutions. On the whole, the architecture for
cross-border deliveries to Syria has taken the form
generally accepted in world practice — henceforth,
it will be within the framework of consent from the
national Government and is no longer micromanaged
by the Security Council.
We welcome the fact that international
humanitarian assistance to Syria now aligns with the
guiding humanitarian principles enshrined in General
Assembly resolution 46/182. We believe that outstanding
issues — akin to those that arise in the context of
United Nations cross-border deliveries from Chad to
the Sudan or from Uzbekistan to Afghanistan — will
be resolved through direct dialogue between the United
Nations and Damascus without external interference,
including from the Security Council. At the same time,
we are seriously concerned that, despite the capabilities
that have long been available to humanitarian workers,
humanitarian deliveries to Idlib through the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing resumed only a month and a half
after the agreements were reached with Damascus. In
that way, people in the enclave who are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance, which the United Nations and
others harp on about incessantly, have once again been
taken hostage by internationally listed Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham terrorists, who played pretend diplomacy with
the Deputy Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the
Syria Crisis, Mr. David Carden, who is a British citizen.
That all reflects very poorly on the work of the United
Nations office in Gaziantep. Next on the agenda is the
resumption of humanitarian aid deliveries to northwest Syria from Damascus through the Sarmada and
Saraqib crossings on the line of contact. The continued
blockade by terrorists of such humanitarian deliveries
is completely baseless. We see the Idlib thugs’ blatant
sabotage and the disgraceful silence on the situation on
the part of the Secretariat and our Western colleagues.
Unfortunately, that is not the only issue that is
being ignored. Against the backdrop of the suffocating
unilateral sanctions imposed on Damascus by Western
countries, the Secretariat appears to have preferred to
attempt to sweep under the rug the report of the United
Nations country team in Syria on the negative impact of
those illegal measures on the humanitarian situation in
the long-suffering country. That also includes the fact
that the United Nations has not noticed Washington’s
occupation of the area beyond the Euphrates and the
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

looting of Syria’s national resources by the United States.
In the oil sector alone, Damascus’ losses as a result of
United States crimes are estimated at $115.2 billion.
Every day, the United States exports approximately
150,000 barrels of crude oil, in a situation where, owing
to fuel shortages in Syria, humanitarian workers are
forced to scale back their operations, including through
the World Food Programme. That is the embodiment
in Syria of the ubiquitously vaunted principle of
United States humanism. The Secretary-General and
the Secretariat have remained disgracefully silent on
that issue.
We regard as telling the critical situation that has
developed as a result of the fact that the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for Syria for the current
year is funded at less than 30 per cent. It is obvious
that Syria, alongside a number of other countries in
need, has been enduring the cruellest discrimination
from Western donors, whose sole concern is to sponsor
weapons deliveries to Ukraine. It is important not to
lose sight of that reality as we listen to disingenuous
statements from a host of our Western colleagues about
their concern for ordinary Syrians, whom they are not
only not helping but instead are attempting to strangle
with illegal unilateral sanctions.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I deliver this statement
on behalf of Brazil and Switzerland, co-penholders on
the Syrian humanitarian file.
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, Director
of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Edem
Wosornu, and the International Rescue Committee’s
Middle East and North Africa Regional Vice-President,
Ms. Su’ad Jarbawi for their briefings. I also acknowledge
the presence of representatives from Syria, Iran and
Türkiye at today’s meeting.
Switzerland and Brazil welcome the resumption
of United Nations humanitarian deliveries into northwest Syria via the Bab Al-Hawa crossing since
19 September. To date, 65 trucks filled with essential aid
from UNICEF, the World Food Programme, the World
Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the International
Organization for Migration have successfully passed
through Bab Al-Hawa. We express our gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and his team, both
at Headquarters and in the field, for their dedication
in operationalizing the exchange of letters between the

S/PV.9426

Syrian Government and OCHA, thereby ensuring that
the Bab Al-Hawa crossing can be used. That crossing
remains central to United Nations efforts to deliver
humanitarian assistance in Syria. The resumption of
the deliveries is promising, and we are hopeful that it
will remain sustainable.
We appreciate the current collaboration between
Syria and OCHA. With the extension by three months
of the use by the United Nations of the Bab Al-Salam
and Al-Rai border crossings, United Nations outreach
now spans three border crossings, assisting 2.7 million
people in need every month. We also reiterate the
necessity of predictable arrangements to respond to the
ever-increasing humanitarian needs on the ground, and
we call on all actors involved not to limit the duration
of the permissions granted.
Syria’s worsening humanitarian crisis is deeply
concerning. The role of the United Nations in delivering
aid remains vital, especially as an increasing number of
Syrians rely on humanitarian assistance. It is imperative
that all aid modalities, including cross-border and
cross-line, remain available to humanitarian actors,
while ensuring rapid, unhindered and sustainable
access across Syria.
Humanitarian operations in Syria must continue
to be undertaken with respect for the principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence. It
is vital that all parties to the armed conflict — with no
exception under any pretext — uphold those foundational
humanitarian norms and international humanitarian
law, including their obligation to allow and facilitate the
rapid and unimpeded passage of humanitarian relief for
civilians in need. Moreover, the continuous and rigorous
monitoring of cross-border humanitarian deliveries is
essential to ensure that those principles are lived up to.
All parties to the conflict must respect humanitarian
and human rights law, while guaranteeing the safety
and well-being of the people living in Syria. We also
welcome OCHA’s commitment to continue to appeal
to donors to provide the necessary funding for the
humanitarian response plan. As of 13 September,
more than halfway through the year, the humanitarian
response plan for 2023 was only 28 per cent funded,
raising serious concerns among the humanitarian
community. Sustainable funding is needed for the plan’s
implementation. In addition, we would like to stress the
importance of early-recovery projects to contribute to
the reduction of needs in the long term.

23-279819/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

We appreciate OCHA’s dedication and transparent
approach to the delivery of assistance to north-west
Syria under the new consent-based model. We are
grateful for OCHA’s commitment to keep the Council
informed, as it should remain informed. Should there
be hindrances in humanitarian access, knowing of
their occurrence and comprehending their causes is
imperative for timely responses.
Switzerland and Brazil have always been, and
remain, fully committed to working in good faith
within the Council and in contact with all stakeholders
so that the former may fulfil its collective responsibility
towards the Syrian people.
I shall now speak in my national capacity on the
political aspects of the Syrian conflict.
Brazil is closely following the escalating violence
in Syria. In the north-east, recent hostilities have
impacted populated areas, leading to further loss of
civilian lives and the destruction of essential civilian
infrastructure. Renewed fighting in the north-west is
equally concerning, affecting families living in camps
and disrupting educational activities. We urge all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and exercise maximum restraint to
prevent further escalation.
We thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his outreach
efforts to re-engage key stakeholders in trying to find
a solution to the current stalemate in the political
process. Resolution 2254 (2015) provides elements
that could lead to a peaceful end to the conflict, while
ensuring Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity.
Addressing the Syrian refugee crisis requires a
holistic approach. Collective action is always needed,
taking into account the protection needs of refugees in
accordance with international law.
The unfolding humanitarian crisis in Syria
underscores the need for an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire. Amid the ongoing economic
crisis, with a plunging currency value and soaring
prices for essential goods, the further suffering of
Syrian civilians and additional damage to critical
infrastructure are simply unacceptable.
Continuous violence, a severe economic crisis with
escalating hunger, human rights violations and a stalled
peace process constitute, in the words of Mr. Pedersen,
an “unacceptable status quo”. Let us not merely hope,
10/22

27/09/2023

but also work diligently towards a favourable political
outcome for Syria, ultimately bringing about the peace,
stability and reconciliation so very desired by the
Syrian people.
A military solution to the Syrian crisis is not only
illusory but also detrimental to the future of the country.
Renewed political will is essential to resume a credible
intra-Syrian political process, especially with the reconvening of the Constitutional Committee. We encourage
all parties to show flexibility for the resumption of the
United Nations-facilitated political process. Syria and
the region should move ahead and leave these painful
times behind. It is high time that we see them do so.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his
briefing and for his continued efforts to attain a sustainable political solution in Syria, including through
his diplomacy during high-level week. I also welcome
the helpful update from Ms. Wosornu. And I want to
thank Ms. Jarbawi for her sobering briefing and for
everything she and the International Rescue Committee are doing to expand humanitarian access in Syria.
The United States welcomes the resumption of
United Nations humanitarian assistance convoys
through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing — a crucial access
point that allows aid to reach millions of vulnerable
Syrians. If implemented, the understanding that UnderSecretary-General Griffiths and his team were able to
reach with parties on the ground in north-west Syria
and with Damascus will maintain that lifeline. But we
are mindful of the regime’s decade-long history of manipulating humanitarian assistance to all areas of Syria,
including its ongoing denial of United Nations access
to the Rukban displacement site. We are also concerned
that the regime will try to impose new conditions on the
United Nations in the future, especially in the fall and
winter, when consent for the three crossings will need
to be renewed and when humanitarian needs will be at
their greatest.
The Council must give the United Nations the support it needs to resist pressure by the Al-Assad regime
and maintain unhindered access to all Syrians for as
long as needed. The Syrian people are counting on
us in their time of immense need. As the single-largest humanitarian donor to the Syrian response effort,
the United States supports aid through all modalities
to reach Syrians in need, including cross-border and
cross-line aid to all areas of Syria.
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9426

I want to underscore the importance of continued
reporting to the Council on humanitarian and political
developments inside Syria in line with resolution 2139
(2014). On the political front, we are monitoring reports
about popular protests in Syria, and we continue to
support the Syrian people’s call for peace, dignity,
security and justice. The United States also supports
the Syrian people’s ability to exercise their rights to
peaceful assembly and the freedom of expression. The
renewed protests in Syria underscore the need for a
Syrian-led political solution.

But once again the United Nations is having to develop contingency plans for when permissions for Bab
Al-Rai and Bab Al-Salam expire in 45 days’ time. Shortterm agreements are not a sustainable solution for the
people of north-west Syria who rely on the United Nations
life-saving aid. And those short-term arrangements distract humanitarian teams on the ground with constant
contingencies and planning for worst-case scenarios,
when their most pressing priority is to engage with the
people who need their support. We need a more sustainable approach for the lifeline of cross-border assistance.

We continue to advocate that implementing
resolution 2254 (2015) remains the only viable path
towards ending the conflict. To that end, we urge the
Syrian regime to engage meaningfully in the political
process called for in resolution 2254 (2015) by returning
to the Constitutional Committee, which has not met in
over a year. While simply holding another meeting of
the Constitutional Committee will not end the conflict,
we believe that the regime’s participation would be an
important signal of its intent to return to the political
process. United States sanctions will remain in place
until, at minimum, there is concrete, measurable
progress towards a political solution.

Turning to political developments, we are following
closely the demonstrations in Al-Suwayda in defence of
their political and economic rights. It is disappointing
that, despite readmission to the League of Arab States,
Syria refuses to abide by the decisions of the Council
and to engage meaningfully in the political process.
The trafficking of large quantities of captagon across
the region continues unabated. And this month we have
seen some of the largest captagon seizures on record.

There is no shortage of conflicts and crises on
the Council’s agenda, but we must not let Syria fall to
the wayside — not as humanitarian needs continue to
spike and not as peace efforts continue to stall. When I
travelled to the border of Türkiye and Syria last year, a
Syrian refugee told me that she was worried the world
would forget about the plight of her people. I told her that
the United States would not let that happen. The Council
must send the same message to all Syrian people.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen, Director Wosornu
and International Rescue Committee Vice-President
Jarbawi for their briefings. With humanitarian needs
in Syria at their highest in years, it is critical that the
Council have before it the facts and the insights from
their teams.
First, the United Kingdom welcomes the news
that aid is once again reaching the people of northwest Syria, 70 days after Russia vetoed cross-border
draft resolution S/2023/506. We are clear that those
deliveries must be secure and unhindered and delivered
in accordance with the humanitarian principles of
neutrality, impartiality and independence.

We therefore urge the regime to begin to engage
seriously in the political process established by resolution 2254 (2015), including the early convening of the
Constitutional Committee. The peace and the stability
of the region depend on it.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Director Wosornu
for their briefings.
I also listened attentively to the statement made by
Ms. Jarbawi.
Last week, President Xi Jinping of China met with
Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad, who was in China by
invitation to attend the opening ceremony of the nineteenth Asian Games. They had an in-depth exchange of
views on bilateral relations and international regional
issues of common interest. President Xi stressed that
China supports Syria in opposing foreign interference; rejecting unilateral bullying acts; safeguarding
national independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity; carrying out reconstruction; enhancing counter-terrorism capacity-building; promoting a political
solution to the Syrian issue, in line with the principle
of a Syria-led and -owned process; improving relations
with other Arab countries and playing a greater role in
international and regional affairs. His words will guide
China’s continued efforts to actively participate in the

23-2798111/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

international community’s discussions of Syria-related
questions and play a constructive role in the political
settlement of the Syrian issue.
China supports and welcomes Syria’s return to the
League of Arab States and supports Arab countries’
endeavour to seek strength through unity and to give
fresh impetus to the resolution of the Syrian issue.
We welcome the agreement of the Arab contact group
on Syria to convene within the year a new round of
meetings of the Syrian Constitutional Committee. We
look forward to positive progress from the meetings.
Countries outside the region should fully respect to
the will of the countries of the regioand their people
and create an external environment that is conducive
to communication and consultation among the
relevant parties.
We support the Syrian Government in taking
necessary measures to combat terrorism and maintain
national security and stability and welcome the
positive progress in counter-terrorism campaigns led
by the Government. China opposes the attempts by
external forces to interfere in Syria’s internal affairs
and undermine security and stability. We also oppose
the illegal military presence and unlawful military
operations in Syria, as well as the unlawful exploitation
of its natural resources.
Since July, we have seen new progress in
humanitarian assistance to Syria. On 19 September,
cross-border assistance through the Bab Al-Hawa
crossing was fully resumed, marking the full
operationalization of the new cross-border humanitarian
assistance arrangement thanks to the joint efforts of the
United Nations and Syrian Government. All parties
must strive to maintain the current positive momentum,
create a sound atmosphere for healthy interactions
between Syria and the United Nations and make greater
efforts to resume and scale up cross-line assistance as
soon as possible.
The relevant donors should honour in earnest
their commitments to ensure that humanitarian
activities throughout Syria receive adequate and
non-discriminatory funding. At the same time, the
international community should support the Syrian
Government’s capacity-building in humanitarian relief,
expand the scope of humanitarian activities in Syria,
increase investments in early recovery and support its
pursuit of autonomous and sustainable economic and
social development.
12/22

27/09/2023

The negative impact of unilateral sanctions on
Syria’s humanitarian situation cannot be ignored or
denied. They must be lifted unconditionally as soon
as possible.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank both
Mr. Geir Pedersen and Ms. Edem Wosornu for their
valuable briefings. We also thank Ms. Su’ad Jarbawi for
her statement, which shed light on the difficult living
conditions of the brotherly Syrian people.
In the context of today’s meeting, I would like to
begin with the political track in Syria.
The United Arab Emirates stresses the importance
of continued dialogue and building confidence among
the Syrian parties and ensuring a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political solution, which is the only way to
end the crisis. The United Arab Emirates also stresses
the importance of continuing the Arab diplomatic
momentum that we witnessed in the past months to
support a peaceful solution in coordination with the
United Nations, especially in the light of the absence of
any serious movement on that track for a long time. We
believe that the role played by the Arab contact group
on Syria is important and must be supported by the
international community, for all those Arab endeavours
are aimed at supporting and strengthening the United
Nations track and the Special Envoy’s efforts.
In that context, we welcome Mr. Pedersen’s remarks
about convening a meeting of the Constitutional
Committee at the end of the year. We hope the
Committee will be able to resume its work and overcome
the prolonged stalemate.
On the security level, we express our concern about
the escalation of tensions in Syria this month, as well
as the flare-up of all the front lines, which demand a
continued call for de-escalation in all Syrian regions
and the cessation of acts of violence, especially with
the fragility of the situation and the continued lurking
by the terrorist organization Da’esh in any security
vacuum in order to re-establish its control over the
liberated areas.
We reiterate our firm position on the need to
preserve Syria’s independence, unity and territorial
integrity and establish lasting security and stability.
As for the humanitarian situation, the United Arab
Emirates welcomes the resumption of the delivery of
humanitarian aid through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

this month. Those important and positive developments
exemplify the results that can be achieved through
constructive dialogue and mutual understanding. In
that context, we appreciate the efforts of the Syrian
Government and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and their close cooperation over
the past months to reach the desired understanding at a
time when relief aid is most needed.
We look forward to the continuation of such
cooperation and coordination, in a manner that serves
the interests and needs of the brotherly Syrian people,
with whom we continue to stand in solidarity. We stress
the importance of the continued delivery of aid through
the other two border crossings, with the most recent
being the entry of six trucks through the Bab Al-Salam
crossing. That helps to ensure entry of the largest
possible amount of aid through all available means.
We continue to underscore the need to ensure
the regular and unhindered delivery of cross-line
aid and to increase such aid to a level commensurate
with considerable needs on the ground, especially
given the Syrian Government’s approval to open the
Sarmada and Saraqib crossings until February 2024.
The international community must consider all means
to halt economic collapse in Syria and reduce its tragic
repercussions on the humanitarian and social conditions
of the brotherly Syrian people, in particular given the
unprecedented decline of the Syrian currency.
We stress that reconstruction and helping Syria to
recover and prosper will also contribute to enhancing
security and stability in the entire region, not just in
Syria. Therefore, we must focus on early-recovery
projects, which remain the best way to bring about
tangible change on the ground, especially in terms of
infrastructure rehabilitation. That will help to provide
Syrians with the necessities for decent living and create
the conditions conducive to the voluntary and safe
return of refugees. We again emphasize the need to
support demining activities in Syria as part of those
projects to protect civilians.
In conclusion, we underline that the current stage
is a critical one for the Syrian people. We must put
their interests above any other considerations, pave
the way to end their severe suffering and enable them
to live in security, peace and dignity. Allowing the
Syrian file to remain hostage to geopolitical disputes
will not be in the interests of any party. Instead, it will
result in further deterioration of humanitarian, security

S/PV.9426

and economic conditions, whose repercussions will
affect the entire region. As the organ responsible for
maintaining international peace and security, we must
prevent that outcome.
Before I end my statement, as this is the last
meeting in which the Permanent Representative of
Syria, Ambassador Bassam Sabbagh, will participate, I
would like to congratulate him on his new position and
wish him every success in his new duties.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and
Mozambique (A3).
We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and the
Director of Operations and Advocacy at the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Edem
Wosornu, for their briefings. Our appreciation also
goes to Ms. Su’ad Jarbawi for her perspectives, and
we welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Türkiye in today’s meeting.
More than a decade after the Arab Spring, Syria is
still marked by political instability and violence, with
devastating consequences for civilian lives and wellbeing. It is regrettable that there has been no meaningful
change in the situation in Syria, notwithstanding
international and regional efforts to end the conflict.
We are particularly concerned about the recent
uptick in violence in the northern part of the country,
including between rival militias, which has resulted in
the loss of 23 civilian lives and displaced more than
20,000 people. Equally worrisome is the reported
heavy shelling on the front lines earlier this month in
northern Syria.
The vast majority of the victims of the continuous
conflict are women and children, as well as
humanitarian workers. We deplore that unnecessary
violence, which undermines peace efforts. It is vital
that all parties honour the nationwide ceasefire and
respect the protection of civilians, humanitarian
workers and civilian infrastructure, in line with
international humanitarian law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions.
As we have often said, there is no military solution to
the inordinately protracted crisis in Syria. We therefore
reiterate that the most viable avenue for sustainable
peace and stability is a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned
inclusive political process. Such a process must involve

23-2798113/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

all segments and actors of Syrian society, including
women, and meet the aspirations of the Syrian people,
undertaken with the facilitation of the United Nations
and the support of the international community.
Now more than ever before, we implore the
parties and stakeholders to inject a new lease on life
into the fragile political process, including through
three elements.
First, we urge a return to the Syrian-led, Syrianowned United Nations-facilitated small body of the
Constitutional Committee meetings. The parties
need to agree on the modalities for the resumption of
talks as soon as possible to create the right conditions
for the much-awaited political process. They must
demonstrate political will and commitment to address
key and substantive issues of concern to move the
process forward.
Secondly, we call for an enhanced role by regional
stakeholders in support of the political process. It is our
hope that the contact group of the League of Arab States
on Syria will work closely with the Special Envoy to
give fresh impetus to the political process. That should
be in line with resolution 2254 (2015), which remains
the foremost road map for working towards the desired
political solution, in a manner that takes into account
the interests of the widest spectrum of the Syrian
population, including women and civil society.
Thirdly, while we welcome the role of the various
stakeholders in the quest for a solution to the Syrian
crisis, we underscore the need for coordination of the
various efforts, such as the Astana format and the
contact group of the League of Arab States, under the
auspices of the Special Envoy, to ensure the coherence
and effectiveness of the various interventions. In that
regard, we reiterate our support for the efforts of the
Special Envoy, particularly his step-for-step initiative,
and call on the parties to engage constructively with
him in his quest to find a sustainable solution to the
Syrian conflict.
Regarding the dire humanitarian situation in Syria,
the A3 notes with concern that it has been compounded
significantly by the deteriorating state of the economy.
Consequently, millions of Syrians remain food insecure
and, as we have heard during today’s briefing, almost
half of the population is considered food insecure,
while others require nutrition assistance and have no
access to potable water.
14/22

27/09/2023

Recent cuts in assistance by the World Food
Programme are further exacerbating the plight of
many Syrians, with millions no longer benefiting from
critical support, while those who benefit have only
half of their needs met. It is worrisome that the dire
situation has become a driver of other social ills that
compel people to adopt negative coping mechanisms,
including early marriage.
The humanitarian situation in Syria demands our
urgent and collective action. The Syrian humanitarian
response plan remains 70 per cent underfunded, and
we urgently appeal to the international community to
come to the aid of the Syrian people. The people of
Syria deserve our support, especially at such a critical
time as they recover from the devastating impact of
the February earthquake and the coronavirus diseases
pandemic, amid the unrelenting violence. With that in
mind, the A3 reaffirms its steadfast support for the use
of all modalities to deliver aid to every person in need
in Syria. The cross-border aid mechanism, as well as
cross-line deliveries, remains crucial to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian people. We renew our call on
the parties to work closely with the United Nations to
create a safe and secure environment for the expansion
of cross-line support.
In that regard, we were pleased to learn that crossborder missions to north-west Syria have continued
despite the Council’s inability to renew resolution
2672 (2023). We welcome the delivery of humanitarian
assistance through the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam
crossings. Given the dire humanitarian situation in
the north-western part of the country, the 49 and
16 trucks that have entered Syria through the two
crossing, respectively, since 19 September will provide
life-saving support and help alleviate the suffering of
many people. In order to reduce continued dependence
on external aid, we renew our call on donors to increase
funding for early-recovery and livelihood activities as
a medium- to long-term alternative to periodic support.
In conclusion, the A3 reiterates the fact that
resolution 2254 (2015) remains the most workable
solution to the conflict. Progress on the political process
will open the much-awaited pathway to peace, which
can be realized through a nationwide ceasefire and a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned United Nations facilitated
political process. As the country’s crisis has entered
its second decade, the A3 expresses its solidarity with
the Syrian people, as they continue their search for
peace, and reaffirms its support for Syria’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence.
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9426

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the information provided by Special
Envoy Pedersen; the Director of Operations and
Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), Ms. Wosornu; and
Ms. Su’ad Jarbawi, regional Vice-President of the
civil society organization the International Rescue
Committee. I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of Syria, Türkiye and Iran at
this meeting.

response plan. The funding crisis threatens to cut short
food and medicine delivery operations, as well as the
implementation of early-recovery projects.

My delegation acknowledges the efforts of the
Special Envoy in ensuring that peace diplomacy is the
only way forward in the political negotiation process
to resolve the conflict, which has upended the lives of
the Syrian people for 12 years. It is important to regain
the trust of the parties to establish an environment that
enables relaunching the meetings of the Constitutional
Committee, the step-for-step negotiation plan and
the implementation of other measures in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains one
of gravest in the world, with conditions for millions
of people continuing to deteriorate. Over the summer
months, heat waves have compounded the suffering
of the population across the country, especially those
displaced and living in camps in the north-east and
north-west of the country. Water shortages, primarily
driven by the ongoing fuel shortages, hostilities and
the reduction of humanitarian services, have pushed
families to their limit. Across Syria, acute hunger
continues unabated; 12.1 million people are facing
acute food insecurity and, due to underfunding of the
humanitarian response plan, approximately 2.5 million
are no longer receiving food or cash support through
the United Nations. Children are suffering from
chronic malnutrition, poor sanitation and the absence
of education. Early and forced marriages persist —
negative coping mechanisms for families that are often
used to alleviate financial hardship or mitigate risks to
family honour amid growing rates of sexual violence.

We believe that, at the very least, political action
must result in stability and good governance through
the implementation of national, regional and global
strategies; relaunching economic activity in order
to decrease the dependence of millions of people
on humanitarian assistance; the establishment of
accountability and transitional justice mechanisms to
provide answers to the families of those who have been
murdered, disappeared or arbitrarily deprived of their
freedom; and the re-establishment of the social fabric,
based on the inclusion of the greatest number of social
and political sectors at all stages of the negotiation,
including in particular the full, equitable and
meaningful participation of women and young people.
We hope that the unconditional opening of the
cross-border operations for access to north-west Syria,
as well as the guarantees for the security and the
freedom of movement of the personnel of the United
Nations and its partner agencies on the ground, will
continue indefinitely. Within that framework, we
believe that the information that OCHA can provide
to the Security Council continues to be important. The
lack of access to safe water sources, the spike in the
number of cholera cases, the increase in the number of
people suffering from food insecurity and the growing
number of displaced women and girls at risk of genderbased violence are realities that will only get worse with
the onset of winter. Given the situation, we urge donors
to continue to honour their pledges to the humanitarian

Lastly, we reiterate the call on all actors to contribute
to national reconciliation and development cooperation.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I thank Special Envoy Pedersen
and Director Wosornu for their briefings before the
Security Council today. I also thank Ms. Jarbawi for
sharing her experience and valuable insights.

The outlook for the rest of 2023 looks bleak, as
sharp increases in food basket prices, the non-renewal
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative and currency
depreciation are pushing an even greater number of
Syrians towards economic calamity. Women and girls
remain disproportionately impacted by the worsening
situation. As such, an urgent increase in humanitarian
funding is now required to prevent the total collapse
of basic humanitarian, medical and social services
throughout the country. Unimpeded access and scaledup operations are critical to stave off the most acute
cumulative humanitarian consequences ever faced by
the Syrian people.
Malta is pleased by the resumption of humanitarian
cross-border operations at Bab Al-Hawa. That vital
crossing is critical to providing for the almost 4 million
Syrians in acute need in the north-west. We expect
that the agreement between the United Nations and
Damascus for all three crossings will be respected and

23-2798115/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

extended for as long as those needs persist. We also
call on all relevant stakeholders to comply with their
obligations under international law to facilitate the
unimpeded passage of aid to all areas of the north-west
through Bab Al-Hawa.
At the heart of the many and varied humanitarian
needs is the continued political paralysis and military
conflict that drives them. Across the country, we note
the recent demonstrations in the south, the troubling
tensions in the north-east between the Syrian Democratic
Forces and tribal communities, as well as continued
air strikes in the north-west. Only a United Nationsfacilitated political process, in line with resolution 2254
(2015), will allow for the change needed to address the
root causes of the crisis that Syria continues to face.
All actors, including the League of Arab States, must
support the efforts and engagement of the Special Envoy
in encouraging Damascus to positively respond to the
steps-for-steps initiative. Most relevant to advancing
the stalled political process is the resumption of the
Constitutional Committee. The deadlock that has
characterized the Committee is deeply regrettable, as it
remains the only format that convenes all parties together
for dialogue. In that respect, we are pleased to hear today
plans to reconvene that vital format before the end of the
year. We sincerely hope that all stakeholders, especially
Damascus, can find the political will to engage in a
meaningful manner and make significant steps towards
ending this devastating and seemingly endless war.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Mr. Pedersen, Ms. Wosornu and Ms. Jarbawi for
their briefings.
The war continues in Syria with complete impunity,
and the violence remains widespread. This war has
repercussions on the entire region, which hosts several
million refugees and is suffering the repercussions of the
captagon trafficking orchestrated by the Syrian regime.
Instability also fuels terrorism. I reiterate France’s
support for Mr. Pedersen’s actions and mediation efforts.
There will be no just and lasting solution in Syria until
a credible and inclusive political process is initiated
based on resolution 2254 (2015). The voices of those
demonstrating in Al-Suwayda and throughout the rest
of Syria is consistent with the same. The international
community expects concrete and verifiable actions from
the regime. The conditions for the return of refugees
must be met. Damascus has still not presented concrete
commitments in that direction. France reiterates its support
for the countries that welcome those millions of Syrians.
16/22

27/09/2023

The resumption of the delivery of humanitarian aid
through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing point is good news.
I commend the efforts of Martin Griffiths and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
which made that possible. However, Russia’s position
on the renewal of the cross-border mechanism last
July arouses legitimate concern among humanitarian
actors, in a context that has grown considerably worse
since the 6 February earthquakes. It is essential that
the Security Council remain seized of this file, and
it would be desirable for the Secretariat to be able to
report regularly and in writing on the humanitarian
response in Syria.
Finally, those responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity must be held accountable for their
actions. France welcomes the work of the international,
impartial and independent mechanism. It also supports
the recently created independent humanitarian
institution on missing persons, which aims to help the
families of the disappeared in Syria to learn the fate of
their loved ones.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen, Ms. Wosornu and Ms. Jarbawi for their
valuable inputs.
Syria continues to be in a severe multifaceted crisis.
Its people have endured over 12 years of war, perpetual
displacement, terrorism, devastating earthquakes and
a deteriorating economic and humanitarian situation.
Despite the acceleration of regional diplomatic efforts,
including Syria’s return to the League of Arab States
and the efforts of the Arab contact group, we see little
sense of urgency from the Syrian Government to
genuinely pursue the political process. We therefore
strongly urge all parties, particularly the Syrian
authorities, to engage more seriously in good faith
with Special Envoy Pedersen’s step-for-step approach
and to implement resolution 2254 (2015). We hope to
see the Constitutional Committee, regardless of venue,
reconvened at the earliest.
Given continued insecurity and instability,
conditions are not yet in place for the dignified, safe
and voluntary return of refugees. Host countries, such
as Jordan and Lebanon, are reaching their capacity.
King Abdullah of Jordan clearly stated during highlevel week that “the fact is that refugees are far from
returning. On the contrary, more Syrians are likely
to leave their country as the crisis persists”. With
no prospect of a political solution, the humanitarian
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

situation remains dire. Japan is encouraged by United
Nations efforts for the recent resumption of crossborder aid operations via the Bab Al-Hawa crossing,
the good news of which we have just heard from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). We are also pleased that so far this year over
4,000 trucks with aid have crossed into north-west
Syria using the Bab Al-Hawa, Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai
border crossings. However, it is crucial that all United
Nations aid deliveries, particularly at border crossings,
be transparent, consistently verified and sufficiently
monitored to ensure their humanitarian nature. Japan
strongly encourages a collective effort to respond to
OCHA’s appeal and to contribute to the humanitarian
response plan, which will help enable United Nations
aid operations in the north-west, including cross-line
deliveries and early-recovery and livelihood projects.
We are seriously concerned that the international
community’s attentiveness may wane as the crisis
drags on.
Lastly, justice is one of the vital components of a
comprehensive and inclusive political solution. The fate
and whereabouts of all missing people must be clarified
to achieve national reconciliation and sustainable peace.
In accordance with the General Assembly’s decision to
establish an independent institution on missing persons
in Syria, Japan looks forward to soon receiving more
updates from the Secretary-General and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, including proposed terms of reference.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to join my colleagues in expressing our
thanks to Special Envoy Pedersen, Ms. Edem Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA),
and Ms. Jarbawi for their briefings.
Switzerland associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Brazil, our co-penholder on the
humanitarian issue. I would also like to echo the thanks
expressed to OCHA for its significant commitment.
Allow me to add a few points in my national
capacity on the political situation in Syria.
As all the briefers confirmed, the situation in
the country remains very worrisome. The security
situation, particularly in the north of the country, has a
major impact on the civilian population, who are all too
often the victims of direct or indiscriminate attacks.
Switzerland calls on all parties to respect, and ensure

S/PV.9426

respect for, international humanitarian law and the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution
in the conduct of hostilities. The introduction of a
nationwide ceasefire, as prescribed by resolution 2254
(2015), is more necessary and urgent than ever if the
country is to emerge from the deep humanitarian,
social and economic crisis in which it is plunged. We
also recall that Syria has an obligation to respect and
protect the human rights of every individual.
Switzerland welcomes Special Envoy Pedersen’s
recent contacts in the region, including in Damascus.
We hope that those contacts will advance his step-bystep approach, according to the mandate conferred
to him by the Security Council and put forward by
regional players in the wake of the Amman, Cairo and
Jeddah declarations this year. A substantial meeting
of the Constitutional Committee as soon as possible,
under the auspices of the Special Envoy, would be
an important step towards relaunching the political
process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). The
Council must also play a role in the fight against
impunity, which is another sine qua non condition for
lasting peace in Syria.
The demonstrations that have been taking place in
Al-Suwayda for several weeks now show that a political
solution to the conflict is still essential. Switzerland
calls for respect for the right to demonstrate freely and
to make one’s voice heard without being subjected to
repression or violence.
Switzerland consistently supports close cooperation
between the Office of the Special Envoy and the Civil
Society Support Room. The aspirations, grievances
and expectations of civil society, and of Syrian women
in particular, some of whom I have had the pleasure
and honour of meeting with on several occasions, and
whose tremendous commitment and courage I have
always admired, must be included in the efforts to
achieve a lasting political solution. Those platforms
act as important channels for communicating the
reality on the ground in Syria to international bodies.
In that respect, Switzerland reiterates its support for
civil society organizations active inside and outside
Syria, which play a crucial role in easing the persisting
tensions and conflict in the country.
Switzerland takes note of Syria’s decision on
4 September to abolish its military field courts. We
call for that measure to be effectively implemented
in order to prevent future arbitrary arrests and forced

23-2798117/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

disappearances of civilians, and for it not to undermine
the search for missing persons. Furthermore, the
implementation by all the parties of confidence-building
measures, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
as well as the release of detainees and the clarification
of the fate of missing persons, are essential to pave the
way for reconciliation in the country.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Wosornu
for their briefings. We value the perspective brought
by Ms. Jarbawi, which gave us a glimpse of the painful
reality that is daily life in Syria.
After more than a decade, Syria remains a security
nightmare, a humanitarian catastrophe, an economic
abyss, a financial ruin and a geopolitical mess — a
most bleak prospect. Since our most recent meeting on
this topic (see S/PV.9403), the overall situation has not
improved, and progress is nowhere to be seen. The
reality continues to be marked not only by the continued
instability, political stalemate, atrocities, human
suffering and grief, but also by the regime’s persistence
to cling to power at all costs. It is the very same
leadership that initiated what became a tragedy for an
entire nation, and which stands as a major impediment
to change by systematically undermining the political
process as foreseen in resolution 2254 (2015).
The humanitarian situation needs no further
description. Albania has repeatedly called for aid delivery
to be based on United Nations principles, including
monitoring and reporting mechanisms — which should
continue — and for humanitarian-access authorizations
not to be politicized. An absurd veto terminated the
Security Council’s authorization for cross-border
delivery in the north-west of the country, adding
insecurity to the unpredictability.
The humanitarian needs will not stop on
31 December. But any future renewal of the use of Bab
Al-Hawa will be subject to the mood in Damascus. And
knowing what it has been capable of — namely, the
worst — we, and those dependent on it, have reason
to remain utterly worried. With that in mind, we have
supported the efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for the continuation of
life-saving humanitarian deliveries through the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing. The recent resumption of those
deliveries is most welcome. Nonetheless, we continue to
believe that a product of the Council is needed in order
18/22

27/09/2023

to provide, in a predictable and sustainable manner, the
delivery of the humanitarian aid by the United Nations
and its international partners.
We support the efforts of the Special Envoy
and his step-for-step approach to bring the political
process back on track based on resolution 2254 (2015).
We consider that a window to the future, the key to
unlocking the path to sustainable peace and a viable
exit out of this never-ending conflict — which must be
done through a functioning and active Constitutional
Committee. Peace and stability in Syria will not come
about if all stakeholders do not come together and
act genuinely and in unison under the guidance of
the United Nations to secure a nationwide ceasefire,
advance the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
and create the conditions necessary for the voluntary,
safe and dignified return of refugees.
Albania remains deeply worried about the
Government forces’ continued arbitrary arrests,
detentions, torture and ill-treatment of people and
about the whereabouts of the more than 130,000
Syrians missing as a result of systematic enforced
disappearances. We fully supported the General
Assembly’s establishment in June of an independent
institution to clarify the fate and whereabouts of all
missing persons. That issue affects millions of Syrian
victims, survivors and families, who are seeking to
clarify the fate of their missing loved ones. And until
that closure is achieved, it will remain an obstacle
to peace.
Despite the propaganda of the regime, people in
Syria are unhappy and remain without prospects. There
is a huge gap between the regime’s rhetoric and the
ordinary people living in fear of an insecure tomorrow
as they try to survive the economic abyss. The protests
in southern Syria are a wake-up call as to the urgent
need for political change. Let us not forget that, 13 years
ago, peaceful protests, which were met with brutality by
the regime, led to conflict, civil war and to the situation
the endures to this day. People are crying out for food
on the table, affordable medicine, fuel, electricity and
water and other basic commodities, while the regime is
investing in drug production and trafficking.
I would like to conclude by reminding the Council
that we should never forget that Syrians have been
victims of violations of international humanitarian
and international human rights law on a massive and
systematic scale. Hundreds of thousands have been
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9426

killed, half the population has been forcefully displaced
and deep scars are everywhere. Therefore, in order to
secure a path to sustainable peace, there must be no
impunity for crimes committed. Peace in Syria will be
built through sustained efforts, and accountability is a
part of that.

condemn the continued silence in that regard by some
States that declare themselves protectors of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
which makes them complicit with the perpetrators of
those crimes and clearly shows the extent to which they
apply double standards.

Many times, including today, many of us have
highlighted what would happen if all the actors in Syria
came together to work in good faith for their future.
Unfortunately, we are, and continue to be, left with the
desolate assessment of what Syria is and would further
become because of the stalemate if — as Special Envoy
Pedersen said earlier — there is no shift in the mindset.
Both aspects are clear, and a clear choice needs to
be made — by the Syrians, first. We reiterate our
unwavering support for the just quest of Syrians for a
better future by rebuilding a decent life in freedom and
dignity for themselves, their families and their children.

Certain permanent members of the Council have
committed — and continue to commit — flagrant
violations against Syria. The United States of America
maintains an illegitimate and unjustified military
presence on Syrian territory. It is supporting separatist
militias that violate Syria’s territorial integrity and is
using terrorist groups in the Al-Rukban camp to play a
destructive role and cause an unnecessary humanitarian
crisis. The United States is also sending its delegations
to illegally sneak into north-eastern Syria, the most
recent of which was the visit by a United States
delegation headed by Ethan Goldrich, Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State. It is also plundering Syria’s national
resources, stealing Syrian oil, gas, and wheat in broad
daylight and depriving their Syrian owners of them. The
United States has caused the Syrian oil sector direct
and indirect losses totalling $115 billion. We therefore
call for the United States to be held accountable and
compelled to pay compensation for those losses.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): For years,
the Syrian Arab Republic has been facing serious
challenges caused by terrorism exported from different
regions of the world, the illegal military presence of
United States and Turkish forces and repeated Israeli
air attacks. All of that has been accompanied by brazen
interference in our internal affairs and has coincided
with the imposition of an economic blockade and illegal
and inhumane unilateral sanctions.
All those challenges are flagrant violations of
the Charter of the United Nations, the principles of
international law and international humanitarian
law, along with all the Security Council resolutions
on Syria, which stipulate respect for the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria,
leading to instability and insecurity in Syria and the
entire region.
The Israeli occupation forces continue their
aggression against Syria’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity by targeting and bombing infrastructure, vital
civilian facilities and airports. Since the beginning of
this year until present, the Israeli occupation forces
have carried out 30 air attacks on such civilian targets.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the strongest
terms all those crimes and attacks by Israel. We equally

Concurrently, the United States and its European
allies continue to impose unilateral coercive
measures on all vital sectors, preventing the Syrian
people from having access to food, health services,
energy, transportation, agricultural production and
causing great and unprecedented economic and
humanitarian suffering.
In addition to all that, this very morning, the
United States representative reaffirmed before Council
members the illegal, illegitimate and shameful position
taken by the Administration of former United States
President Donald Trump announced in March 2019,
which recognized Israel’s sovereignty, the occupying
Power, over the occupied Arab Syrian Golan, in clear
violation of international law and the relevant United
Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 497 (1981).
All those illegal and illegitimate practices that we
have drawn attention are only a few examples of what
the United States is doing in Syria. The United States
lectures us at every meeting about the need to abide by
the Charter of the United Nations and the importance of
defending the principles of international law. It simply
tries to fling mud at others while shamefully evading

23-2798119/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

the devastating repercussions of its policy of creative
chaos and destruction that it has spread in our region
and in other regions of the world.
We listened to the briefing given by Mr. Pedersen,
Special Envoy to Syria. Mr. Pedersen recently visited
Damascus and met with the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates, who affirmed to Mr. Pedersen Syria’s
commitment to a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political
process, free from external interference and on the
basis of respect for Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity. In that regard, I would
like to note that we continue to participate in dialogue
and coordination with the Special Envoy. We hope that
his efforts will allow the Constitutional Committee to
resume its meetings as soon as possible.
We also listened to Ms. Wosornu’s briefing. I would
like to point out that, while the Syrian Government
granted permission to the United Nations on 13 July to
use the Bab Al-Hawa crossing to ensure the continued
delivery of humanitarian aid to Syrian civilians in
the north-west of the country, the first convoy used
the crossing only on 19 September, in conditions
detrimental to the United Nations — more than two
months after permission was granted — owing to
obstruction by the terrorist groups that are present in
that area and that have taken the Syrian civilians there
hostage. In the meantime, we have not heard a word
from those countries that have caused us headaches by
repeatedly proclaiming themselves eager to meet the
humanitarian needs of Syrians.
While my delegation thanks Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for the efforts he has made in this area,
it stresses that the Syrian Arab Republic, by permitting
the use of that crossing, in addition to granting
permission to use the Bab Al-Salam and Al-Rai border
crossings, along with using the Sarmada and Saraqib
crossings, for the delivery of cross-line humanitarian
shipments internally, is guaranteeing sufficient
humanitarian access to meet the humanitarian needs
of Syrians in north-west Syria as is required. However,
maximum pressure must be exerted on terrorist groups
in that area to prevent them from exploiting those in
need of the humanitarian aid or diverting it from its
intended purpose. It will also be necessary to provide
sufficient, sustained and predictable funding to the
relevant United Nations programmes and agencies,
given that the issue of declining funding has become
a matter of genuine concern regarding the capacity of
those programmes and agencies to fulfil their mandates.
20/22

27/09/2023

Out of concern for its citizens, the Syrian Government
has opened five crossings, while it was demanded of us
that we open only two crossings. Do Council members
remember that?
With regard to the issue of the return of refugees,
I would like to underscore that Syria welcomes the
return of every Syrian refugee who has been forced to
leave the country because of armed terrorist groups.
The Syrian Government has taken several decisions to
that end, and we are cooperating with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Arab contact group to achieve that objective. In that
context, we call on Western countries to work to create
conditions conducive to the voluntary and dignified
return of Syrians to their cities and villages, including
by implementing early-recovery projects and financing
efforts to clear mines and explosive remnants, instead of
obstructing the return of refugees and politicizing that
dossier to serve their narrow political agendas.
My delegation stresses that improving the
humanitarian situation in Syria requires providing
sustainable solutions to support Syrians, which would
reduce dependence on life-saving humanitarian aid and
increase their resilience. It also requires the immediate
and unconditional lifting of the unilateral coercive
measures imposed by the United States of America and
the European Union on Syria and its people.
Finally, before I conclude my statement, and given
that this statement is my final one before the Security
Council in my capacity as the Permanent Representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic, I would like to express my
thanks and appreciation to those sisterly and friendly
Council members that have provided support to Syria
and spared no effort in standing by its side in the face of
interference in its internal affairs and all attempts to exploit
and politicize the humanitarian situation in the country. I
call on other Council members to reconsider their way of
dealing with Syria and to adopt a constructive approach
that would truly contribute to finding solutions to the
problems we face, rather than fuelling the situation and
destroying what has been achieved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Ms. Wosornu, Director of Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their updated briefings. We
also note the statement made by Ms. Jarbawi.
23-27981

27/09/2023

The situation in the Middle East

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
extremely dire. One of the most pressing challenges
facing Syria today is its deeply troubled economy,
which is primarily the result of unilateral sanctions
and illicit resource exploitation — both of which
disproportionately affect women, children and
other Syrians.
It is vital that humanitarian aid and efforts to
rebuild Syria not be used as tools of pressure against
the country. Iran has consistently supported the
provision of aid to the Syrian people and underlines
the importance of delivering humanitarian assistance
in a fair and transparent manner. We commend the
United Nations and its partners for their unwavering
commitment to assisting the Syrian people and working
diligently towards alleviating their immense suffering.
We firmly believe that the primary solution to the
Syrian crisis lies in political means, as military actions
will only further complicate the situation.
We stress the significance of resuming the meetings
of the Constitutional Committee as an effective
mechanism for advancing the political process. We hope
that differences regarding the Committee’s meeting
venue can be resolved promptly, allowing its work to
resume. The continued functioning of the Committee
is vital, with its venue being of lesser importance. The
role of the United Nations should remain supportive,
with the entire process under Syrian leadership and
ownership. In that context, we support the ongoing
efforts of Mr. Pedersen and his engagements with the
parties concerned to resolve the impasse within the
Constitutional Committee.
Unfortunately, after 12 long years of the Syrian
crisis, we continue to witness the presence of active
terrorist groups within Syria, posing a severe threat to
both its security and that of its neighbouring countries.
While recognizing the legitimate security concerns
of Syria’s neighbouring countries, it is essential to
emphasize that the fight against terrorism should not be
utilized as a pretext to violate Syria’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. In the meantime, the illegal presence
of foreign military forces within Syria has only added
to the instability of the country and the broader region.
We strongly condemn the ongoing attacks by the
Israeli regime on Syrian territory. The Israeli regime
commits such aggression to divert the attention of
the international community from the daily atrocious
crimes it is committing against the Palestinian people.

S/PV.9426

We reiterate our principled stance of supporting
the expedited return of refugees to Syria. At present,
there exists a significant number of Syrian refugees
in Türkiye, Lebanon and Jordan. Their return should
be facilitated through the cooperative efforts of all
host Governments.
Addressing the challenges faced by Syrian refugees
requires the establishment of essential infrastructure,
including electricity, water, housing and education. The
role of the United Nations, particularly the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
is pivotal in that regard.
Iran is committed to collaborating with its partners
within the Astana process, striving to achieve lasting
and sustainable normalization in Syria. The Astana
process, serving as a framework for peaceful dialogue,
has achieved significant milestones. It remains the
collective duty of our three countries as guarantors to
uphold and enhance that framework.
During the seventy-eighth session of the General
Assembly on 22 September, Iran hosted a ministerial
meeting with Russia and Türkiye as guarantor countries
of the Astana format, with the participation of the Special Envoy. Among various priorities, the Foreign Ministers stressed the importance of facilitating the dignified
and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons to their respective homes in Syria. They also expressed their shared concerns over the dire humanitarian
situation in Syria and called for unconditional humanitarian assistance devoid of political considerations. They
support the bilateral agreement between the United Nations and the Syrian Government, which allows for the
delivery of essential humanitarian aid via Bab Al-Hawa
for a six-month period, providing crucial relief to those
in dire need.
To conclude, we warmly welcome and totally support
the recent positive developments in Syria’s diplomatic
relations, both on the regional and international fronts.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I thank Mr. Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria; Ms. Wosornu,
Director of Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Jarbawi
for their statements.
Last week, we all listened to world leaders as they
addressed the most urgent problems affecting international peace and security, global prosperity and human

23-2798121/22

S/PV.9426

The situation in the Middle East

rights. Sadly, despite its grave political, humanitarian
and security repercussions, the 12-year Syrian conflict
has not been placed where it should be on that list of
global priorities. The reality is that the Syrian crisis is
not a frozen conflict, and it would be collectively remiss
to treat it as such.
Active conflict is still ongoing on the ground in Syria
today. The population is faced with deep economic deprivation, on top of a humanitarian crisis of catastrophic
proportions where 7 out of every 10 people depend on
international humanitarian assistance for survival. The
situation is further exacerbated by the earthquakes in
February. Since the beginning of the conflict, hundreds
of thousands of people have been killed. Millions have
been forced to flee their homes and have become refugees or internally displaced.
Just as worrisome is that the territorial integrity of
the country has come under imminent threat due to terrorist organizations, primarily now the Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units (PKK/YPG). As the
conflict remains unresolved, new elements of instability are added to the picture. Recent developments on a
wide spectrum, ranging from ongoing anti-regime protests in the south to armed clashes in the north-east and
the spread of captagon production and trafficking, once
again highlight the necessity to accelerate the efforts to
find a viable solution to the Syrian conflict.
A comprehensive settlement of the Syrian conflict
requires simultaneous progress in various areas. Those
include revitalizing the political process in line with
resolution 2254 (2015); disrupting the malign and separatist agenda of terrorist organizations in order to preserve Syria’s territorial integrity and unity; and creating
conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
Syrian refugees. Without national reconciliation and a
new social contract, Syria will continue to be prone to
conflict. Therefore, it is essential that the Syrian opposition be included in all efforts towards a political solution.
The Constitutional Committee, which was created
as a result of the efforts of the Astana guarantors, is the
most effective platform to bring together the Syrian parties. As we reiterated in the ministerial meeting of the
Astana platform last week in New York, we are committed to engaging and working together for the reactivation of the Constitutional Committee so that it will start
producing tangible results. We continue to support the
efforts of Special Envoy Pedersen to make progress on
the political tract.

22/22

27/09/2023

The continued presence of terrorist organizations in
Syria poses a vital threat to the country and its neighbours, primarily Türkiye, as well as to the wider region.
In fact, the threat of PKK terrorism to Syria’s territorial
integrity has never been more alarming than it is today.
Recent clashes between Arab tribes and PKK/YPG have
shown once again that the activities of that organization and the external support it continues to receive is a
major source of instability in Syria. The oppressive and
discriminatory practices and human rights violations of
that organization are a matter of public knowledge now
and have also been extensively reported by the United
Nations. We urge all sides to adopt a holistic, long-term
approach and disengage from those separatist entities,
which do not have any place in the future of Syria.
For almost a decade, the United Nations cross-border humanitarian aid mechanism has played an indispensable role in delivering urgent humanitarian assistance
to millions of Syrians in need. The mechanism, authorized by the Security Council, was unique in terms of the
level of predictability, transparency and effectiveness.
Therefore, it is important to ensure that the United Nations cross-border assistance continues to function in
line with its long-standing modus operandi.
All sides will benefit from maintaining the reporting and monitoring elements of the mechanism, which
are critical for the neutrality and oversight of the operation. We are pleased that aid deliveries through the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing have finally resumed after a weekslong halt. All parties must fulfil their responsibilities for
the uninterrupted flow of cross-border aid as long as it
is needed, including through scaled-up donor funding.
Türkiye, for its part, will continue to coordinate and
closely cooperate with the United Nations and its partners towards that objective.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Türkiye is entitled to take appropriate measures against direct
and imminent threats posed to its security by terrorist
organizations operating in Syria. As such, we will continue to exercise our inherent right of self-defence, as
outlined in Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations and relevant Security Council resolutions.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

23-27981
