S/PV.8669

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8669

th meeting
Wednesday, 20 November 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Norman-Chalet

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-37495 (E)
*1937495*

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, and Ms. Tania Hary, Executive Director of
Gisha, Legal Centre for Freedom of Movement.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and previous
practice in that regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Mr. Mladenov.
Mr. Mladenov: We meet today in the aftermath of
the most serious recent escalation between Israel and
Palestinian militants in Gaza. Although the immediate
crisis was defused, the situation remains highly volatile.
Following Israel’s targeted killing of Palestinian
Islamic Jihad (PIJ) Commander Baha Abu al-Ata in
Gaza, Palestinian militants launched more than 500
rockets towards Israel. This latest escalation was
preceded on 1 November by some 10 rockets that
were launched from Gaza towards Israel, one of them
hitting a house in Sderot city. While, according to the
Israel Defense Forces (IDF), 90 per cent of the rockets
were intercepted by the Iron Dome, those that landed
caused damage to residential and commercial property.
Seventy-eight Israelis were treated for injuries or shock.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars at
civilian population centres is unacceptable and must
stop immediately.
2/24

20/11/2019

In response to the rocket attacks, the IDF conducted
a number of strikes against PIJ and militant targets in
Gaza. Thirty-four Palestinians were killed, more than
20 of whom were identified by the IDF as militants and
including three women and eight children. One of the
fatalities was reportedly caused by a Palestinian rocket
falling short inside Gaza. In total, 109 people were
also injured.
Among the people killed in Gaza were eight
members of a family, who were killed in a single Israeli
strike. The IDF has reportedly admitted that their home
was mistakenly targeted. That is a tragic and heinous
incident and must be thoroughly and impartially
investigated. There is no justification for the killing of
civilians anywhere.
I want to recognize today the extraordinary effort
by Egypt, working closely with the United Nations, to
ensure that calm in Gaza was restored after 48 hours of
hostilities. Had our efforts failed, we would certainly
be in the midst of another war that would be far worse
than the terrible conflict in 2014. However, the dangers
have not passed. Although for now the arrangements
that came into effect in the early hours of 14 November
are holding, sporadic rocket launches have continued,
prompting Israeli retaliation.
But there are also other risks. Israeli closures and
intra-Palestinian division feed a desperate reality.
Militant activity, rocket fire and retaliatory air strikes
constantly risk more violence. Over the past year and
a half, the United Nations has worked hard to prevent
escalation and to implement the United Nations package
for Gaza as endorsed by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians (AHLC). As a result of that work, the
electricity supply was restored to an average of 13 hours
per day; more than 16,000 temporary jobs were created;
and work is progressing on reviving an industrial zone
to create long-term economic opportunities. All those
measures have admittedly eased tensions but they fall
far short of what is required in terms of both financial
resources as well as political commitment by Palestinian
leaders and measures by Israel.
Gaza ultimately requires a political solution.
Militant activity cannot continue to undermine the
chances for peace and development. Israel cannot
continue with its policy of closures that stifle
development. Palestinian leaders cannot continue to
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

avoid the devastating consequences of their internal
political division.
I take this opportunity to thank those in the
international community who have contributed to the
implementation of the AHLC plan and call on all to
increase their support to United Nations programmes
on the ground. Most urgent is the need to address the
collapse of the health system in Gaza.
Nevertheless,
our
important
humanitarian
engagement must not divert us from the political goal
of helping Palestinians to develop freely, without
relentless occupation, and Israelis to live in security,
free from the fear of terror and rockets. The only way to
ensure this goal is to work towards and achieve a twoState solution — one that is based on relevant United
Nations resolutions and in which Gaza is an integral
part of the future State of Palestine.
Protests in Gaza at the Gaza perimeter fence have
also continued, with a small number of participants
engaging in violent activities. The IDF responded
with riot dispersal means and live fire, injuring over
300 people, including women and children. The Israeli
security forces must exercise maximum restraint and
use lethal force only when it is strictly necessary, as
a last resort, and in response to an imminent threat of
death or serious injury, in accordance with international
law. Hamas must ensure that protests at the fence
remain peaceful and prevent provocations.
If we want a way out of this crisis that leads to
something more than just another ceasefire, the road
is clear. There must be no more firing of rockets,
retaliatory strikes or provocations; the understandings
that sustain calm in Gaza must be upheld; efforts must
be redoubled to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and lift
the closures; and the focus must be towards a long-term,
sustainable political solution that includes allowing the
Palestinian people throughout the occupied territory to
vote and elect their leaders for the first time since 2006.
In recent weeks, I have engaged with senior
Palestinian officials and different factions and am
encouraged that all sides have moved from their
entrenched positions and made important concessions
towards making elections a more realistic prospect.
Renewing the legitimacy of all national institutions
is important for the future of the Palestinian people.
In my discussions, I have emphasized all the critical
elements required for elections to be credible. First,
they must be organized across the occupied Palestinian

S/PV. 8669

territory — in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and Gaza — in line with the Palestinian Basic Law,
electoral legislation and international best practices.
Secondly, both legislative and presidential elections
are necessary and should be held within a clearly
identified and reasonable timeframe. Thirdly, broad
intra-Palestinian agreement must be reached on the
modalities of holding elections.
As Palestinians hopefully accelerate their efforts to
hold elections, the Israeli-Palestinian political deadlock
continues to manifest itself in the continuation of
negative trends on the ground. On 1 November, some
2,600 housing units were advanced by the Civil
Administration High Planning Committee, including
182 units in Mevo’ot Yeriho, an outpost in the
Jordan Valley that the Israeli Government decided in
September to retroactively legalize as a new settlement.
Other notable plans include 382 units in the Dolev
settlement, west of Ramallah, and 609 units in the large
urban settlement of Beitar Illit, west of Bethlehem.
I take the opportunity to reiterate that we regret
the announcement made on 18 November by the United
States that it no longer views settlements as inconsistent
with international law. The United Nations position
remains unchanged. As per resolution 2334 (2016),
Israeli settlement activities are a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of the two-State solution and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures have also continued across the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Citing the
absence of Israeli-issued building permits, which are
nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain in Area C
and East Jerusalem, Israeli authorities demolished or
seized 48 structures, resulting in the displacement of
101 Palestinians, including 46 children. This practice
must immediately cease.
Violence also continues across the occupied
Palestinian territory. In the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, 46 Palestinians, including nine children,
and three Israelis were injured in various incidents,
including during clashes, search-and-arrest operations
and settler-related violence. On 11 November, a 22-yearold Palestinian man was killed in circumstances that
indicate that he did not pose a threat. Such acts must
be thoroughly and impartially investigated and the
perpetrators held accountable. The IDF has reportedly

19-374953/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

launched an investigation into that incident. Four days
later on 15 November, a Palestinian journalist lost an
eye after being reportedly shot by the Israeli security
forces while covering a demonstration in the village of
Surif, north of Hebron.
I remain concerned by the continuing and
sometimes escalating settler-related violence. Attacks
on Palestinians and their property in the context of the
annual olive harvest have continued despite preventive
measures adopted by the Israeli authorities. These
attacks, along with the restrictions on Palestinian
farmers’ access to their land in areas adjacent to Israeli
settlements and behind the West Bank barrier, have
undermined agricultural livelihoods.
Despite the agreement reached last month between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority, which resulted in
the transfer of some $425 million of clearance revenues
to the Authority, the underlying disagreements
between the two parties remain, including over Israel’s
deductions. It remains critical that both sides engage
in a constructive manner with the goal of restoring the
revenue transfers in full, in line with the Paris Protocol
on Economic Relations. The United Nations stands
ready to assist that process.
In a positive development, on 11 November UNWomen, with support from the Government of Norway,
launched a $1.2-million programme to support the
advancement of the women and peace and security
agenda in Palestine, including the development of the
Palestinian national action plan for the next four years
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We have regularly updated the Council and its
members on the financial challenges that the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) continues to face. Cash flow
is reaching a record low. I welcome the extension of the
UNRWA mandate until 2023, as adopted by the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly on 15 November,
but given the stakes, I urge the swift mobilization of
support to enable the Agency to sustain its operations.
Turning now briefly to other developments
in the region, the situation in the Golan remains
calm. However, the continued violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement remain of
concern, particularly in this volatile time for the region.
On 19 November, the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) observed two unidentified
objects being fired from a location on the Alpha side
4/24

20/11/2019

and heard three explosions. The IDF informed UNDOF
that it had intercepted rockets fired from Syria. The
Syrian authorities informed UNDOF that they had no
knowledge of any firing of rockets. On 20 November,
the IDF carried out air strikes against what it described
as Iranian Quds Force and Syrian armed forces targets
in Syria. Further details of the developments in the
occupied Golan will be reported in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on UNDOF, to be submitted to the
Security Council on 3 December.
In Lebanon, peaceful nationwide and non-sectarian
demonstrations, triggered by frustration against
Government policies, led to the resignation of Prime
Minister Saad Hariri on 29 October. Security forces
have largely responded with restraint, allowing
peaceful demonstrations to continue despite heightened
tensions at roadblocks. After one month of unabated
protests, a political deadlock hinders the nomination
of a Prime Minister-designate and the formation of
a new Government, amidst a rapidly deteriorating
economic situation. The United Nations has called for
a swift formation of Government that is responsive
to the protestors’ aspirations and has the Parliament’s
backing. The United Nations also encourages the
Lebanese security forces to continue to protect
peaceful demonstrators.
In the area of operations of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), following
decreased joint operations with the Lebanese Armed
Forces prompted by the popular protests, UNIFIL’s
operations, in close coordination with the Lebanese
Armed Forces, returned to normal levels in early
November. The Council will be briefed on resolution
1701 (2006) on 25 November.
In closing, I would like to return to the issue of
the long-overdue Palestinian elections. The Palestinian
people have a right to vote and elect their leaders. For
too long, they have been denied that right and division
has set in. A whole generation’s voice for the future
has yet to be heard. Intra-Palestinian division is like
a cancer eating away at the aspiration for statehood,
peace and the commitment to democracy, rule of law
and human rights.
Elections are not a gift; they are a right. If elections
are to build unity, they must take place in Gaza and the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem. How can we heal
the devastating division if people in Gaza are not able to
vote for their future as well? The United Nations will do
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all that is necessary to support a successful Palestinian
election process, but we must be cognizant of broader
risks as well. The continuing risk of war threatens to
upend all our efforts to prevent escalation and revive a
political process. The United Nations will continue our
efforts to prevent another devastating conflict despite
all odds.
Upholding the international consensus on resolving
the conflict and all final status issues on the basis of
the two-State solution, as per relevant United Nations
resolutions, international law and mutual agreements,
is just as important. Unilateral moves fuel anger and
disillusionment and significantly undermine the
prospects for establishing a contiguous and viable
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as the future capital
of both States.
The President: I thank Mr. Mladenov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hary.
Ms. Hary: I thank the Council for the invitation to
be here today.
I was born in Haifa, in northern Israel, and became
a United States citizen at the age of five. My parents had
moved to Los Angeles in pursuit of a better life. Their
parents before them had fled to Israel to escape conflict
and poverty and, like most of us in this Chamber, I
believe, I took it for granted that the ability to travel
shaped every aspect of my life. I moved back to Israel
in June 2007, just days before Hamas took power in
Gaza and Israel’s subsequent imposition of a near total
lockdown on the Strip. Over the past 12 years, I have
seen the devastating impact of Israel’s closure policy on
Gaza but also on Israel. Three major military operations
and several smaller operations — like the one that we
saw last week — have taken the lives of thousands of
people. I do not believe that we are better off or safer
for it in Israel.
Gisha means “access” or “approach” in Hebrew. We
are the only Israeli human rights organization focusing
on the situation in Gaza and on how reality there is
shaped by our Government’s actions. The permanent
discourse about Gaza, especially in Israel but also at
the United Nations, revolves around terror or crisis.
We are lucky at Gisha to see nuance, entrepreneurship,
resilience and potential through our broad caseload
and our range of contacts. In my comments here today,
I hope to share a sober analysis with the Council of

S/PV. 8669

where we are, but I also hope to convey my optimism
about what the future could hold. There is much that can
be done to meaningfully alter course, given a broader
understanding of what is at stake and also political will.
Today, Israel continues to exercise control over
many aspects of daily life in Gaza. The Rafah crossing,
which connects Gaza to Egypt, is vital. However, Israel
controls all access to the West Bank, the movement
of commercial and humanitarian goods and Gaza’s
sea space, airspace, access to farmland, civilian
infrastructure and the Palestinian population registry.
In 2007, Israel further reduced access to a point of
closure. Entry of civilian goods was restricted, all exit
of goods was blocked and travel of people was allowed
only in what Israel called “exceptional humanitarian
cases”. Far beyond just protecting legitimate security
concerns, Israel defined its approach as economic
warfare and also the separation policy. It was an effort
to apply pressure and simultaneously reinforce Gaza’s
isolation from the West Bank, primarily to achieve
political goals.
Certain practices have changed, but overall the
picture remains the same. Israel believes that it can
manage the humanitarian situation in Gaza and it has
an interest in maintaining the physical and political
fragmentation of Palestinians, which allows it to
pursue annexation in the West Bank. The changes that
have been made to the closure, while important, have
not been significant enough to alleviate humanitarian
concerns, let alone address wider needs. Unemployment
in the Strip remains among the highest in the world.
Electricity is available just half of the day and families
struggle to secure clean water. Hopelessness and despair
have increased, particularly among young people, who
account for 70 per cent of the population — that is,
1.4 million of the 2 million residents of the Strip. They
see no future and feel abandoned by regional leaders
and by the international community.
Access is repeatedly cited by the World Bank and
by Israeli security officials as a catalyst for well-being
and stability, and yet as the situation in Gaza continues
to deteriorate, counterintuitively, obstacles are placed
on people trying to improve their conditions and live
their lives peacefully. To give a few examples, last year
Gisha invited 24 people from Gaza to a meeting of
Israeli, Palestinian and foreign stakeholders about the
situation in the Strip. Only four — all men — received
permits, while the State claimed that “women played
too minor of a role in the economy” to be relevant to

19-374955/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

discussions about improving economic activity. If
you are a woman in Gaza, you are less likely to meet
Israel’s criteria for work-related travel. Our own field
coordinator was also blocked — he and other human
rights defenders do not meet the criteria for travel. We
recently represented a company in Gaza wishing to sell
its cookies in the West Bank, but an ongoing ban on the
exit of food products continues to undermine the once
thriving food sector in the Strip.
I am honoured to be here today to share the stories
of these courageous women and men who joined us in
challenging movement restrictions. It actually gives me
no joy to expose the senselessness and even the cruelty
of decisions made daily, ostensibly in my name. In 2018,
Gisha was contacted by a man in Gaza whose father in
the West Bank had suffered a debilitating stroke. His
urgent application for a permit went unanswered for
two months until the army responded that the father
was “not sick enough to justify a visit”. Two petitions
to the District Court and an appeal to the High Court
were unsuccessful. Security had nothing to do with it.
These stories are not just the unfortunate by-product
of conflict; they are an expression of Israel’s intent to
maintain control of the West Bank while locking out
Palestinians in Gaza.
I am certain that many Council members will want
to make statements today reaffirming the illegality
of the settlements and citing that they are a primary
obstacle to peace. I encourage them to note that the
isolation of Gaza is also a primary obstacle, aggravated
certainly by Palestinian division but also driven by
deliberate choices on the part of Israel. In March this
year, in defending his decision to allow funds from
Qatar to enter the Strip, Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu was cited as saying that whoever is against
a Palestinian State should be for transferring the funds
to Gaza, because maintaining a separation between
the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank and Hamas
helps prevent the establishment of a Palestinian
State. In the absence of self-determination, millions
of Palestinians cannot vote for the Government with
so much power over their lives and different legal
standards are applied to people literally living side by
side. The situation cannot be anything other than cause
for further instability not only in the region, but also
in some of the capitals of Council member States. The
erosion of norms entailed in maintaining the occupation
undermines the universal values of security and human
rights on which this very institution was founded.
6/24

20/11/2019

So, what can be done? First, access — rather than
allowing the minimum access necessary to prevent
further crises, we believe that the international
community should insist that Israel allow the maximum
access possible, subject only to necessary and
reasonable security procedures. Since 2014, we have
seen the rate of exit of goods from Gaza increase, but
it remains a fraction of what it could be. Restrictions
could be lifted on the types of goods that can exit and to
which destinations. Also vital for industry, construction
and civilian infrastructure is the entry of building and
other raw materials, which remain heavily restricted by
Israel’s broad definition Organizationf what constitutes
dual-use items.
When it comes to the movement of people, Israel
must remove obstacles on people travelling to reunite
with family and to reach jobs and other professional
opportunities, especially women, who, as I noted, are
disproportionately denied access. Israel must improve
access to medical care and also access for companions
of patients, including parents, who are routinely denied
permits to accompany their children to treatment.
Israel must allow safe and reliable access to Gaza’s
sea and farmland. Egypt has operated the Rafah
crossing consistently since May 2018, allowing many
to travel abroad. It should be encouraged to continue
and expand operations.
The Palestinian authorities should refrain from
leveraging the critical services needed by the civilian
population in their factional dispute, including
electricity supply and health care. I also believe that
the two Israeli civilians allegedly held in Gaza should
be released immediately as a humanitarian imperative.
The humanitarian and economic situation in Gaza is
not an act of nature. It is the result of deliberate choices
made by policymakers — Israeli but also Palestinian and
regional actors, as well as the international community,
which has helped keep the people’s heads above water
with the critical aid that it provides but must leverage
its influence for more sustainable change.
Given recent statements by Israeli officials and their
supporters and the current American Administration, I
do not think that we can delude ourselves that a peace
process is just around the corner. In the absence of peace
and also to catalyse it, the international community
must confront the de facto annexation of the West
Bank together with the isolation of Gaza, taking action
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to reverse these trends by abiding by its obligation to
protect civilians.
It should also provide support to civil society. A
vibrant community of civil-society organizations
operates in both Israel and Palestine, but we and our
allies are targeted for our work. We are outraged at
the expected deportation of our Human Rights Watch
colleague Omar Shakir, but as much as these actions
are cause for concern, I believe that they are also an
indication of our growing influence.
Many people in Israel may see my appearance
here today as an act of disloyalty, because we have
been taught that it is a zero-sum game, that it is us or
them. In fact, it is just the opposite: the well-being of
Israelis and Palestinians is interlinked, and we should
address Palestinian security just as much as we do
Israeli security.
To conclude, the international community has a
claim, a moral responsibility and a vested interest to
pursue peace and, with it, accountability for rights
violations. If nothing else, the desire of some to
undermine the foundations on which this institution,
the United Nations, rests should be a loud wake-up call
and should unite the international community in action.
Young people in Israel and in Palestine will be grateful
for it.
The President: I thank Ms. Hary for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
wishing to make statements.
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America):
I wish to thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As
always, we appreciate his team’s hard work to fairly
address these complicated issues. I also want to thank
Ms. Hary for her briefing.
I am sure that there will be further discussions
today of our Monday announcement regarding Israeli
settlements in the West Bank. Ambassador Craft has
already addressed this issue in writing, and I want to
briefly take it up again today on her behalf.
It is the position of the United States that the
establishment of Israeli civilian settlements in the West
Bank is not per se inconsistent with international law.
We believe that this complex political problem can
be resolved only through direct negotiations between
the Palestinians and the Israelis. I would like to be
clear on our decision. The United States Government

S/PV. 8669

is expressing no view on the particular legal status of
any individual settlement, nor are we addressing or
prejudging the ultimate status of the West Bank. That
is for Israelis and Palestinians to decide.
The relevant question today then is, what real
obstacles are preventing the Palestinians and the
Israelis from sitting down to work towards peace?
On that matter, we must note that the recent barrage
of rocket fire from Gaza into Israel represents a far
greater barrier to peace. Just for a moment, I want each
person in this Chamber to imagine what it would be like
to live each day knowing that a siren could go off at any
time, alerting them and their family that they have 15
seconds to reach a bomb shelter. Would anyone on the
Council tolerate such an existence? Would they accept
blame and criticism for the violence directed against
them? Would they feel confident that there was a clear
path to peace while these attacks persist? Of course not.
And yet this is often what Israel is expected to endure.
In just the past week, reports indicate that 450
rockets were fired into Israel by the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad. What is especially notable is that these attacks
threaten the lives of Israelis and Palestinians alike. This
Iranian-funded terrorist organization has repeatedly
attempted to undermine progress towards peace. It has
intentionally attempted to disrupt periods of calm and
ceasefire between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Both
sides are affected by these terrorist actions. Schools in
Israel and the Gaza Strip are closed, businesses have
shut down and families are seeking shelter. There
could hardly be a more significant or more self-evident
barrier to peace.
The United States remains committed to the cause
of peace, and Monday’s announcement does not alter
this fact. We continue to believe that discussion between
the parties is the path to finding a solution that works
for both sides and promotes and protects the welfare of
Palestinians and Israelis alike.
But just as we are committed to the cause of peace,
we are committed to Israel and its fair treatment at
the United Nations. As Ambassador Craft has made
abundantly clear and asked me to convey again today,
the United States has always supported Israel in the
past; we support Israel today; and we will support
Israel moving forward. We will not stand idly by when
the international community unfairly criticizes Israel,
especially when it fails to also condemn those who seek

19-374957/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Israel’s physical destruction and even deny its right
to exist.
If the Council is truly committed to peace, we must
be clear-eyed in evaluating what the real obstacles are
to its attainment. Rocket fire that threatens the safety
of Israelis and Palestinians on a daily basis is such
an obstacle.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first of all
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov and his team
for the presentation and their dedicated work. Let
me also express my thanks to Ms. Hary for her
insightful presentation.
Let me start with the recent developments in
Gaza. Germany condemns all attacks on Israel in the
strongest possible terms, including the recent firing
of more than 400 rockets from Gaza into Israel. Such
attacks are directed against Israel’s security and cause
casualties among Israeli civilians. Hamas and the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad must stop firing rockets from
Gaza into Israel. There is no excuse for the firing of
rockets into Israel.
Germany remains steadfast in its commitment to
Israel’s security. We will not be silent whenever Israel’s
security or right to exist is questioned or compromised.
While we stress Israel’s right to self-defence and its
right to react adequately to attacks against its territory,
we are also concerned by reports about the killing of
innocent civilians in Gaza. We have taken note of the
announcement of investigations into incidents with
civilian victims by the Israel Defense Forces.
Last week’s escalation in and around Gaza is
deeply concerning. It reminds us once again of the
urgent need for a sustainable long-term solution to
the humanitarian, economic and political crisis in
Gaza. As Ms. Hary illustrated in her briefing, freedom
of movement of persons and goods is an essential
aspect of any resolution of the dire humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza. We call on both Israel and
the Palestinian authorities to do their respective parts
in order to improve the situation in Gaza.
A political solution is required not only for Gaza
but for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as a whole.
Germany remains firmly committed to a negotiated
two-State solution based on the internationally agreed
parameters. We believe that the two-State solution is the
only viable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
that meets Israeli and Palestinian security needs, fulfils
8/24

20/11/2019

Palestinian aspirations to statehood and sovereignty,
ends the occupation that began in 1967, resolves all
permanent- status issues and guarantees equal rights
for all inhabitants.
We welcome and support any initiative aimed
at reviving the peace process as long as it is based
on a commitment to a viable two-State solution as
internationally agreed and as long as it is acceptable to
both parties, Israelis and Palestinians.
We also support any attempt to restart meaningful
direct talks in negotiations between the parties with
the objective of reaching a just and lasting solution.
Forgoing the most controversial questions of the peace
process by taking them off the table or creating facts on
the ground will not, however, lead to sustainable peace.
We therefore call on the parties to the conflict, as well
as other international stakeholders, to refrain from
taking unilateral measures that risk undermining the
viability of a negotiated two-State solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict on the basis of the internationally
agreed parameters.
We believe that international law provides the
basis and framework for all political negotiations and
finding an agreement that is acceptable to both parties.
One of the main obstacles to a political settlement to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the continued settlement activities in
the territories occupied since 1967. We reiterate our
position that Israeli settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories are illegal under international
law and undermine the prospects for a negotiated twoState-solution.
The continuing expansion of settlement activity,
including the recent approval of 2,300 new housing
units in October by the Higher Planning Council
of the civil administration, and the legalization of
settlement outposts by Israel are a matter of serious
concern to us. We also remain deeply concerned about
increased demolitions and seizures of Palestinianowned structures across the West Bank and evictions
of Palestinians from their homes in East Jerusalem.
We call on Israel to end the expansion of
settlements, the legalization of settlement outposts, the
confiscation of Palestinian land and evictions from,
and the demolition and seizure of, Palestinian-owned
structures. We remain extremely concerned about
repeated statements alluding to, or even announcing, an
intended annexation of areas of the occupied West Bank.
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Should such statements turn into actual Government
policy or law that would, in our view, constitute a clear
violation of international law.
We strongly advise our Israeli friends and the Israeli
Government against taking any steps in that direction
that could have serious negative repercussions on the
viability of the two-State solution and the entire peace
process. We reiterate that Germany will not recognize
any changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with
regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by
the parties.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), it needs to be fully implemented, not only
with regard to settlement activities but also with regard
to acts of terror, violence against civilians, incitement,
provocative actions and inflammatory rhetoric. The
increase in violence, as well as in provocative rhetoric
and actions on both sides, is deeply worrisome. We
strongly urge all sides to de-escalate, exercise restraint
and refrain from provocative rhetoric and actions.
With regard to the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple
Mount, we recall the paramount importance of
maintaining the agreed status quo for keeping the peace
at those holy sites.
Before I conclude, let me also say a final word
concerning the very important issue of support for the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). The Special
Coordinator alluded to that and reminded us of the
emergency situation that we are in. UNRWA remains
indispensable to meet the basic needs of Palestinian
refugees. By providing humanitarian assistance, health
services and education, UNRWA contributes to the
stability in the region.
Germany therefore strongly supports the renewal
of UNRWA’s mandate for three years. As the largest
bilateral donor, Germany remains firmly committed
to UNRWA and continues to significantly contribute
to UNRWA’s budget. We encourage others to similarly
continue their financial support to the Agency’s crucial
work, in particular by disbursing the funds they
have pledged.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov and Ms. Tania Hary for their briefings.
The Gaza Strip continues to be the scene of
persistent cycles of violence that is undermining the

S/PV. 8669

right of both Israelis and Palestinians to live side by
side in peace and security. We condemn in the strongest
terms the firing of rockets into Israeli territory to target
populated areas as a response to an Israeli operation.
We welcome the ceasefire established thanks to the
efforts of the United Nations and Egypt and call on all
parties to exercise maximal restraint in order to ensure
that the ceasefire holds.
The obligations to protect civilians and respect
international humanitarian law, including its principles
of distinction and proportionality, must be respected.
We call on the Israeli authorities to conduct a thorough
investigation on the air strike that resulted in the deaths
of eight members of the Al-Sawarkah family. The cycle
of violence facing the Gaza Strip recalls the need to
take concrete steps to improve the economic and
humanitarian situation, including lifting the blockade
and fully opening the crossing points, while taking into
account the legitimate security concerns of Israel.
A political solution to the crisis also demands the
return of that territory to the control of the Palestinian
Authority. In that regard, we also reiterate our call
on Palestinian factions to engage in good faith in the
reconciliation process. We encourage Palestinian leaders
to work towards ensuring strong, inclusive, accountable
and democratic institutions, based on respect for the
rule of law and human rights. A credible electoral
process throughout the Palestinian territory — in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, as well as in the
Gaza Strip — should contribute to meeting that goal.
Concerning developments on the ground in the
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the ceaseless
pursuit of settlements, including related measures, is
fundamentally undermining, and will soon irrevocably
compromise, the two-State solution, which we support.
Settlements are illegal under international law, which
is unambiguous and not subject to interpretation.
Settlements constitute a flagrant violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), and international humanitarian law, in particular
the Fourth Geneva Convention. Settlement policy also
leads to increased tensions and violence on the ground
and undercuts the trust needed to achieve a just, stable
and lasting peace. We call on the Israeli authorities to
end it immediately.
In that context, we also reiterate that we will
not recognize any changes to the pre-1967 borders,
including in Jerusalem, other than those agreed by

19-374959/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

both sides. In anticipation of the December briefing
on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016), we
reiterate our request for a written report on the issue,
in accordance with the usual practices of the Security
Council, including presidential not S/2017/507.
Today we are celebrating World Children’s Day. We
are deeply concerned about the impact this conflict is
having on children. The excessive use of force resulted
in the deaths of 16 Palestinian children in the first half
of 2019 alone, while violent attacks led to the deaths of
three Israeli children during the same period. Attacks on
schools are on the increase, as are arrests of children on
their way to school and their administrative detention.
We are also very concerned about the extremely
elevated and increasing number of refusals of, and
delays in obtaining, permits from the Israeli authorities
for children in need of medical care outside Gaza. We
expect all parties to act in full compliance with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, the thirtieth
anniversary of which we are currently commemorating
in the General Assembly Hall.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Mladenov and
Ms. Hary for their briefings.
At the outset, the Dominican Republic emphatically
condemns the recent escalation of violence in the region.
The firing of rockets into civilian areas is absolutely
unacceptable. We insist that there is no justification
whatsoever for carrying out such indiscriminate attacks
and that it is imperative to make every possible effort
to achieve an expeditious, complete and definitive
de-escalation.
Safeguarding the lives and ensuring the safety of
Palestinian and Israeli civilians must be at the heart
of all international efforts, bearing in mind that such
acts of violence increase the humanitarian needs of the
population and serve only to hinder any possibility for
understanding and progress towards a peaceful, just
and lasting solution to the conflict.
According to the World Health Organization, during
the period from 12 to 14 November, Israeli forces in the
Gaza Strip killed at least 34 Palestinians and injured
111. According to Gaza’s Ministry of Health, eight of
the dead and 46 of the wounded were children, who are
paying a high price for a conflict over which they have
no control. Similarly, injuries were reported in Israel
from the firing of rockets from Gaza.
10/24

20/11/2019

Guided by respect for human rights and international
law, we are deeply concerned about continued Israeli
settlement activities throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in and around East Jerusalem. We
continue to see how the hopes of the Palestinian people
to consolidate their State are dashed by the systematic
expansion of the settlements, accompanied by a policy
that seeks to legitimize them. Women and children
continue to be victims of an environment of ongoing
violence, which removes all possibility of well-being.
The situation limits the lives and movement of the
affected population.
We agree with international consensus that the
only way forward for Palestinians and Israelis is
through the negotiation of a two-State solution. We
urge concrete action to broaden consensus rooted
in the peaceful resolution of conflicts, international
law, multilateralism — recognizing the important
mediation role of the United Nations — and previous
agreements, based on a two-State solution, with Israel
and Palestine living side by side in peace and security
within secure borders.
The Dominican Republic would like to express its
gratitude to Commissioner-General Pierre Krähenbühl
for his commitment and dedication in the leadership
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and to Palestinian
refugees. The extraordinary circumstances in which the
Agency continues to operate, with significant financial
and political challenges, continues to be a source of
concern. Looking ahead to the Agency’s prospects for
the immediate future, we reiterate our call to support
its human development and humanitarian assistance
initiatives, which provide relief for the suffering of
Gaza’s inhabitants and Palestinian refugees throughout
the region.
Finally, the Dominican Republic believes that
it is critical to embark upon an intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process that will enable the national
consolidation necessary to advance its legitimate
aspirations as a nation and will lead to a process of
political renewal based on free and inclusive elections.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, on his
detailed briefing on peace and security issues in the
region, in particular on the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
We also thank Ms. Tania Hary, Executive Director of
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Gisha, Legal Centre for Freedom of Movement, for
her briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with deep concern the
resumption of violence on 12 November between
Israelis and Palestinians in the Gaza Strip and southeastern Israel, after a relative calm. We unreservedly
condemn that violence, which has indiscriminately
targeted both Palestinian and Israeli civilians.
Given the current situation, my country would like
to remind the Israeli and Palestinian parties that just
and lasting peace will require a negotiated solution,
with bold compromises that can lead to a solution of
two States coexisting peacefully. Côte d’Ivoire believes
that the deep aspiration of the Palestinian people — a
viable State based on pre-1967 borders, with Jerusalem
as its capital — is an inalienable right. We are also
committed to the security of the State of Israel.
Côte d’Ivoire also urges the parties to the conflict to
respect the ceasefire reached on 14 November, mediated
by the United Nations and Egypt, and to refrain from
any unilateral actions that could further undermine
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the crisis.
Persistent tension and recurrent clashes between
the warring parties must spur the international
community and, especially the Security Council, to
create, without further delay, a framework conducive
for the resumption of Israeli-Palestinian dialogue,
which, regretfully has not made any significant
progress since the Oslo Accords. And the recent actions
and statements of certain stakeholders’ also do not bode
well for imminent peace.

S/PV. 8669

with a view to lifting the blockade on Gaza. Côte
d’Ivoire also encourages the Palestinian parties to
pursue dialogue, based on strengthened cooperation,
for the effective return of the Palestinian Authority
to Gaza, which would enable better handling of
humanitarian issues.
My country is also concerned about the continuing
budget deficit facing the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. We therefore urgently call for a lasting solution
to the situation, which undermines the effectiveness
of the Agency, which provides assistance to more than
3 million Palestinian refugees.
The much sought-after peace requires, first and
foremost, the willingness of Israelis and Palestinians
to engage in constructive dialogue, which will
undoubtedly have a stabilizing effect on the entire
region. Côte d’Ivoire remains firmly convinced that it
is only through such a dialogue that a peaceful solution
can be found to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire renews its support for
Mr. Mladenov and all the stakeholders who are working
day after day to establish a productive dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians, in order to achieve lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians and stability in
the Middle East.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We also listened
carefully to the statement delivered by Ms. Hary.

The Council must therefore unite once again
in order to send a strong message of peace to all the
parties and to encourage them to resume peace talks
under the auspices of the United Nations. In that
connection, we welcome the key role of international
and regional actors, including Egypt for its mediation,
which has once again proven decisive in reachiing the
current ceasefire.

China is deeply concerned about the recent
protracted turbulence in the Palestinian-Israeli
situation. Military actions have been escalating, causing
heavy civilian casualties. Settlement activities continue
unabated, and there has even been evidence of rhetoric
attempting to justify those settlement activities. The
prospects for the two-State solution are being severely
undermined. I would like to emphasize the following
points today.

The consequences of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict are also disastrous for the people living in the
Gaza Strip, with a worsening humanitarian crisis due
to the cumulative effects of a constant lack of water
and electricity, crumbling social infrastructure and
a foundering economy. We must therefore urgently
remedy the situation, which fuels resentment and
radicalization, through Israeli-Palestinian negotiations

First, it is imperative to cease all rhetoric and
actions that contradict the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international consensus and to adhere
to the overarching goal of the two-State solution. The
two-State solution and the principle of land for peace
constitute the bottom line of international justice.
There should be no retreat from those objectives,
not even by half a step. Independent statehood is an

19-3749511/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

inalienable national right of the Palestinian people — it
is not something that can be traded. Resolution 2334
(2016) clearly indicates that settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, run contrary to international law. Given
the severity of the Palestinian-Israeli situation, all
parties must be committed to playing a constructive
role, refraining from irresponsible rhetoric, preventing
the exacerbation of tensions and confrontation
and refraining from adding new complexities to
the Palestinian question. The parties concerned
must immediately cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including the
demolition of Palestinian houses and confiscation of
their property.
Secondly, it is important to seek solutions through
political and diplomatic means and refrain from any
actions that might escalate tensions. Following the
recent turmoil in southern Israel and the Gaza Strip, the
international community has been closely monitoring
the situation and is deeply concerned. China commends
Special Coordinator Mladenov, Egypt and others for
deploying their good offices with a view to reaching
a ceasefire agreement. China has also been making
efforts to alleviate tensions. The Chinese Government’s
Special Envoy on the Middle East Issue, Mr. Zhai Jun,
has been in close contact with the parties concerned.
China calls on all parties to remain calm, exercise
restraint and remain committed to rebuilding and
building up mutual trust so as to create sound conditions
for the relaunching of peace talks. The international
community should continue to work on the basis of
the two-State solution, the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative, inter alia. We continue to urge the
parties to re-engage in peace talks as soon as possible
with a view to establishing an independent State of
Palestine with full sovereignty and with East Jerusalem
as its capital, based on the 1967 borders.
Thirdly, it is necessary to closely monitor and
improve the economic and humanitarian situation in
Palestine, adopt comprehensive measures and promote
peace through development. The economic and
humanitarian situation remains grave in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) has done much work to improve the
humanitarian situation of Palestinian refugees. The
Agency is a success story of multilateralism and the
12/24

20/11/2019

role of the United Nations. On 15 November, the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session adopted with an overwhelming majority
a draft resolution renewing the mandate of UNRWA,
thereby demonstrating the international support for,
and recognition of, UNRWA’s work. China supports the
continuing important role of UNRWA.
Fostering development is an important step towards
resolving the question of Palestine. China calls on the
parties concerned to implement the relevant United
Nations resolutions in full and to lift the blockade of
Gaza as soon as possible. China stands ready to continue
its cooperation with Palestine in economic, financial,
cultural, educational and health-care sectors, among
others, and to take concrete actions in order to promote
national stability and development in Palestine.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Let me join others in
thanking Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, and Ms. Tania Hary,
Executive Director of Gisha, Legal Centre for Freedom
of Movement, for their briefings. I also welcome
the observer of the Observer State of Palestine and
the representative of Israel to the Chamber for our
deliberations today.
I would like to address the following three issues
in my statement today: the systematic annexation of
Palestinian lands, the situation in Gaza and the power
of the peaceful resolution of conflicts.
On the first issue, regarding the systematic
annexation of Palestinian lands, South Africa would
like to reiterate its steadfast stance with regard to the
peace process and resolving the constant stalemate in
negotiations. In that context, we affirm that the only
way to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East
is by reaching lasting peace between Palestinians and
Israelis themselves and by restoring all the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people, in accordance with
the two-State solution and the relevant United Nations
resolutions and international terms of reference,
including the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, among others.
The continuing disregard for those prevailing
and long-standing international concepts cannot be
allowed, particularly with regard to the circumvention
of final -tatus issues, such as borders, the status of
Jerusalem and the right to return of refugees. Israel’s
continuing pronouncements on the annexation of
large parts of the West Bank and the building of
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

additional settlements further undermine the prospects
for peace and are glaring examples of violations of
international law. Since 1967 — that is, for over half a
century — Israel has systematically constructed more
than 160 settlements and outposts on land seized from
the Palestinian people. More than 600,000 Israelis
are now living in settlements built from the ruins of
demolished and destroyed Palestinian properties. Since
the adoption of the first resolution on the situation in
Palestine — resolution 42 (1948), of March 1948, over
70 years ago, and all subsequent resolutions — the
Council has failed to ensure that those resolutions are
implemented or to take any concrete action to address
the blatant violations of those resolutions. I now ask my
fellow Council members, what will force the Council
to act?
I would like to remind the Council of its unanimous
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), on 23 December
2016. It clearly states, in paragraph 1, that the Council
“[r]eaffirms that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, has no
legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation
under international law and a major obstacle to the
achievement of the two-State solution and a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace”.
There is no ambiguity, legal or otherwise, in those
words or in that resolution.
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations
clearly states that
“[t]he Members of the United Nations agree to
accept and carry out the decisions of the Security
Council in accordance with the present Charter.”
It must be clear to all that no State Member of the
United Nations is exempt from its obligations under
the United Nations Charter. If we were to abandon the
principles enshrined in the Charter, it would render
the Council and its decisions obsolete. In that regard,
South Africa has and will continue to insist on the full
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) and all other
Council resolutions on this matter, including by calling
for written reports by the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). We cannot
ignore one Security Council resolution while calling
for the full implementation of others.
On my second point, South Africa is deeply
concerned about the recent activities in Gaza, which

S/PV. 8669

have led to increased tensions, the killing of more than
30 Palestinians and injuries to hundreds of innocent
Palestinians and Israelis. Those actions perpetuate
the dire security and humanitarian situation in the
area, and we welcome last week’s announcement of a
ceasefire brokered by the United Nations and Egypt.
In that regard, we call for a halt to the violent attacks
on both sides and for all parties to begin negotiations.
Additionally, South Africa is concerned about the
continued human rights violations in the occupied
territory and reiterates that such violations only foster
hatred between the peoples of Palestine and Israel.
With regard to my third issue, on the power of
peaceful conflict resolution, the security of Israel and
its future generations does not lie in the annexation of
Palestinian territories, the imprisonment of Palestinians,
the erection of high concrete walls and checkpoints
or the continued blockade of Gaza but rather in a
peaceful, stable and happy neighbour and a sovereign
and independent Palestinian State, whose children, like
Israeli children, can go to school, play, attend places
of worship and compete in sporting activities with
their Israeli friends in peace and security. That can be
achieved through sustained dialogue, negotiation and
mediation, through both sides respecting one another
and through compromise and understanding. As our
late President Mandela said at a banquet in Cape Town
during the visit of President Yasser Arafat in 1998,
“Our own humble experience has shown that
negotiated solutions can be found even to conflict
that the world has come to regard as insoluble. It has
taught us that such solutions emerge when former
opponents reach out to find common ground.”
In conclusion, I would like to say that South Africa
is fully committed to ensuring that a two-State solution,
and the agreed peace processes aimed at ensuring two
viable States coexisting side by side for the mutual
benefit of all peoples in the region, especially Israelis
and Palestinians, becomes a reality. We are ready to play
our part to assist the parties in finding durable peace
for the sake of their children and future generations.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing and Ms. Tania Hary for her input.
Regrettably, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate. Last week we saw another escalation.
Israel conducted an operation in Gaza targeting a
senior leader of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. In

19-3749513/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

response, rockets were fired from Gaza on southern
and central Israel. Thankfully, owing to the United
Nations and Egypt’s hard work, we were able to prevent
one of the most dangerous escalations in and around
Gaza from degenerating into full-fledged war. Luckily,
the situation was stabilized to safeguard the lives and
security of Palestinian and Israeli civilians. But it was
yet another example of how volatile the situation on the
ground is.
The cornerstone of our policy on the Middle East
peace process is the idea of a negotiated two-State
solution. Unfortunately, it continues to be dismantled
piece by piece, particularly through the expansion of
Israeli settlements. Poland’s position on the Israeli
settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territory
is clear and remains unchanged. It is also the European
Union’s position. The adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) was a strong reaffirmation of the international
consensus on the matter.
I will now turn to the situation in Gaza, which
remains dire and continues to fuel extremism and
radicalization and foster instability. We call on all to
take urgent steps to achieve fundamental change in the
humanitarian, political, security and economic situation
in Gaza, as well as to end the closure policy and ensure
the sustained opening of the crossing points that are
important for Gazans’ daily lives, while at the same
time addressing Israel’s legitimate security concerns.
On the political track, the intra-Palestinian division
only aggravates the situation of the people of Gaza
and weakens the national aspirations of Palestinians.
We urgently need to relaunch the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process. Everyone must commit to
Egypt’s efforts in that connection. We have taken note
of President Abbas’s announcement that elections will
be held, and a date should be set very soon for a vote
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in the
Gaza Strip. We call on all the Palestinian factions to
commit to that process.
The only way forward for Palestinians and Israelis
is the negotiation of a two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and an independent, democratic and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security. Our main aim today should be to restore the
political horizon for the resumption of a meaningful
peace process.
I want to conclude with a few words about the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
14/24

20/11/2019

Refugees in the Near East, which remains a key
contributor to the stability and security of the region.
In that context, Poland supports a technical rollover of
the Agency’s current mandate.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his report on the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories. We would also like to thank Tania Hary for
her briefing.
We are regrettably compelled to note that over
and over again when we discuss the situation in the
Middle East in this Chamber, we have to talk about
the deteriorating overall situation in the region. But
instead of heeding the calls to consolidate international
efforts to resolve long-standing and new crises, we
see unilateral actions that are completely out of step
with a logic of compromise and collective action.
First and foremost, I mean the problem that is central
to the whole region, the issue of the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Two days ago, the United
States took yet another step undermining the entire
complex of agreements on the issue. It was announced
that the United States authorities no longer consider
Israel’s construction of settlements in the West Bank
a violation of international law. Furthermore, it was
underscored that this was a recognition of the so-called
realities on the ground. As far as we are concerned,
such realities are unacceptable and unlawful. It is clear
that this move will worsen an already tense situation
in the efforts to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Of a piece with that statement are the decisions of
the United States Administration on Jerusalem and the
illegitimate recognition of Israel’s sovereignty over the
occupied Syrian Golan, which are gross violations of
international law and resolution 497 (1981) in particular.
In that context, we want to once again affirm that the
Golan is unquestionably Syrian territory, occupied
and then illegally annexed by Israel. Israel’s rocket
fire on Syria has intensified in the past few days and
runs directly counter to the efforts to normalize the
situation in the region. This kind of action is seriously
worrying and abhorrent. We affirm the principled
position reflected in resolution 2334 (2016), according
to which Israel’s establishment of settlements in the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, has no legal force and is a violation of
international law, as well as one of the main obstacles
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to achieving a two-State solution and a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
As far as we are concerned, the internationally
recognized foundations for a settlement in the
Middle East, including the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid
principles, remain unshakeable. Besides that, like our
colleagues, we are concerned about the escalation
around the Gaza Strip that has been accompanied by
the launch of rockets into Israel and retaliatory shelling.
We also need active efforts at the international level to
improve the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza.
We are more than ever convinced that today it has
become absolutely vital to take practical steps to extract
the peace process from its dangerous impasse. First
and foremost, the policies promoting Israeli settlement
activity and the demolition of Palestinian property
must cease. Russia will continue its efforts in bilateral
and other formats aimed at reviving direct dialogue
between the Palestinians and Israelis. As with most of
our colleagues, it is clear to us that the only way out of
all of this spiralling collection of problems is through
concerted international and regional efforts, with
the United Nations and its Security Council playing
a central role. We believe that the Quartet, whose
functions have been endorsed by numerous Security
Council resolutions, is still relevant and needed more
than ever.
Last week’s vote on the Middle East bloc
draft resolutions in the Fourth Committee clearly
demonstrated the international community’s growing
support for the principles that constitute the basis
for a settlement. We also believe that the support
that has been shown to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is extremely important. UNRWA’s activity
has a political dimension as well as a humanitarian one,
and an important stabilizing effect in the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East. Israel
and Palestine have major religious significance for
hundreds of thousands of adherents of the monotheistic
religions, and the swift establishment of a lasting peace
in those lands is in the interests of every Christian,
Muslim and Jew.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
unresolved problem of Palestine, together with the years
of instability in the region as a whole, is building up the
potential there for protests and radicalism in general.

S/PV. 8669

The situation demands concerted efforts on the part of
responsible members of the international community.
The Secretary-General was instructed to work on that
issue under resolution 598 (1987). The need to develop
a sustainable mechanism for collective security in
the region through dialogue on an equal footing is
becoming ever more urgent. Russia’s initiative in that
regard is aimed both at unblocking conflict situations
and developing measures for confidence and control.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like to
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his important
updates on what is happening on the ground, as well as
Ms. Tania Hary for providing a different perspective.
Like others who have come to the Chamber, she has
brought us sad and real stories of suffering that pose
the question of how much more we in this Chamber
can tolerate, and how much more can the people of
Palestine and Israel tolerate on this issue. We welcome
the ceasefire that has been in place since last Thursday
and urge all parties to exercise maximum restraint. With
that in mind, I want to highlight some pertinent points.
First, the violence and provocations must stop. We
condemn violence of every kind, particularly when
it targets innocent civilians, including women and
children. The bombing of eight civilians in Gaza by
Israel, as Special Coordinator Mladenov mentioned,
should be taken seriously and impartially investigated.
My delegation is also appalled at the continuing
provocative actions and violence by the occupying
Power towards Palestinian civilians. That vicious circle
of retaliation must stop. In the Gaza Strip, more than
30 people, including eight members of one family, were
killed last week alone. We managed to avoid another
catastrophe; but how long can we count on such luck?
Indonesia recognizes that some within the
international community may have concerns about
some similar Palestinian actions towards Israel. But to
do justice, we must put the issue in the proper context.
The sequence and gravity of violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law
perpetrated by the occupying Power are not comparable
to the actions of Palestinians, which often come in
response to insurmountable frustration. One does not
have to be a genius to comprehend the situation. We need
only honesty. The cycles of violence and provocation
must stop. We urge Israel to adhere to international law,
particularly international humanitarian law, and related
Security Council resolutions.

19-3749515/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Secondly, the root cause of the conflict must
therefore be comprehensively addressed. We must never
forget that Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestinian land
is at the root of this protracted problem. It is compounded
by Israel’s illegal settlement policy in the occupied
territories, which blatantly disregards international law
and opinion. I also want to mention the new statement
made this week by the United States. It does not help and
could lead to further deterioration of an already fragile
situation. The settlements are illegal and in flagrant
violation of international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Indonesia strongly rejects any attempt to cast doubt
on a policy that incontrovertibly constitutes a de facto
annexation and is a barrier to peace efforts based on
a two-State solution. The United States’ irresponsible
and provocative statement can only have the effect of
making a resolution of the conflict more difficult and
a two-State vision unattainable. We sincerely hope
that this was not the intention of the statement in the
first place, which we should also note was made by
a member of the Quartet. We urge the international
community to reaffirm the illegality of the settlements
and its continued support for the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, statehood
and independence, within the pre-1967 borders, and
with East Jerusalem as the capital of a State of Palestine.
My third point is the need to address the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. There has been a sharp
deterioration in the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
The ensuing despair and frustration among Palestinians
are capable of provoking anger and worse violations.
The unjustifiable blockade of Gaza must therefore be
lifted now and not later. In the West Bank, the coercive
environment intensified by Israel’s demolitions, forced
evictions, discriminatory planning, access restrictions,
settlement expansion and settler violence are also
leaving Palestinians increasingly vulnerable. In
addition, there is growing suffering among Palestinian
refugees as the funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) suffers. As we welcome the renewal of
the Agency’s mandate, Indonesia once again appeals to
the international community to extend its full support
to UNRWA’s vital work.
In conclusion, I was told this morning to close my
eyes and try to imagine peace in Gaza. Like Martin
Luther King, I too have a dream. I dream that one day the
children of Palestine and the children of Israel can play
16/24

20/11/2019

together on a playground. But that dream seems hard to
achieve, simply because we are still letting the vicious
circle of retaliation continue, because settlers continue
to colonize and because countries make statements and
take actions that are contrary to international law and
Security Council resolutions. I have a dream that one
day we will reach a two-State solution.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Mr. Mladenov and Ms. Hary for
their briefings.
Israel’s settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian
territories is illegal under international law, particularly
international humanitarian law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and contravenes Security Council
resolutions. Colonization also helps to heighten tensions
on the ground and undermine the possibility of a twoState solution. It erodes the prospects for lasting peace
between Israelis and Palestinians, as was recalled in
resolution 2334 (2016). With almost 650,000 settlers
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, we are near the
point of no return.
For that reason, France has condemned the decision
to build 2,342 housing units in the West Bank and the
infrastructure works near Bethlehem, which undermine
the territorial continuity of a future Palestinian
State. Such decisions are in addition to the ongoing
construction of 3,000 housing units in settlements in
the West Bank and East Jerusalem from mid-June to
mid-September and the expansion with another 6,000
units in the previous quarter. In total, the number of
decisions on settlement housing construction since
the beginning of this year is already higher than in
2018. France therefore calls on the Israeli authorities
to halt such initiatives as well as all those that would
jeopardize the two-State solution. In that regard, we will
pay particular attention to the information contained
in the Secretary-General’s next report of 2019 on the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
We regret any decision that may encourage further
settlements. Respect for international law is not
negotiable. It is binding on everyone. Undermining that
principle weakens the entire international system. It is
not up to one country to decide what is legal. The issue
of the legality of settlements cannot be looked at on a
case-by-case basis.
I would also like to return to the latest developments
on the ground, in particular the dangerous escalation in
Gaza last week. France strongly condemns the firing
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of more than 450 rockets into populated areas of Israeli
territory from the Gaza Strip. I would recall in that
regard that France believes that Israel’s security is not,
and never will be, negotiable. Any attack deliberately
targeting civilian populations and infrastructure is also
contrary to international humanitarian law. In addition,
we have taken note of the Israeli army’s announcement
of an internal investigation into the deaths of eight
Palestinian civilians, including five children, in an air
strike on Deir el-Balah on 14 November. We call for
that investigation, like those announced by Israel in
April 2018, to be completed in a transparent manner
and followed by measures that are commensurate with
the gravity of the situation.
We call on all parties to exercise the utmost restraint
and to respect the ceasefire agreed under the auspices
of the Special Coordinator. In addition to the immediate
need for a cessation of hostilities, there will be no lasting
stability in Gaza without the lifting of the blockade,
along with credible security guarantees for Israel, and
without the return of the Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinian Authority will be able to fully
exercise its authority in Gaza only if there is a resumption
of the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process, which
must involve credible elections held throughout
the Palestinian territories, including Gaza and East
Jerusalem. We noted with interest the commitment of
President Abbas to holding elections in the near future
as well as the preparatory work undertaken to that end.
We encourage the Palestinian leadership to ensure that
the elections take place, and we stand ready to support
it on that path.
In a context where the situation in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem remains worrying, I reiterate France’s
commitment to respect for freedom of expression and
the protection of journalists. We also call on the Israeli
authorities to reconsider their decision to revoke the
residence permit of the Director of Human Rights Watch
for Israel and Palestine following the confirmation by
the Israeli Supreme Court of that decision.
In conclusion, I would like to recall France’s
unwavering support for the two-State solution. At
a time when the prospect of such a solution is being
questioned, it is more necessary than ever to recall
that only a solution based on the internationally agreed
parameters will make it possible to meet the aspirations
of Israelis and Palestinians and to bring lasting peace
to the region. It must allow the establishment of a

S/PV. 8669

Palestinian State living in peace and security alongside
Israel, within secure and internationally recognized
borders drawn on the basis of the 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as the capital of the two States. Any peace
plan that deviates from the internationally agreed
parameters would be doomed to failure. As France is a
friend of both Israel and the Palestinians, it stands ready
to encourage them to resume dialogue on that basis.
Pending a lasting peace that provides a just, realistic
and sustainable solution to the issue of Palestinian
refugees, the role of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
will remain crucial. At the General Assembly, a very
large majority of Member States called for the renewal
of its mandate for three years, which France welcomes.
We will remain vigilant as to the Agency’s ability to
implement its mandate and to continue its operations,
in particular in East Jerusalem.
Together with our European partners, we will
continue to monitor the situation closely and to advocate
for an order based on international law. It is also the
responsibility of the Council to ensure compliance with
international law and the parameters agreed by the
international community. France will ensure that.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome
the convening of this meeting. We thank Mr. Mladenov
and Ms. Hary for their detailed briefings.
Peru is following with deep concern the
developments in the situation in Palestine. We regret
the ongoing hostile dynamics and the unacceptable
and unsustainable stalemate in the peace process.
We are particularly alarmed by the new escalation in
Gaza and its impact in terms of fatalities and injuries.
Peru condemns the indiscriminate attacks by Hamas
and other extremist groups against Israeli territory as
well as Israel’s disproportionate responses against the
Palestinian people.
In such circumstances, we urge the parties directly
involved to cease, investigate and punish all violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law, all
terrorist acts and all attacks against civilians. We must
move towards specific steps in that direction.
We also regret the relentless expansion of
settlements in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and the development of legislation
that seeks to give them a legal status. That settlement
policy is closely linked to the increase in demolitions

19-3749517/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and evictions as well as to the rise in violent incidents
against Israeli settlers, who are seen as perpetrators in
some cases and victims in others.
We note with concern that unilateral statements
on such illegal practices may further undermine the
territorial integrity of the Palestinian State and the
increasingly remote prospects of achieving a two-State
solution. Such practices must stop in line with the
relevant Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), which are binding.
To that end, we emphasize the urgent need to end
the blockade of the Gaza Strip. That involves the prior
restoration of control over the area by the Palestinian
Authority and providing Israel with the necessary
guarantees for its security. We also believe it important
to align humanitarian assistance with development
plans that offer hope and opportunities to young people.
We must also reiterate the need to provide the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East with steady and predictable
funding and to mobilize to that end the support of the
international community, particularly that of countries
with the greatest resources and those committed to
peace and stability in the region.
In the current fragile situation, we believe that
the Council must speak clearly by demanding that the
parties act with moderation, prevent further escalation
and support the resumption of meaningful dialogue in
order to achieve the only viable solution — that of two
States living side by side, with secure and mutually
recognized borders.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): First
and foremost, we would like to thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov for his briefing on recent developments
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We also thank
Ms. Hary for her briefing. We reiterate our full support
to Mr. Mladenov for his efforts to calm the situation
and prevent clashes, particularly in the light of the
Israel’s recent provocations, shelling and strikes against
the Gaza Strip. We firmly condemn those strikes,
which have killed and wounded dozens of innocent
Palestinians. We commend Egypt’s efforts to facilitate
a ceasefire and to stop Israeli attacks on Palestinian
civilians and infrastructure.
In the Fourth Committee last Friday, 170 Member
States voted to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
18/24

20/11/2019

Near East (UNRWA) for an additional three years. The
international community thereby sent a clear and firm
message that underscores the importance of UNRWA’s
role and the essential services it provides to about
5.5 million Palestinian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon,
Syria and the occupied Palestinian territory, and this
despite concerted efforts to change the firm position
that UNRWA has maintained since it was established in
1949 under General Assembly resolution 302 (IV). My
country is proud to be one of UNRWA’s main partners.
In the past five years alone we have voluntarily
contributed $118 million to its support.
Accordingly, we believe that the Palestinian
refugee issue is the essence of the Palestinian
question. That is why we in the Security Council
have a special responsibility to uphold the inalienable
right of generations of Palestinian refugees and their
descendants to return to the homes from which they
were displaced, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy and General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) of 1948 in particular. As
the occupying Power, Israel is legally, politically and
morally responsible for creating the problem of the
Palestinian refugees and perpetuating it. We reject any
attempts by any party to nullify Palestinian refugees’
right of return or to distort the refugee issue by
attempting to resettle them, dismantle UNRWA, stop
its funding or deprive their future generations of their
right of return through a so-called redefinition of their
legal status.
We also call for granting Palestinians a dignified
standard of living and freedom of movement, while
maintaining their refugee status until they can exercise
their right to return and compensation. While we
thank former UNRWA Commissioner-General Pierre
Krähenbühl for his efforts during his tenure, we
commend the steadfast Palestinian people, who have
demonstrated resilience on their land. We reiterate our
full support to their legitimate right to resist the Israeli
occupation by defending their holy places and land and
their inalienable rights in the face of Israel’s attacks aimed
at strengthening their occupation and undermining
any opportunity for true peace, as well as its arbitrary
arrest campaigns, its demolition and confiscation of
buildings, its continuing blockade of the Gaza Strip, its
attacks on Muslim and Christian holy sites, the attempts
aimed at changing Jerusalem’s historic status and its
demographic composition, the excessive construction
of new settlements and expansion of existing ones
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and the forced displacement of Palestinian refugees,
all of which are gross violations of international law
and international humanitarian law. In that regard, we
reiterate our rejection of any attempts to legitimize
Israel’s illegitimate expansionist settlement policy
in all of its manifestations throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. As we
said, it is a flagrant violation of international law and of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016). It is an obstacle to peace. We
want to reiterate that Israeli settlements are an activity
that is null and void and cannot in any way constitute an
acceptable fait accompli.
In conclusion, as I said at the beginning of my
statement, the strong message sent by most Member
States and their unwavering position in support of
the Palestinian people and their right to exercise their
inalienable rights reflects the special importance that the
Palestinian question has for millions all over the world.
And as we saw and heard from most of the Heads of
State and Government in the Assembly’s recent general
debate, the world has echoed the key importance of the
question of Palestine and of ensuring that a lasting,
just and comprehensive resolution of it is based on a
two-State solution. The Arab-Israeli conflict should be
resolved according to the resolutions of international
legitimacy and international law and the Arab Peace
Initiative, with all its elements, which calls for Israel to
fully end its occupation of all the Arab territories it has
occupied since June 1967, including East Jerusalem,
before a comprehensive peace with Israel and the
normalization of relations can be achieved.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to express our delegation’s
appreciation and gratitude to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov
for his informative briefing and for his and his team’s
laudable and tireless efforts in the Middle East. We also
commend the valuable and constructive contributions
of Ms. Tania Hary, Executive Director of Gisha, Legal
Centre for Freedom of Movement.
Today’s meeting revisiting the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, is
very timely. In the past week, the Israel Defense Forces
and Palestinian militias in Gaza once again exchanged
intense attacks, resulting in several deaths and injuries
and extensive material damage. These ongoing
clashes are endangering children, whose rights, as the
representative of Belgium noted, are currently being
commemorated in the General Assembly Hall in the

S/PV. 8669

context of the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention
on the Rights of the Child. And the groups that have
always been the most vulnerable in this conflict,
women and the civilian population of both sides,
are also in danger. We believe that as long as Gaza
remains at the centre of the ongoing tensions between
Israel and Palestine, none of the efforts to improve the
deteriorating economic and social situation of Gaza’s
2 million inhabitants will improve their long-standing
terrible standards of living.
We therefore urge all the armed groups in Gaza
to cease their provocations and attacks. Similarly,
Israel should respect international law and measure its
responses in order not to harm the civilian population
generally. Lethal weapons of war should not be directed
at areas inhabited by civilians who are not involved in
the fighting in the conflict. The Israeli forces present in
the occupied Palestinian territories should respect and
ensure the security of citizens of both sides in the event
of protests or demonstrations, keeping in mind that the
right to protest is a historical democratic right as long
as it is the civilian population that is demonstrating, as
is the case in Gaza.
We cannot leave the Israelis and Palestinians to
their fate. That is why our delegation urges the Security
Council and the international community to stay united
and to approach its work with more humanity in order
to achieve a definitive political solution to the conflict
that is in the interests of both the Palestinians and the
Israelis, a solution that all the other peoples of the
Middle East and the world in general so fervently wish
for. We deplore the fact that the historic moments that
gave hope to the whole world on this issue have been
consigned to oblivion. However, we believe that it is
still necessary and urgent to continue to coordinate
efforts aimed at finding a formula for talks that would
encourage the parties to return to the negotiating
table and deal with all outstanding issues. We deem
it urgent and imperative that support continue for the
Egyptian and United Nations mediation efforts aimed
at achieving intra-Palestinian reconciliation. It is time
for Palestinian leaders to make concessions and seek to
reach truly definitive agreements that guarantee their
political unity, thereby enabling them to work together
for the well-being of their own citizens. Such an accord
would also involve the return of the Palestinian National
Authority to the Gaza Strip.
Before concluding, I wish to express my
Government’s satisfaction with the tireless efforts

19-3749519/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and encourage
the international community to continue providing the
funding it needs to maintain and enhance its work. In
accordance with our commitment to the Charter of the
United Nations, Equatorial Guinea wishes to reaffirm
its position that, in recognition of the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 242 (1967), the Arab Peace Initiative, the
Madrid principles, the Middle East Quartet road map
and other instruments, we consider the historic claims
of the Palestinians and the peaceful existence of Israel
to be just. We therefore, reiterate our support for the
two-State solution based on the 1967 borders, with
the capital city of Jerusalem to be negotiated between
the two parties, guaranteeing a safe and peaceful
coexistence for both States and in harmony with the
other countries of the region.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I would like to thank Mr. Mladenov once again
for his briefing and for the work of his team on the
ground in what we have heard are obviously very
difficult circumstances. I took careful note of his
characterization of the current situation and, given the
number of crises and difficulties we have seen over
Gaza in recent months, I know he did not make that
characterization lightly. I will come back to that topic
in due course.
As others have done, I wanted to start by stressing
that the United Kingdom’s position on settlements has
not changed. They are illegal under international law,
present an obstacle to peace and threaten the physical
viability of a two-State solution. The British position
was reflected in our support for resolution 2334 (2016)
but also for previous resolutions that confirmed the lack
of legal validity of the settlements, such as resolution
465 (1980). We also condemned the advancement of
plans for over 2,000 housing units across the West Bank
on 10 October and call on such counter-productive
action to end.
Turning specifically to Gaza, I wanted to thank
Ms. Hary for her briefing and her insights on access.
We take this issue very seriously. I believe that the most
important aspect of the situation is the escalation of
hostilities in Gaza that began on 12 November, about
which we are very concerned. We welcome the ceasefire
reached between Israel and the Palestinian Islamic
20/24

20/11/2019

Jihad, and we are grateful, as are others, to Egypt and
the United Nations for their mediation efforts.
I wish to stress the complete unacceptability of
the indiscriminate attacks against civilians by the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad. We regret the loss of life and
urge all parties to adhere to the ceasefire arrangement.
In the longer term, we encourage actors to put forward
sustainable proposals to resolve the threat posed to
Israel’s security by Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic
Jihad and other militants in Gaza. Hamas’ misrule is
leading to dreadful consequences for the people of
Gaza and also of Israel.
I wanted to pick up on Ms. Hary’s briefing on
movement and access restrictions and show how they
have constrained exports and affected the Palestinian
economy in terms of low growth and rising levels
of unemployment. We look to Israel to apply the
same conditions to Palestinian traders as they do to
Israeli traders.
I also wanted to join other speakers in reiterating
our concern about demolitions and incidents of
violence in both directions. I would also like to take the
opportunity to join others in saying that Israel’s security
is absolutely a top priority for us and to condemn the
missiles that are fired at Israel. However, as long as the
destabilizing situation and the violence continue, it will
be very difficult to find a way through.
We remain concerned by the increase in settler
violence. We welcome work towards genuine and
democratic national elections for all Palestinians, and I
agree with those speakers who said that such elections
would be crucial in view of the establishment of a
viable and sovereign Palestinian State. To this end, we
call on all Palestinian factions to seek common ground
and work together to pursue a positive path towards
democracy for the full benefit of the Palestinian people.
I also wanted to put down a marker about a call
for greater media freedoms in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including revising relevant legislation.
We are concerned by the 17 October decision by the
Magistrate’s Court in Ramallah, which ordered the
blocking of 50 Palestinian Arabic websites, which we
think is an important part of what is happening on
the ground.
Finally, I would like to join others in noting the
importance of the two-State solution, as well as the
importance of Palestine and Israel living in peace and
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

mutual respect, side by side as equal and sovereign
States. Security is, of course, an absolutely crucial
component of that.
I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Madam President, and your
delegation on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month. We are confident that, with your wisdom,
you will lead the Council’s work to a successful end.
I also wish to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nikolay Mladenov, and
the Executive Director of Gisha, Ms. Tania Hary, for
their comprehensive briefings and their assessments
of the current difficult situation in all its dimensions
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem.
This meeting is being held today in the wake of
continued attacks by the United States Administration
on the inherent rights of the Palestinian people to
their territory. It continues to deny their right to selfdetermination, to freedom and to independence. The
United States Administration has made yet another
unlawful declaration on illegitimate Israeli settlements
in order to kill any chance of achieving peace, security
and stability in our region and for its peoples. We
strongly reject and condemn such an unlawful and
irresponsible Declaration, which we consider to be
legally, politically, historically and morally null and
void, without any value whatsoever. It is to be added
to the series of provocative and irresponsible measures
taken by the United States Administration, beginning
with the claim that Jerusalem is “the capital of Israel”,
ongoing attacks against Palestinian refugees and their
right to return to their homes, and attempts to put an
end to the work of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well
as recognizing so-called Israeli sovereignty over the
occupied Syrian Golan.
The international community has confronted
and rejected all of these policies, which have also
been rejected here at the Council, including by some
Council members who spoke to the press before this
very meeting. We are confident that the position of
the international community, especially the Council,

S/PV. 8669

is strong and firm in rejecting this latest declaration
by the United States, as it has done with regards to
previous ones. All such declarations run counter to
international law and the Charter of the United Nations
and its relevant resolutions. They will not affect the
legal and political situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, or accord any
legality to Israel’s colonization policies on our territory,
including its annexation policy and its illegitimate
settlements. That will affect only the position, image
and credibility of the United States, or what is left of
them in the eyes of the international community. This
Administration continues to deepen its ineligibility as a
peace mediator, its use of double standards and its bias
regarding the Israeli occupation at the expense of our
right to self-determination.
Today it is impossible to believe that the voice
of the United States is a voice in support of peace. It
has become clear that it is a voice that incites others
against the Palestinian people and encourages Israel
to continue with its illegal annexation of our territory
and systematic violations of our rights. Our land is not
a gift that the United States can offer to satisfy the
ambitions of Netanyahu, and the blood of our people
is not a currency to be used as a bargaining chip in
Israeli elections.
In its resolutions on this subject, from 242 (1967)
to 2334 (2016), the Security Council has reaffirmed the
inadmissibility of the seizure of other people’s land by
force. That has been a basic principle of international
law, implemented since the end of the Second World
War. The Council has also affirmed the illegitimacy
of Israeli settlements in the occupied Arab territories,
including the Palestinian territory, and has stated that it
was illegal to annex Jerusalem. In its adoption of those
resolutions, it was working to achieve international
peace and security, in line with its mandate. We
reaffirm that settlements, as a form of colonialism, are
illegitimate according to United Nations resolutions
and the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the Legal Consequences of the Construction
of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (see
A/ES-10/273). They constitute a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, a blatant breach of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and a war crime under
the Rome Statute. Any attempt to change that reality
is therefore doomed to failure, and no one, no matter
how strong, can change international law according to
whims or illusions.

19-3749521/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In that regard, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank all the States, Governments, organizations
and members of the Council that have expressed
their support for upholding international legitimacy
and committing to the international consensus on the
basis of the terms of reference for a just and peaceful
solution. They have reaffirmed that Israeli settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, are a blatant violation of international law
and a key impediment to ending the Israeli occupation
and achieving peace in line with a two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders.
Every country here at the United Nations can
contribute to achieving peace by supporting our
inalienable rights and by refusing to acknowledge
Israel’s illegal practices and policies, including those
aimed at changing the status and character of Jerusalem
or at changing the pre-1967 borders. They can support
us by refraining from providing assistance and support
to illegal settlement activities, by differentiating
between Israel and the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967 where relevant transactions are concerned,
and by ensuring accountability and ending impunity,
which is one of the major obstacles to the achievement
of justice, peace and security.
We warn against the logic of the United States
Administration, which holds that international law is
an obstacle to peace, seeks to justify Israeli crimes and
believes that it can impose its will on the international
community as a fact to be accepted. There cannot
be one international law that applies to all of us and
another that is invented and tailored by the United
States Administration to suit Israel’s colonial greed
and forgive its crimes. The international law that we all
know does not permit double standards or bullying. It
should apply to everyone without exception, including
Israel and the United States.
The international law that we know does not
forgive the Israeli blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip.
It does not prevent its civilians from having even a little
bit of life and hope. It does not forgive the Israeli air
strike on the home of the Sawarkas, which killed five
little children in that family. International law does not
forgive when a little girl goes to sleep hoping to celebrate
her tenth birthday the next morning, only to wake up
and have to attend her parents’ funeral. International
law does not forgive the killing of a man in Hebron
who went out to buy food for his waiting family and
never came back. It does not forgive Israel’s holding on
22/24

20/11/2019

to the bodies of martyrs and the pain that causes their
parents. It does not forgive a sniper shooting a press
photographer in the left eye while he was documenting
violations committed by the Israeli occupiers. The
soldiers believed that killing the witness would conceal
their crime, but it only revealed and condemned them.
International law does not forgive ambushes and
arbitrary arrests of girls and boys. Nor does it forgive
their torture in Israeli prisons and detention centres.
It does not forgive the military invasions of cities,
towns and camps or the sowing of terror in the hearts
of mothers who fear for the fate of their children.
International law does not forgive forced displacement
or the demolition of houses and property and the
displacement of their owners. International law does
not forgive the rioting and acts of terrorism by Israeli
settlers, their looting of Palestinian natural resources
or their burning of fields and olive trees. International
law does not forgive the fact that people are made to
wait for long hours at army checkpoints. It does not
forgive the expansion of settlements in the West Bank
or the racist annexation of Jerusalem, the provocative
acts carried out in Haram Al-Sharif or the imposition
of illegal taxes on the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
International law does not forgive silence on these
things. Neither the Palestinian people nor its leaders
will give in to political blackmail. We will continue to
take every measure possible to legally and politically
counter the racist policies and inhumane practices that
we are witnessing, in order to honour our commitment
to the Palestinian people in our homeland and abroad,
to their historical sacrifices and to the defence of
our rights and national positions, including our right
to freedom, security and dignity in our own beloved
homeland of Palestine. As one of our famous poets
once said,
“If one day a people desires to live, then fate will
answer their call. And their night will then begin to
fade, and their chains will break and fall.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Danon (Israel): Two days ago, the United States
adopted an important policy that rights a historical
wrong. We thank the United States Administration
for clearly rejecting the false claim and historical lie
that the Israeli communities in Judea and Samaria
are inherently illegal under international law. Earlier
today, I had the pleasure of speaking with United
19-37495

20/11/2019

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV. 8669

States Ambassador Craft who, as she is travelling in
Latin America, called to express her continued support
for Israel.

force a solution on the sides. Otherwise, why would
the international community refuse to acknowledge the
true obstacles to peace?

We look forward to combating the hypocrisy we
see when it comes to identifying the true obstacles
to peace in the region. We hope that the rest of the
international community will find the courage to
review the United States policy with an unbiased eye.
Judea and Samaria are inseparable parts of the Jewish
people’s homeland. This is not a recent development
or claim, but a historical truth that will never again be
denied. The United States announcement reaffirms that
resolution 2334 (2016) was based on political motives
and has resulted in prolonging the conflict.

As opposed to the baseless claim that the Jewish
communities stand in the way of peace, there are two
true main obstacles to peace that must be overcome,
if we are to be able to reach an agreement. We did not
hear them mentioned here today.

Many times, members of the Security Council have
claimed, as they did today, that the Jewish communities
in Judea and Samaria are an obstacle to finding a
solution to the conflict. The Pavlovian response of some
European countries to Secretary of State Pompeo’s
announcement only further delays the chances of
ending the conflict. History teaches us that such claims
have no merit. Let me be clear — Jewish communities
are not an obstacle to peace. Israel has made this clear
many times, not only with words, but with actions. In
our peace agreements with Egypt and Jordan, we have
proven that when there is a partner, we are willing to
negotiate and go to great lengths to achieve peace.
In 2005, Israel unilaterally decided to leave the
Gaza Strip. Despite its rights to the land, Israel made
this difficult decision because we thought that it would
bring us closer to ending the conflict. Instead, it was
met with terror and violence. Last week, we witnessed
yet again rockets being fired at civilians — some 400
rockets. In 2009, President Obama asked Prime Minister
Netanyahu to freeze building in Judea and Samaria.
Prime Minister Netanyahu showed pragmatism and
froze building for 10 months. Israel once again showed
its willingness to make compromises in order to achieve
peace. Needless to say, the response to this gesture was
once again the rejectionism of the other side.
History clearly demonstrates that not only is
Israel working to attain peace, but it has proven time
and again that the Jewish communities in Judea and
Samaria are not obstacles to achieving it. Why then
would some members of the Council obsessively repeat
the mantra that Jewish communities — which they refer
to as settlements — are an obstacle to peace? Perhaps,
it has to do with the political agenda and desire to

The first is the Palestinian Authority’s incitement
against Israel and the Jewish people. When an entire
generation is taught in school that the State of Israel
has no right to exist, when children are taught to idolize
martyrs whose so-called heroic acts are killing innocent
people, and when teachers demonize Jews, we are faced
with a real obstacle to peace. Incitement is an obstacle
to peace, but we do not hear all Council members saying
so because it places blame on the Palestinian Authority
instead of on Israel.
The second real obstacles to peace is the Council’s
attempt to determine the outcome of the negotiations
before they have even started. Too many members of the
international community have a habit of trying to alter
the starting point of future negotiations. Perhaps, that
is done out of frustration over the fact that a solution to
the conflict has not yet been reached.
The international community uses questionable
legal tools to try to solve a political conflict. There are
many examples of such behaviour. In internationally
endorsed agreements, Israel and the Palestinian
Authority agreed — we signed that agreement — that the
future border will be negotiated directly and bilaterally.
Although I heard certain remarks contrary to this fact
in the Chamber today, we nevertheless have those
agreements. Some in the international community have
decided to go beyond the explicit agreement between
the parties and add a few preconditions.
Several minutes ago, we heard some Council
members say that future borders will be negotiated
based on the so-called 1967 lines. The General
Armistice Agreement of April 1949 between Israel
and Jordan explicitly states that the demarcation
line was established for military purposes only and,
as stated in Article VI of the Agreement, “without
prejudice to future territorial settlements or boundary
lines”. That was signed in 1949 between us and the
Jordanians. Adding such a precondition is an attempt
to decide the outcome of the negotiations before they
have begun. Similarly — and this explains why some

19-3749523/24

S/PV.8669

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the international community insist on claiming
that Jewish communities in Judea and Samaria are
obstacles to peace despite knowing very well what I
just mentioned — the claim is meant to try and decide
the fate of these communities in a future agreement
before the sides have — or really one side has — even
agreed to negotiate.
Just last week, the mandate of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) was renewed. UNRWA
maintains the status of refugees and preaches in schools
about a non-existent right of return. Why would the
international community choose to keep people in
refugee status? Why should someone who is a citizen of
another country — for example, of the United Kingdom
or the United States — still be considered a refugee
according to UNRWA? The only possible explanation is
that it is an attempt to shape the solution to the conflict.
Furthermore, inviting to the Council Israeli
organizations that, under the umbrella of Israeli
democracy and freedom of speech, paint a distorted
picture of reality — and this is not the first time — is
an attempt to solidify a one-sided narrative. It does
not advance the prospect of negotiations. It all but
guarantees that they will not happen in the near future.
The United States announcement this week says
the exact opposite of what others in the international
community are saying. It says that we cannot decide for
the parties what the solution will look like and that only
they can make that determination. There is a crucial
difference between saying that we will not declare all
Jewish communities in Judea and Samaria illegitimate
and that we will allow the parties to decide on what
happens with them in future, on the one hand, and that
we will declare that these communities are illegitimate
and that there can be only one outcome in future, on
the other. Why should we negotiate if the Security
Council knows better? The United States is not trying
to misuse international law in order to force an outcome
to the conflict, but rather understands that one can only
come from negotiations. This idea was echoed by an
American official who said that the announcement will
create an appropriate level playing field for future talks.

24/24

20/11/2019

When the international community tries to force
a solution, it achieves the exact opposite effect. When
Palestinians see that their battles are being fought for
them, why would they agree to come to the negotiating
table where they would have to compromise to speak
with us? I would ask my colleagues, the Ambassadors
of Belgium and France, how many times they have met
Mr. Mansour over the past year or over the past four
years. How many times has Mr. Mansour met with the
Israeli delegation over the past four years? How many
times has President Abbas met with Prime Minister
Netanyahu over the past four years?
Maybe the international community thinks it
is helping the Palestinians, but it is not. It is simply
delaying the day that we will actually have to sit down
and negotiate directly. The international community’s
actions are delaying the negotiations, which is
clearly counterproductive.
The automatic support of some European countries
for the Palestinians has resulted in a propaganda
campaign that starts here in New York and ends in
Ramallah. If they truly want to help, they must change
their approach because their criticism is preventing
direct negotiations. If the international community
wants to bring the conflict to an end, it must shift
its focus from trying to determine the outcome of a
negotiation to encouraging the occurrence of one.
The United States has played an important role to that
effect, and we believe that the Arab countries in our
region, through their influence, can also play a vital
role in bringing both sides to the negotiating table.
Israel is more than willing to negotiate, as we have
shown many times in the past. But, in order to get the
Palestinians to the table, the international community
must stop trying to force an outcome. Instead, they
must force the Palestinians to show up — simply show
up — without preconditions. The political conflict
will never have a legal solution. The only solution is a
negotiated one.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on the list, but a number of colleagues have
asked for consultations, so I invite Council members to
consultations to continue our discussions on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

19-37495
