General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

240

35/213.

Access by staff representatives to the Fifth
Committee

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/220 of 20 December 1979,
I. Reaffirms the responsibility and authority of the
Secretary-General as the Chief Administrative Officer of
the United Nations under Article 97 of the Charter of
the United Nations;
2. Reiterates its readiness:
(a) To receive and consider fully the views of the
staff as set out by a single recognized representative of
the staff of the United Nations Secretariat in a document submitted through the Secretary-General under
the agenda item entitled "Personnel questions";
(b) To receive and consider fully the views of the
staf( as set out by a designated representative of the
Federation of International Civil Servants' Associations in a document submitted through the SecretaryGeneral under the agenda item entitled "Report of the
International Civil Service Commission";
3. Decides that, to assist its deliberations, the Fifth
Committee may, if considered desirable, invite:
(a) A single recognized representative of the staff of
the United Nations Secretariat to make an oral
presentation to the Committee to introduce, at the
beginning of the Committee's consideration of the relevant agenda item, the document referred to under paragraph 2 (a) above;
(b) A designated representative of the Federation of
International Civil Servants' Associations to make an
oral presentation to the Committee to introduce at the
beginning of the Committee's consideration of the relevant agenda item, the document referred to under paragraph 2 (b) above;
4. Notes that the statements referred to in paragraph
3 (a) and (b) above would be made from the floor of the
conference room;
5. Notes further that if any questions are posed by
members of the Fifth Committee in response to the
statements referred to under paragraph 3 (a) and (b)
above, they could be answered in writing by the representative of the staff of the United Nations Secretariat
or of the Federation of International Civil Servants'
Associations as appropriate, in a single supplementary
document submitted through the Secretary-General.

I. Notes with appreciation the continuing efforts of
the International Civil Service Commission to review
the application of the Noblemaire principle, and invites
the Commission to complete its examination as soon as
possible, especially with a view to achieving comparability of total compensation of the United Nations
remuneration of the Professional and higher categories
with that of the selected comparator national civil service and to ascertaining whether the present comparator is still the highest paid civil service;
2. Requests the Commission to intensify and
speedily to conclude its fundamental and comprehensive review of the purposes and operations of the post
adjustment system as requested in General Assembly
resolution 34 / 165 of 17 December 1979 by fully taking
into account the causes of possible anomalies, and to
submit the results of the review to the Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
3. Welcomes the Commission's willingness to advise
Member States, upon request, in developing a system
for adjusting the salaries of their expatriate staff,
provided that this assistance does not impinge upon the
exercise of the Commission's functions under its statute
and that no additional resources will be required for this
assistance;

II
I. Notes the progress made by the International
Civil Service Commission under the authority given to it
under articles 13 and 14 of its statute;
2. Notes the decision of the Secretary-General to
implement the Master Standard. of job classification,
beginning on I January 1981;
3. Invites the Commission, -the Secretary-General
and the heads of the organizations which have accepted
the Commission's statute to co-operate fully in the implementation of the common standards of job classification established by the Commission, ensuring appropriate consideration of the individual situation and
requirements of each organization and the most
economical use of resources;

A

III
I. Notes the surveys of best prevailing conditions for
the General Service and related categories carried out by
the International Civil Service Commission under article 12 of its statute, including the second such survey
at Geneva;
2. Requests the Commission to continue to study the
general principles and methodology for surveys to determine the conEiitions of service of the General Service
and other locally recruited categories, including the
determination of gross salaries, taking into account the
views expressed in the Fifth Committee at the thirtyfifth session of the General Assembly;

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the sixth annual
report of the International Civil Service Commission, 4 '
Reaffirming the central role of the Commission in the
development of a single unified international civil service through the application of common personnel
policies and standards, methods and arrangements,
Endorsing the systematic and integrated approach
which the Commission is pursuing in its work,

IV
I. Decides that, for staff in the Professional and
higher categories, thirty points of post adjustment shall
be consolidated into base pay, effective I January 1981,
in conformity with the recommendation by the International Civil Service Commission in paragraph IOI of
its report, 45 resulting in salary scales (gross and net),
post adjustment schedules and scales of staff assessment
and pensionable remuneration as set forth in annexes II
to Y40 to the Commission's report, and that the base of

" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session.
Supplement No. 30 (A/35/30 and Corr. I and 2).

"Document A/35/30/Corr. l was issued on 5 November 1980 to
replace the text of annex V contained in the report of the Commission.

99th plenary meeting
I 7 December I 980
35/214.

Report of the International Civil Service Commission
