Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Comnuttee

2673 (XXV). Protection of journalists engaged
in dangerous missions in areas of armed
conflict
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2444 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968, in which it invited the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the International Committee of the
Red Cross and other appropriate international organizations, to study:
(a) Steps which could be taken to secure the better
application of existing humanitarian international conventions and rules in all armed conflicts,
(b) The need for additional humanitarian international conventions or for other appropriate legal instruments to ensure the better protection of civilians,
prisoners and combatants in all armed conflicts,
Recalling also the fundamental principle that a distinction must be made at all times between combatants
and persons not taking part in the hostilities,
Considering that it is essential for the United Nations to obtain complete information concerninf armed
conflicts and that journalists, whatever their nationality,
have an important role to play in that regard,
Noting with regret that journalists engaged in missions in areas where an armed conflict is taking place
sometimes suffer as a result of their professional duty,
which is to inform world public opinion objectively,
Bearing in mind the appeal made by the SecretaryGeneral on 30 September 1970 on behalf of missing
journalists,
Recognizing that certain types of protection can be
granted to journalists under:
(a) Article 4 of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Treatment of Prisoners of War, of 12 August
1949,18
( b) Article 13 of the Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and
Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, of 12 August 1949,14
(c) Article 13 of the Geneva Convention for the
Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and
Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea, of
12 August 1949,111
(d) Article 4 of the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,16
Being aware, however, that these provisions do not
cover some categories of journalists engaged in dangerous missions and do not correspond to their present

needs,
Convinced of the need for an additional humanitarian
international instrument to ensure the better protection of journalists engaged in dangerous missions, particularly in areas where an armed conflict is taking

place,
1. Expresses its grave concern about the fate of press
correspondents carrying out dangerous missions;
2. Expresses its deepest regret that some of those
correspondents have paid with their lives for their conscientious approach to their missions;
3. Invites all States and all authorities parties to an
armed conflict to respect and apply in all circumstances
18 United Nations,

Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 972.
(1950), No. 970.
(1950), No. 971.
(1950), No. 973.

H United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75
11 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75
1t United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75

75

the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949 in so far as they are applicable, in particular, to
war correspondents who accompany armed forces but
are not actually a part of them;
4. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to consider
at its twenty-seventh session the possibility of preparing
a draft international agreement ensuring the protection
of journalists engaged in dangerous missions and providing, inter alia, for the creation of a universally
recognized and guaranteed identification document;
S. Invites the Commission on Human Rights to
consider this question as a matter of priority at its
twenty-seventh session in order that a draft international agreeme:it may be adopted as soon as possible
by the General Assembly or by some other appropriate
international body;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other appropriate international organizations, to submit a report on this question to the General Assembly
at its twenty-sixth session;
7. Decides to give the highest priority to the consideration of this question at its twenty-sixth session.
1922nd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.
2674 (XXV). Respect for human rights in armed
conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2444 (XXIII) of 19 I)e..
cember 1968 and 2597 (XXIV) of 16 December 1969
and noting resolution XXIII adopted by the International Conference on Human Rights held at Teheran
in 1968,17
Referring to resolution XIII and to the other pertinent resolutions on human rights in armed conflicts
adopted by the twenty-first International Conference
of the Red Cross held at Istanbul in 1969,18
Expressing its deep concern in connexion with the
fact that wars unleashed in violation of the Charter of
the United Nations in several parts of the world lead
to incalculable disasters and suffering among civilians,
Having considered with appreciation the SecretaryGeneral's report on respect for human rights in armed
conflicts, 19

1. Solemnly reaffirms that, in order effectively to
guarantee human rights, all States should devote their
efforts to averting the unleashing of aggressive wars and
armed conflicts that violate the Charter of the United
Nation: and the provisions of the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations;20
2. Condemns the actions of countries which, in
flagrant violation of the Charter, continue to conduct
aggressive wars and defy the generally accepted prin17 Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
p. 18.
1s See A/7720, annex I, section D.
19 A/8052.
20 Resolution 2625 (XXV).

76

General Aasembly-Twenty-fifth Ses~ion

ciples of the Geneva Protocol of 1925 21 and the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 ;22
3. Considers that the principles of the Geneva
Protocol of 1925 and the Geneva Conventions of 1949
should be strictly observed by all States and that States
violating these international instruments should be condemned and held responsible to the world community;
4. Affirms that the participants in resistance movements and the freedom fighters in southern Africa and
territories under colonial and alien domination and
foreign occupation, struggling for their liberation and
self-determination, should be treated, in case of their
arrest, as prisoners of war in accordance with the principles of the Hague Convention of 190723 and the
Geneva Conventions of 1949;
S. Considers that air bombardments of civilian
populations and the use of asphyxiating, poisonous or
other gases and of all analogous liquids, materials and
devices, as well as bacteriological (biological) weapons,
constitute a flagrant violation of the Hague Convention of 1907, the Geneva Protocol of 1925 and the
Geneva Conventions of 1949;
6. Recognizes the necessity of developing additional
international instruments providing for the protection
of civilian populations and freedom fighters against
colonial and foreign domination as well as against
racist regimes.
1922nd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.
2675 (XXV). Basic principles for the protection
of civilian popnlations in armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Noting that in the present century the international
community has accepted an increased role and new
responsibilities for the alleviation of human suffering
in any form and in particular during armed conflicts,
RecalUng that to this end a series of international
instruments has been adopted, including the four
Geneva Conventions of 1949,2'
Recalling further its resolution 2444 (XXIII) of
19 December 1968 on respect for human rights in
armed conflicts,
Bearing in mind the need for measures to ensure the
better protection of human rights in armed conflicts of
all types,
Noting with appreciation the work that is being undertaken in this respect by the International Committee
of the Red Cross,
Noting with appreciation the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on respect for human rights in armed confl.icts,211
Convinced that civilian populations are in special
need of increased protection in time of armed conflicts,
Recognizing the importance of the strict application
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
21 League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),
No. 2138.
·
22 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Nos.
970-973.
11a Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague
Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and 1907 (New York,
Oxford University Preas, 1915).
24 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), Noa.
970-973.
2G A/7720 and A/8052.

of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949,26
Affirms the following basic principles for the protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts, without
prejudice to their future elaboration within the framework of progressive development of the international
law of armed conflict:
1. Fundamental human rights, as accepted in
international law and laid down in international instruments, continue to apply fully in situations of
armed conflict.
2. In the conduct of military operations during
armed conflicts, a distinction must be made at all
times between persons actively taking part in the
hostilities and civilian populations.
3. In the conduct of military operations, every
effort should be made to spare civilian populations
from the ravages of war, and all necessary precautions should be taken to avoid injury, loss or damage
to civilian populations.
4. Civilian populations as such should not be the
object of military operations.
5. Dwellings and other installations that are used
only by civilian populations should not be the object
of military operations.
6. Places or areas designated for the sole protection of civilians, such as hospital zones or similar
refuges, should not be the ob1ect of military operations.
7. Civilian populations, or individual members
thereof, should not be the object of reprisals, forcible
transfers or other assaults on their integrity.
8. The provision of international relief to civilian
populations is in conformity with the humanitarian
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other
international instruments in the field of human rights.
The Declaration of Principles for International
Humanitarian Relief to the Civilian Population in
Disaster Situations, as laid down in resolution
XXVI adopted by the twenty-first International Conference of the Red Cross, 27 shall apply in situations
of armed conflict, and all parties to a conflict should
make every effort to facilitate this application.
1922nd plenary meeting,
9 December 1970.
2676 (XXV). Respect for human rights
in armed conflicts

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Preamble of the Charter of the
United Nations affirms faith in the dignity and worth of
the human person,
Recalling that the United Nations has as one of its
purposes the achievement of international co-operation in solving international problems of a humanitarian
character and the promotion of respect for human
rights,
Reiterating the obligation of Member States for the
urgent termination of all armed aggression, as envisaged in Articles I and 2 of the Charter and in other
relevant documents of the United Nations,
26 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), No. 973.
27 International Review of the Red Cross, No. 104 (Novem-

ber 1969), p. 632.
