UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/1
5 January 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3616th meeting of the Security Council, held on 5 January 1996 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Burundi", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the letter of 29 December 1995
from the Secretary-General to the President of the Council on developments
in Burundi (S/1995/1068). The Council shares the Secretary-General’s deep
concern at the situation in Burundi, which has been characterized by daily
killings, massacres, torture and arbitrary detention. It condemns in the
strongest terms those persons responsible for such actions, which must
cease immediately. It encourages all States to take the measures deemed
necessary to prevent such persons from travelling abroad and receiving any
kind of support. It reiterates its profound concern about radio stations
which incite hatred and acts of genocide and encourages Member States and
others concerned to cooperate in the identification and dismantling of
them. The Council calls upon all concerned in Burundi to exercise maximum
restraint and to refrain from all acts of violence. It reiterates that all
who commit or authorize the commission of serious violations of
international humanitarian law are individually responsible for such
violations and should be held accountable. In this context it stresses the
importance it attaches to the work of the International Commission of
Inquiry established pursuant to its resolution 1012 (1995) of
28 August 1995, and undertakes to study carefully the letter from the
Secretary-General dated 3 January 1996 containing an interim report on that
work (S/1996/8).
"The Security Council is gravely concerned at recent attacks on
personnel of international humanitarian organizations, which have led to
the suspension of essential assistance to refugees and displaced persons
and to the temporary withdrawal of international personnel. The Council
welcomes the Secretary-General’s decision to ask the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to visit Burundi to discuss with the Burundi
authorities steps that might be taken to defuse the situation. It
underlines that the authorities in Burundi are responsible for the security
of personnel of international humanitarian organizations and of the

96-00276 (E)

050196

/...

S/PRST/1996/1
English
Page 2

refugees and displaced persons there and calls upon the Government of
Burundi to provide adequate security to food convoys and humanitarian
personnel.
"The Security Council welcomes the assumption of his functions by the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi, and calls
on all concerned to support his efforts. It commends the work of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in seeking to
promote dialogue and national reconciliation in Burundi, as well as the
role played there by the Organization of African Unity (OAU). It welcomes
the decision of the OAU in Addis Ababa on 19 December 1995 to extend the
mandate of the OAU Mission in Burundi for another three months and to
strengthen the civilian component of the mission. The Council also
welcomes the outcome of the Cairo Conference of Heads of State of the Great
Lakes Region on 29 November 1995, supports the work of the facilitators
appointed by it, and emphasizes once again the importance it attaches to
all States acting in accordance with the recommendations contained in the
Cairo Declaration as well as those adopted at the Regional Conference held
in Bujumbura in February 1995. It stresses the importance of continued
attention by the international community as a whole to the situation in
Burundi and encourages Member States to intensify contacts and visits.
"The Security Council notes the proposals referred to in the
Secretary-General’s letter of 29 December 1995. It will consider these and
other proposals he may submit in the light of the reports of Mrs. Ogata’s
mission and from his Special Representative in Burundi. It also requests
the Secretary-General to consider what role United Nations personnel in the
region and other support personnel might play in Burundi.
"The Security Council reaffirms its support for the Convention of
Government of 10 September 1994, which constitutes the institutional
framework for national reconciliation in Burundi and for the institutions
of Government established in line with it. It calls once again upon all
political parties, military forces and elements of civil society in Burundi
fully to respect and implement the Convention of Government and to give
their continued support to the institutions of Government established in
line with it.
"The Security Council will remain seized of this matter."

-----
